



















































Hansard: February 16, 1971


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

 

Tuesday, February 16, 1971. 
 

3:00 o’clock p.m. 
 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the Nineteenth 

day of January, 1971, for the meeting of the Fifth Session of the Sixteenth Legislative Assembly of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o'clock p.m. today, 

Tuesday, the Sixteenth day of February, 1971. 
 

3:05 o’clock p.m. 
 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, was 

pleased to open the Session with the following Speech:- 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Fifth Session of the Sixteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

HOME COMING ’71 

 

During 1971 we hope that many former residents will visit the province. 

 

Several years ago at the request of the Saskatchewan Tourist Association, a Home Coming ’71 Committee 

was established to promote Saskatchewan tourism. 

 

You will be asked to approve funds to make the activities of this committee as meaningful as possible. 

 

CANADA WINTER GAMES 

 

It has been the privilege of our province to act as host for the 1971 Canada Winter Games. 

 

These games have brought thousands of athletes and tourists to the Saskatchewan area. 

 

Among other dignitaries, it is our particular pleasure to welcome his Excellency, the governor General, the 

Prime Minister, and Federal Cabinet Ministers. 

 

One of the legacies of the games at Blackstrap Provincial Park will be the mountain as a permanent ski 

facility. 

 

Moreover, the park will now become a year round, winter and summer, recreation area for the youth of our 

province. 



 

February 16, 1971 

 

2 

 

MINERAL RESOURCES 
 
In Saskatchewan the mining outlook is bright. 
 
The potash industry has now reached a secure and advancing position in a newly stabilized world potash 

market. 
 
Precambrian activities received a major boost by Gulf Minerals' announcement of its plan to proceed with its 

Rabbit Lake uranium development. 
 
The increasing demand for lignite coal is most encouraging. 
 
In the oil and natural gas industry, increased crude oil prices and an expanding demand for natural gas 

should be the stimulus required to bring exploration capital into the province. 

 

The Government continues to be concerned about the Federal White Paper tax proposals as they affect the 

mining industry. 

 

It will continue to vigorously oppose proposals which might discriminate against the West, or harm our 

competitive position in world markets. 
 
The Legislature meets at a time when most Canadians face serious economic problems. 
 
Inflation is still raging in many parts of Canada. 

 

What is even more serious, is the fact that weapons used to combat inflation have caused other difficulties. 

 

UNEMPLOYMENT 

 

Unemployment across the Nation has risen to critical proportions. 

 

Fortunately, unemployment in Saskatchewan is less severe than in most provinces. 

 

Nevertheless, in an effort to create jobs, particularly in the construction industry, the Government in recent 

months has embarked on a crash public works program. 

 

You will be asked to approve large sums for dozens of new projects. 

 

You will be asked, moreover, to advance the date for other building programs which had originally been 

planned for 1972 and 1973. 

 

Hopefully, many of these projects can be under way by spring. 

 

Student Employment 

 

My Government will make a special effort to provide employment opportunities for university and technical 

school students during the summer months. 

 

All government departments, agencies and branches, together with our crown corporations, have been asked 

to hire the maximum of students who can be usefully employed. 

 



 

February 16, 1971 

 

3 

 

In addition, under certain circumstances, the Government will be prepared to subsidize the employment of 

students in certain other sectors of the economy. 

 

AGRICULTURE 
 
Because of poor international wheat sales, the agricultural sector has been especially hard hit. 
 
The drop in farm purchasing power permeated through out whole economy during 1970. 

 

However, as the current Session commences, there are encouraging signs that the world wheat marketing 

situation is improving. 

 

Sales and Quotas in most rural areas are substantially better than one year ago. 

 

Moreover, there are indications that the sale of durum, barley, flax, rapeseed and oats may reach an all-time 

high in the current crop year. 

 

Diversification 

 

My government, since taking office, has constantly urged and promoted agricultural diversification. 

 

The Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act, introduced at the last Session, has been most successful in promoting a 

rapid expansion of breeding stock. Financial assistance under this legislation will be expanded during 1971. 

 

SEDCO Loans 

 

You will be asked to approve further funds for the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, 

which will permit that agency to make additional loans to major agricultural projects. 

 

Financing of Livestock on Reserves 

 

Legislation will be introduced which will permit Indian Bands to borrow money for herd expansion. 

 

Hog Incentives 

 

Canadian hog prices are almost totally dependent upon the American market. 

 

Those prices have dropped sharply in recent months. 

 

In an effort to help Saskatchewan producers you will be asked to approve a Bill which will permit the paying 

of quality incentives for hogs. 

 

Irrigation 

 

During 1970 an encouraging start was made in potato production in the South Saskatchewan Irrigation area. 

 

You will be requested to approve funds for the continued expansion of land irrigation programs in this part 

of the 



 

February 16, 1971 

 

4 

 

province. 
 
Livestock Pollution Controls 
 
An Act will be introduced to help prevent pollution from livestock feeding operations. 
 
The Bill will make it an offence to operate an intensive livestock operation so as to constitute a public 

nuisance. 
 
Workmen's Compensation for Farmers 
 
Workmen's Compensation for the individual farmer and his workers will be made available on a voluntary 

basis. 
 
HIGHWAYS 
 
Major sums will again be requested for the construction and expansion of our provincial highway system. 
 
Overall spending will probably be the highest in history. 
 
In formulating the 1971 program, the need to provide jobs for Saskatchewan citizens will be constantly kept 

in mind. 
 
Construction on the Leader Bridge across the Saskatchewan River will be completed in the autumn of 1971. 

Work on the Nipawin Bridge is proceeding satisfactorily. 
 
To facilitate the development of our Northern resources, the construction of roads in our North is being 

expedited. 
 
SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN BASE HOSPITAL 
 
Construction work on the new South Saskatchewan Base Hospital located in Regina is now proceeding 

according to plan. 
 
You will be asked to provide major additional funds for this vital project. 
 
EDUCATION 
 
My Government continues to give the highest priority to the education of our young people. 

 

Within the context of that priority, we have endeavoured to restrain the annual increases in local property 

taxes needed for educational purposes. 

 

In the past year, all school budgets were thoroughly examined by the department, and firm controls on 

spending were applied in co-operation with the school boards. 

 

At the same time the highest grants in history were paid, which permitted most districts and units to hold 

their mill rate, and others to reduce their rates by one or two mills. 

 

Larger Provincial Grants 

 

My Government will again ask the Legislature to assume a large proportion of the overall costs of education 

in an attempt to ease the burden on local taxpayers, and further diversify the overall tax base available to 

these local boards. 

 



 

February 16, 1971 

 

5 

 

Teachers' Salaries Agreement Act 

 

In order to facilitate bargaining between teachers and trustees you will be asked to approve changes in the 

timetable of negotiations. 
 
Amendments will also be introduced to provide for additional means of submitting disputes to arbitration. 
 
These changes are designed to expedite the negotiation process and the conclusion of agreements. 
 

University 

 

You will be asked to approve the largest sum of money in history for the continued expansion of the 

University of Saskatchewan on both the Regina and Saskatoon Campuses. 
 
Student Representation 

 

Legislation will be proposed to give students on the Regina and Saskatoon Campuses the right to elect one 

member each to the University Board of Governors. 

 

Teachers' Pensions 
 
Your approval will be requested for a measure to adjust the existing superannuation for teachers who retired 

prior to April, 1963, and their widows and dependents. 

 

Bursary Program 
 
A special committee on scholarships and bursaries will be established to make recommendations on all 

bursaries paid by the Provincial Government or the University. 

 

The committee will consist of representatives of the Government, of the University, technical schools, and 

students. 

 

Larger School Units Act 
 
My Government feels that further centralization of some smaller elementary schools, solely on economic 

grounds, may not always be in the best educational interests of the students. 

 

Accordingly, legislation will be prepared to require the concurrence of the Department of Education, where a 

board proposes to close schools offering instruction in the lower grades. 
 
ELECTORAL REFORM 
 
Last year, a special Legislative Committee met periodically to study electoral reform. 

 

Using the Committee's final report as a basis, at the current Session my Government will propose certain 

far-reaching changes in the Election Act and the Controverted Elections Act. 

 

SUNDAY MOVIES 

 

You will be asked to consider changes in the hours during which cinemas are permitted to operate on 

Sundays. 

 



 

February 16, 1971 

 

6 

 

STORE OPENING 
 
You will be asked to consider changes in the Urban Municipalities Act, which provide for stiffer penalties 

for stores remaining open in other than authorized hours. 
 
LIQUOR ACT 
 
You will be asked to set up an Intersessional Committee of the Legislature to review all aspects of our 

various liquor laws. 

 

The Committee will be requested to make recommendations designed to modernize and increase the 

effectiveness of existing legislation. 
 
LIGHTING OF AIR STRIPS 
 
In recent years, mainly because of provincial grants, about 70 air strips in the province have been constructed 

or improved. 

 

It is now proposed that additional steps should be taken. 

 

A new program will be introduced which will permit local communities to establish lights on their local 

strips, with provincial assistance grants. 
 
LABOUR 
 
Essential Services Emergency Act 

 

Amendments will be introduced to the Essential Services Emergency Act to facilitate the settlement of 

certain labour disputes. 

 

Minimum Wage 

 

The Minister of Labour will propose that the minimum wage in Saskatchewan be adjusted upward. 

 

Workmen's Compensation Act 
 
Changes in the Workmen's Compensation Act will be placed before you for approval with the object of 

increasing benefits for injured workmen and their dependents. 
 
Labour Standards Act 
 
Amendments will be proposed to the Labour Standards Act which will assist employees to recover unpaid 

wages from directors of a company in the event the corporate body defaults. 
 
It will be proposed that employees be given an absolute priority in respect to wages over all other claims and 

general creditors. 
 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 
 
Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards 
 
You will be asked to pass legislation that will protect Saskatchewan consumers from the disadvantages of 

unsolicited 

 



 

February 16, 1971 

 

7 

 

goods and credit cards heretofore distributed without restriction. 
 
Litter 
 
In the interests of environmental management and as a measure of pollution control, you will be asked to 

consider legislation that will effectively restrict the incidence of littering in the province. 

 

Law Foundation 

 

In keeping with the progressive spirit of Saskatchewan law, you will be called upon to establish a Law 

Foundation to advance legal education, research and law reform. 

 

Franchises 

 

You will be asked to approve legislation providing for the supervision and control of pyramid-type 

franchises and multi-level distributorships. 

 

HOME OWNER GRANT 
 
In 1966, in an effort to help property owners with their local taxes, my Government introduced an annual 

$50 homeowner grant. 

 

Subsequently the amount was raised to $60. 

 

At the current Session you will be asked again to increase this annual grant. 

 

SPECIAL CARE HOMES 

 

The provision of special care facilities to serve our aged and infirm citizens has been a prime consideration 

of my Government in the past. 

 

You will be asked for additional funds to permit a major expansion of this program in the coming year. 

 

INDIAN AND METIS 

 

My Government notes with gratification that Saskatchewan native people are indicating a new pride and 

confidence in themselves. 

 

During the past year, the Provincial Indian and Metis Department, co-operating with federal authorities, has 

found jobs for large numbers of natives. 

 

As a result of new provincial regulations, highway and building contractors have also provided employment 

for hundreds of citizens of native origin. 

 

In the coming year, my Government has asked all hospitals receiving provincial grants to hire a percentage 

of citizens of Indian origin. 

 

New farms at La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Mortlach are now providing job opportunities. 

 



 

February 16, 1971 

 

8 

 

My Government has taken over the facilities at Cutbank from the Federal Government. It is using them for 

native training and education in conjunction with the farm establishment. 

 

My Government believes that the problems of our native population must continue to be given a top priority, 

and you will be asked for sharply increased appropriations for these programs. 

 

************ 

 

The Public Accounts for the fiscal year, together with the estimates for the year commencing April 1, 1971, 

will be submitted to you. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge your 

duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

APPOINTMENT OF CLERK ASSISTANTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I should like to inform the Assembly that Michael Arthur de Rosenroll, Esquire, and 

Michael Douglas Turgeon, Esquire, have been appointed Clerk Assistants of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF PAGES 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I should like to introduce to the Members of the Assembly the four pages who will 

serve the House during this Session. On my left Miss Elizabeth Connor, and Miss Kathy Scott, on my right 

Mr. Kenneth Fiissel and Mr. Fred Gottselig. I am sure that all Members will wish to join with me in 

extending to them a very sincere and warm welcome. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


