



















































Hansard: July 30, 1971


97 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Friday, July 30, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Press Conference Held by Minister of Agriculture 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House view with alarm and 

dismay the fact that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) in a Government office held a press 

conference, a full-blown press conference, this morning to announce this particular Bill respecting family 

farm property. It has always been customary in this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, for many, many years, that 

when the Legislature sat that these Bills were presented to the House. This was a flagrant violation of the 

democratic process, Mr. Speaker, in the worst regard by a brand new Government. Mr. Speaker, I listened to 

the Canadian Press report, and ’phoned Canadian Press, the implications of this Bill were carried across this 

country at dinner time, and except by pure accident, those of the Opposition learned of it this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we granted leave to introduce this Bill despite the fact that it requires 48 hours notice. We 

granted leave for this Bill to be introduced simply on the basis that it would give the people of Saskatchewan 

the weekend to study this Bill, which we understand by press reports, is terrifically complicated. It is only, 

Mr. Speaker, that we have consented to this Bill being introduced that anyone in Saskatchewan will be 

permitted to see it if it is produced and presented on our desk this afternoon because we exempted ourselves 

from the 48 hours and granted that leave. Mr. Speaker, I hope that this is not a precedent set by the 

Government opposite to flagrantly violate what is the democratic rights of the Opposition in this particular 

province. We hope that the Minister will stand up and say that he regrets that he has carried out this action 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We hope that the Minister will stand up and tell the House that he has been wrong in 

this action and this it will not be carried out in the future. Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty dismal start for a 

Government that has 45 Members to those 14 who are on this side. 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in answering the Hon. Member from 

Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), I am not knowledgeable of there being any formally written rule in regard to 

press conferences as he has made mention of. I am certain that there have been instances of such practices 

before. I apologize to them if they think that we have in any way infringed upon the democratic right of this 

Legislative Assembly. However, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) knew that the Bill was coming 

in, he 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

98 

 

was ’phoned yesterday and informed that we were going to try and have the Bill ready for Thursday. He 

knew then because it was not brought forward on Thursday, it would be today. The press conference was 

held and the Bill will be laid on the table before the end of the Session this afternoon so that you will have 

the opportunity over the weekend to scrutinize that Bill. The reason for some urgency in having the press 

conference to give some insight as to what the Bill was about for the people of Saskatchewan as well as the 

people of this Legislative Assembly. We feel there is need of and some urgency in getting it to those people 

as well as to the people of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Wildlife Crop Insurance Damage 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 

like to announce that our Department has requested the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office which 

co-operates in wildlife crop insurance damage to re-instate the $25 premium to those farmers who have 

purchased or will be purchasing wildlife crop insurance. I was rather surprised and shocked to learn when 

entering the Department that the former Government had reduced this to $20 per acre. As of now, however, 

it will be restored to $25. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would ask the Minister to keep just to the statement and not to raise a debate. We can't 

permit debates on statements. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Bill to Facilitate Seating of Elected Members 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to direct a question to the Premier. I 

believe it has been announced that Mr. Allan Guy was officially declared elected by the judge in the re-count 

in regard to Athabasca; and Mr. Gross similarly has been declared the winner after re-count in Gravelbourg. 

In view of the situation on this side of the House I would ask if the Premier would be prepared, and I 

recognize it can't be done today, on say Monday to bring in a Bill to accommodate both of these Members to 

allow them to sit in the House for the remainder of this Session. Now, very briefly, I recognize what the 

Premier said when they brought in the Bill to allow me to sit, and again just let me reiterate that we don't 

agree with their interpretation of the Act but if we were to argue it the Session would be over. He said he 

doesn't like the precedent of the Legislative Assembly seating Members when that responsibility and 

privilege belongs to the people, and with this I concur. However, it is highly unlikely that we shall get the 

same set of circumstances that we now face this year in 1971. We may have an Opposition as small as we are 

or even smaller, but it is highly unlikely that we should get the same situation. We have such a small 

Opposition, such a stunning set back with the death of our Leader 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

99 

 

and, frankly, we need all the help we can get on this side. So I would ask the Government to give 

consideration to passing the Bill to seat these two Members so they can represent their constituencies in this 

House for the remaining part of the Session. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware other than by word of mouth of the situation 

in Athabasca. I understood that the Gravelbourg re-count was finished yesterday but I don't know what the 

Athabasca situation is. I reiterate my earlier remarks about our misgivings about seating people while the 

process of re-count is still going. In the instance of the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) it had, 

for all practical purposes, ceased because his opponent had publicly indicated that he wasn't going to appeal. 

However, I will consider what the Leader of the Opposition has said and we shall make our decision and 

announce it in due course. 

 

Highway Program 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways (Mr. Byers) isn't here so I should like to 

direct my question to the Treasurer (Mr. Blakeney). In lieu of the statement made by the Minister of 

Highways that the Liberal Government's highway budget of 1971-72 would be carried out with the exception 

of a few changes, would the Government tell us what the changes are in that program? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I will take that question as notice and I will relay it to the Minister. Doubtless he will 

answer as soon as he has an opportunity to consider it. 

 

Souris Valley Extended Care Hospital 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Hon. 

Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). On Wednesday of this week the Minister announced that the Souris 

Valley Extended Care Hospital at Weyburn would soon be accepting and receiving patients from the 

southeastern part of Saskatchewan. I should appreciate if he would please tell the House how many new 

patients — that is, those not presently being cared for in the Saskatchewan Hospital complex — will be 

accommodated during the year 1971-72 and if this care will be cost-shared with Ottawa? 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, let me answer the last point first. It is my 

understanding that the program will be cost-shareable with the Government of Canada. In the case of any 

additional patients that might be admitted over and above those that are in the present mental hospital, as far 

as I know, initially it will be those patients that are in the mental hospital but I understand it is going to be 

extended. I shall give the Member for Regina Whitmore Park a more detailed answer after I have consulted 

some of my officials. 

 

Are Property Owners to Pay Full School Mill Rate 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Education (Mr. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

100 

 

MacMurchy) or perhaps the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood). In view of the fact that property 

owners are nearing the time when municipal taxes may be paid this question is of some urgency; would the 

Minister inform us whether property owners and particularly farmers will be required to pay the full school 

mill rate or only the rate of 25 mills as promised by your party in the election campaign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — May I advise Hon. Members that our program was a four-year program, not a four-day 

program or a four-week program. I think Members have been amused by the comments of Members opposite 

to the effect that because something wasn't done in the first four weeks that there has been a 'reneging', if I 

may use the word of the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac), on some particular promise. That particular 

plank is under consideration. It will certainly obviously not apply for the year 1971, when, of course, many 

people have paid their taxes. I have, as have many people who live in cities, and there is, I think, no 

suggestion that it will apply for year 1971. I am confident that it will apply before the four-year term is over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation to Flood Victims 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to 

the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The practice has been to allow about three questions, we have had four, but on this 

occasion I shall allow an extra one because it's a new Member asking it. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I am wondering if the Cabinet has arrived at 

any policy on paying compensation to the flood victims of the Qu'Appelle Valley river system, and if so, 

what is that policy? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I'm advised that since no compensation was paid by previous governments that the people 

there have not been applying for any. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If, in fact, there have been applications which we haven't dealt with we are not aware of 

them. We are aware of money being paid with respect to the particular Lumsden flood, the big flood, but we 

weren't aware of any applications which have come since then. If they have, we are certainly not aware of it. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Yes, there is an application I believe, Mr. Premier, from a Mr. Wong, for example, at 

Lumsden. I believe there are some from people up at Craven and if the Premier has not seen them I shall 

make sure that he sees the applications, which were made some months ago, I might advise. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

101 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They will have been dealt with by the previous Government then. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to help the Premier out. We were considering this very 

closely, we were thinking of doubling them as a matter of fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Address-in-Reply 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. B. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park) 

for an Address-in-Reply. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in resuming this debate, I said last night at 

the end of my remarks that today I would review some of the promises made by the NDP; some of the 

unbelievable promises they made all over this province, the official ones the party made and then the ones all 

the candidates who got elected made to the folks back home and the ones of those who didn't get elected 

made to the folks back home. I have got a partial list here, we are still doing research because everyday we 

run into more. I promise the Government that we will continue this research and we will bring them to the 

attention of the Government which I am sure they would like us to do and to the public. 

 

I also intend to discuss, and I hope and I am sure when the Premier rises in his place to enter this debate that 

he will inform the House and the public just how the Government intends to pay for these promises, or rather 

how they intend to have the poor old taxpayer pay for them, and maybe, approximately, when they intend to 

put them in. In four years, well I'm sure they have such a terrific plan with their New Deal for People that 

they put out eight or nine months before the election so they had a great deal of time to plan, and if you could 

give us some timetable, it would be helpful for us and the people, I am sure. 

 

Just let's go over a few of them. Now the Land Bank, No. 1, that means they're going to buy some land that's 

going to cost them a lot of money. No. 2, forgivable loans for farmers. No. 3, re-open small hospitals. No. 4, 

they are going to eliminate the teacher-pupil ratio. Every time they eliminate or every time they raise it one, 

it is $3 million or $3.5 million of the taxpayers' money. No. 5, they are going to build more houses, vastly 

more houses. No. 6, they are going to provide funds to pave streets, to build sidewalks, to build parks, to 

build recreation centres. They have no idea how much this will cost — a great many towns will be interested 

I am sure. No. 7, they are going to grant money to small industries and small businesses. No. 8, they are 

going to build community colleges and parks and universities all over the province and offer higher 

education available in all parts of the province. No. 9, they are going to sharply increase the labor budget. 

No. 10, they are going to establish industrial research. No. 11, they are going to launch massive housing and 

urban renewal programs. No. 12, they are going to modernize small towns and build sport centres. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

102 

 

No. 13, they are going to abolish utilization fees. No. 14, they are going to give old-age pensioners, both rich 

and poor, so-called free medical and hospital coverage. No. 15, they are going to provide eye glasses, wheel 

chairs and hearing aids at very low cost. No. 16, they are going to establish a central aid program. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Any more, Dave? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — More! I haven't even got warmed up yet. No. 17, they are going to include Mercy Care 

Homes under hospitalization. No. 18, they are going to reduce medicare and hospital premiums. No. 19, they 

are going to include chiropractic services under medicare. No. 20, they are going to establish a school of 

social aid work at the university. No. 21, they are going to build more senior citizens' homes. No. 23, they 

are going to provide a drug program. No. 24, they are going to remove sales taxes on meals, including hot 

dogs and hamburgers, children's clothes, soaps, cleaners, books, grain storage facilities. No. 25, they are 

going to reduce or eliminate other fees and charges unspecified. No. 26 they are going to reduce automobile 

insurance. No. 27, they are going to introduce half-fare bus fares to everyone over 65. No. 28, they are going 

to spend more money fighting pollution. No. 28, they are going to start a new planning agency in the 

Government, and I'll bet they'll have three or four new planning agencies. No. 30, they are going to reduce 

property taxes for education to 25 mills. No. 31, they are going to hire more students. No. 32, they are going 

to make more bursaries available. No. 33, they are going to give more grants for auxiliary education 

associations. No. 34, they are going to build vastly more student housing. No. 35, they are going to establish 

a consumer affairs agency. No. 36, they are going to give more money towards the Indian and Metis 

organization. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Sounds like a good program! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, it is beautiful! It is wonderful It is unbelievable! It is the greatest thing since the 

invention of mother love and warm water. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I tell you I haven't even got warmed up yet. I am delighted to live in this Province, that is 

until I get the bills. No. 37, they are going to hire an ombudsman, or two or three. And they will need one, 

believe me. I thought they elected 45 ombudsmen over there but maybe they didn't. I thought that was the job 

of the elected people to represent the people, but they don't believe that. They are going to hire some more. 

 

No. 38, they are going to enlarge Government Information Services, and Oh, brother, can I believe that! We 

will give you the names and addresses of some of the fellows that we let out when we first became the 

Government. And they are going to provide a hotline. Get this: they are going to provide a hotline for the 

public. I am going to need one of these. I wonder if they can tell us where it is going to go — the hotline to 

the Premier's office, the Attorney General's office? No. 39, they are going to set up a new Department of 

Northern Affairs. They 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

103 

 

have already done that and they have already established a commissar from the North. I understand that they 

might put the offices in Prince Albert. Please, do me a favor. Put them in Prince Albert East, if there is one 

left. No. 40, they are going to build a power dam at Nipawin. Where is the Member for Nipawin (Mr. 

Comer)? Last time we put a price tag on that it was $98 million. It has probably gone up to $150 million. We 

don't need the power right now, but we are going to build it anyway. No. 42, they are going to create — well, 

these are now getting kind of technical. I am just using these to explain because they have regional programs 

that no one should miss. For example, they are going to create new jobs in Moose Jaw. I don't know why 

Moose Jaw, but they are going to create new jobs in Moose Jaw. No. 43, they are going to build a $1.5 

million provincial building in Moose Jaw. No. 44, they are going to give Regina a share of the gasoline tax. I 

wonder if the Premier, the Treasurer, when he gets up to speak will say what year they are going to give 

Regina this. I am not sure it was Henry or who that promised this one — are they going to give it to all the 

other villages and towns and municipalities? 

 

No 45, they are going to build a youth hostel. No. 46, they are going to build a technical vocational school in 

Regina. No. 47, Lumsden was not forgotten but it might be now. They are going to build a nursing home in 

Lumsden. No. 48, it says right in here, and the Premier didn't even know about it, it says, we are going to pay 

more flood compensation. He hasn't read the entire program yet. No. 49, this is the Member for Saskatoon 

University (Mr. Richards) — he is going to take over the potash industry. That ought to knock off $1,000 

million, but maybe it will take a week or two to do that. No. 50, they are going to take over the pulp mill in 

Prince Albert. Now we have totalled it up and it comes to more than 100 promises. 

 

I am not going to bore the House with any more, but that is just a slight sample of some of the promises that 

you people made. There are many more. As I say, there are over 100 and we will keep you posted. For 

example, and I just want to deal with one more — Art Thibault, poor old Art. Where is Art? Art promised 

purple gas for small businessmen. How small, Art? Five foot five? If I thought that I would qualify, I would 

try and get back in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, anyway, Art is going to give small businessmen purple gas. I don't know whether they 

are going to drink it, eat it, or what they are going to do with it, but they are going to get purple gas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how do they intend to pay for this fantastic program? I don't care whether the Premier 

says they are going to do it in one year or four years, I suggest that it will take him four years to pay for this 

program. Now how do they say that they are going to pay for it? Oh, they are going to reduce premiums, 

going to reduce taxes. They are going to soak the rich! They are going to raise the corporation tax. They are 

going to get more money for royalties. That is great! Good! Wonderful! Everyone likes to soak the rich, 

except for the rich, I don't think they like it very well. 

 

But I want to give you one word of caution. Before you can soak those big industries, you have to get them 

in. You 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

104 

 

can't soak them before you get them, then you can really sock it to them. There is another little detail they are 

forgetting. Before they sock it to those industries, they should get them in here, and they need to get them in 

here for jobs. You know, there is a tremendous number of jobless people. Not quite as many as you people 

thought there were, but they are growing every day in the last five weeks, I am sure. And they are watching 

and they are waiting, rather impatiently, and they are losing hope because in five weeks they haven't 

announced anything for them. Oh, you got plans and you got studies! You are going to think about it. You 

are going to increase the public works. Well, we went through that routine too, and we are going to watch 

yours with great interest. You can dig up some of those old plans and put dates on them. 

 

Let me tell you of our experience. All of those people that you will hire in those public works, will be 

employed and I am glad to see it — but it won't solve the unemployment problem. The only thing that would 

really give these people jobs is if you can get someone to invest a buck to start a factory or an industry or 

start one yourself. I think even after five weeks — and I agree with the Premier — we don't expect that they 

will do their program in four weeks, four months. In fact, in reading the unbelievable program we don't even 

think they will do it in four years or 40 years — and they aren't going to have any more than four years. But 

the unemployed people are waiting. They want to know, Mr. Premier, what your plans are. And vague 

promises of study groups and tourist industry up in the North, I am afraid they aren't quite good enough. 

 

Let's take one example. The Premier announced briefly, and I am sure that he is going to have a great deal to 

say about it later on in this House, that the deal — the Canada deal we had made with the Choiceland Iron 

Mine — was out. The Members on both sides of the House, people all over Saskatchewan, I am sure were 

shocked and dismayed when the Premier made this announcement. All Members will recall that this project 

began formally a little over two months ago with the signing of an agreement in Regina. 

 

The partners involved were the Government of Saskatchewan, IPSCO, the local steel mill, Denison Mines, 

the Choiceland Iron Mines Limited. I said at the time of the signing of the agreement when I was involved in 

negotiations, that this is one of the most important industrial projects we had ever attempted to get into this 

Province. Indeed, when one thinks of the tremendous secondary industry potential that this development 

would create, it would probably have been the single most important industrial project ever to come to the 

Prairie Provinces. 

 

At the time of the signing of the agreement we acknowledged the fact that there were some risks involved in 

this enterprise. But then there are risks involved in every new industry. It was our feeling at the time that the 

advantages far outweighed the disadvantages. 

 

Let me, for just one moment, enumerate some of these advantages: employment — our Socialist friends 

opposite made a big issue during the recent election campaign about the Saskatchewan unemployment 

figure. I remind you that during the last six months of our Government, the unemployment rate in this 

Province was the lowest anywhere in Canada. But despite that fact we had at no time maintained that we 

were satisfied with our unemployment rate. We have always maintained that we should 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

105 

 

like to see it lower until it was wiped out. We were, and still are, more concerned about the unemployment 

rate in Saskatchewan, and especially in the northern part of the province. That is why we decided to go ahead 

with both the pulp mill at Dore Lake and the iron mine at Choiceland, despite the risks involved. 

 

There are thousands and thousands of people unemployed in both of these areas. We are convinced that the 

unemployment opportunities must be developed in these areas and developed now, not 50 years from now. 

 

The new mine at Choiceland would have provided over 1,000 jobs in the construction period and another 

1,000 full-time jobs when completed, in the mine and the pelleting plant. The secondary services that would 

have accompanied the new industry would have meant, maybe, as high as 3,000 or 4,000 additional jobs in 

that area. The new mine would have created additional employment in other parts of the province as well. 

 

Jack Turvey, president of IPSCO, has figured that such a project would have meant an additional 3,000 or 

4,000 here at the steel mill. This steel mill could have well become the steel centre of Western Canada. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, over the next decade the Choiceland Mine and the Iron Pelleting Plant directly and 

indirectly could have created as many as 10,000 additional jobs in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — 80,000! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, not 80,000 but 10,000. And at least we promised 80,000 and we got some. I will say 

this for you fellows — I don't know how many you promised but it won't be 80,000 at the rate that you are 

going. It won't be 8,000 and in fact I don't think that it will even be 80. The additional jobs would have been 

a big step forward in the diversification of this Province. Even our Socialist friends opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

have admitted that diversification is an absolute necessity in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When are you going to announce, Mr. Agriculture Minister (Mr. Messer)? You can find the press today if 

you want to make that announcement. You have been in five weeks and you haven't announced one job-

producing industry, business or anything else. 

 

For too long this Province has been dependent on wheat with the result that when there is a drought or the 

price of wheat goes down or we can't sell our wheat, the whole economy stagnates. 

 

The new mine, while having diversified our economy, would have given us a wider tax base in this province. 

Everyone knows we need that especially if you Socialists hope to carry out even one-tenth of the promises 

that you made to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for years now the NDP Socialists have been preaching anti-Americanism in this province. In 

fact, up and down this whole land, if there ever has been a dividing force between us and our neighbor to the 

south, it has been the NDP throughout the length and breadth of this nation. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

106 

 

They opposed the Prince Albert pulp mill because it was partly financed by American capital. They have 

opposed the Dore Lake pulp mill because it was financed partially by American capital. For years they have 

harped about the need for developing our resources with Canadian capital, yet when we made arrangements 

with Canadian capital to develop our mine at Choiceland, a mine that has been known for years, that people 

have worked on for years, including your Government when you were the former Government. When we 

make those arrangements, your first opportunity, you turn thumbs down. 

 

Now I said at the beginning of my remarks that I found it incredible that the new Government would even 

think of turning down this complex. There they sit, calling themselves the friend of the underdog, the friend 

of the unemployed, tossing out the window the opportunity of getting into this Province, even though when 

the new Premier said in his press statement that he wanted a more economical approach to the project, 

implying that the initial agreement and studies were not economically sound. He based his assessment on the 

final feasibility study of the General Engineering Company. 

 

Well, what about that study? This same company had been hired several years ago. We hired them again. We 

said make a study of this. If it is feasible we want to go ahead with it. We knew that we should get a partial 

answer. We gave ourselves, at that time, if it was totally unfeasible, a chance to back out. And the 

Government took that chance and we put that clause in there. At the same time, I think and I am convinced, 

the Premier and the new Government should have asked for more time. I am convinced that they would have 

got more time. From Denison, they certainly would have got more time from Mr. Kirby, they would have got 

more time from the Choiceland Mine. 

 

What do some of the people say about the study? In a press statement dated July 19th, the Leader-Post under 

the name of Steve Roman, president of Denison Mines had this to say: 

 

Stephen Roman, Chairman of Denison Mines Limited said today that Premier Allan 

Blakeney made a big mistake in cancelling an agreement for the development of the 

Choiceland iron deposit in Saskatchewan. 

 

Roman went on to say: 

 

It was a good deal for all concerned, and would have provided a new and vital industrial base 

for Saskatchewan. If the Premier wants to listen, Mr. Roman said, we can prove the project is 

economically sound and our figures are accurate, and also prove the information on which 

the agreement was cancelled was wrong. 

 

Mr. Roman is a Canadian citizen. He is the man who built the Elliott Lake mines. He is one of the most 

successful mining men anywhere in the world, one of the leading businessmen in this country. And yet, 

would Mr. Blakeney get in touch with him and say, "come on and sit down with me?" He did not. I talked to 

Steve Roman in Toronto this morning and asked him if he has had any word from the Government of 

Saskatchewan. Has Mr. Blakeney or anyone else phoned you and asked you to come down and talk this thing 

over? And he said, "No, they haven't. All I heard was the cancellation." I said, "Would you talk it over with 

him?" He said, 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

107 

 

Of course I would. I still think it is a good deal. I still think that it would work out for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people. I would like a chance to present my side of the picture. I think the report was 

ill-conceived and hastily done. 

 

Now, let me point out this: that they may be dealing, they may be carrying on negotiations with Mr. Daly. 

That's fine! Mr. Daly is a fine man. He is the president of Choiceland mines. But Mr. Daly has been trying to 

develop this mine for years. It wasn't until he got someone of the stature of Mr. Roman, someone with the 

know-how, someone with the worldwide organization behind him, Mr. Roman, that has made the 

Choiceland Iron mine and pelleting plant anything close to being a viable project. Yet our Premier cancels it 

out of hand, never phoned him up, never said, "I'll come down and see you or you come out and see me." I 

am convinced that Mr. Roman, Mr. Daly and Mr. Turvey, recognizing that there was a new Government, and 

that the Government had the right and took it — and I don't blame them — to stop and look over every deal 

that our Government made before they went ahead. We allowed that escape clause. We put that in there for 

that reason, for ourselves or any other government. Then you could have told them, "come on out and talk 

this over and see if we can make a better deal." Maybe you could have made a better deal. Maybe you can 

make a better deal yet, I hope you can. But let me tell you this, you don't get people of the stature of Steve 

Roman with the money behind him to come into this Province and offer to work with us every day. It's a fact 

that we, and you before us, tried to get that Choiceland iron mine developed and we failed. And the first time 

we got someone, whom I think had the know-how and the money behind him to maybe make it successful, 

Mr. Blakeney just threw it out the window a few days after he became the Premier. 

 

Mr. Roman goes on to say: 

 

We thought it was an economically sound agreement when we went into it and we still feel 

the same way. We think we know more about underground mining than the Company that 

did the feasibility report. The project calls for a lot of work and lots of original ideas. 

 

Denison was anxious to get in on a project which could have completely changed the economy of this 

Province. 

 

Interprovincial Steel and Pipe have said it cannot expand without access to ore products. Choiceland can 

provide that. It was planned to sell the iron ore to all the Prairie Provinces and outside the country as well. 

Mr. Roman quoted further: 

 

A steel firm is essential to the rest and will be involved either in Regina or Edmonton. 

 

He decline to elaborate on his reference to Edmonton. But I can tell this House that I am absolutely confident 

that if this Government — and I hope this thing isn't finished, I hope they haven't completely lost their 

chance — if this Government does not take this opportunity or if they can't replace it with another 

opportunity and a steel complex of this size gets developed either in Manitoba or more likely in Alberta, then 

I'll tell you we have lost our opportunity to have a steel plant for at least the next 50 years. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

108 

 

There is only room for one large steel complex in the Prairie Provinces and I think we had that opportunity 

within our grasp. I hope, I sincerely hope, that what the Premier has done up to this point was merely a ploy 

in his negotiations, but I can tell him that he had better get those interested parties back at the table and I can 

also tell him that he cannot develop that complex with a Choiceland iron mine. Maybe he can find some new 

partners that have got the kind of money and know-how that Mr. Roman has in Denison Mines, I hope he 

can. I am a citizen of this Province and I want to see it succeed. If they can, this party will be the first to 

congratulate you and support you. But I think it was absolutely disgraceful that you didn't at least explore the 

ideas and invite Mr. Roman out here to say, "Look, we've got this study, we don't think it is economically 

sound, although it did show a small profit was possible. What do you think about it, after all you have been 

in the mining business for years, you made a fantastic success of your business life and the companies you 

have been involved in. What is your answer to it?" Maybe, Mr. Premier, you wouldn't have been satisfied, 

maybe he couldn't have given you answers that would have satisfied you, but at least you could have looked 

this Opposition in the eye, and the people of this Province and the unemployment problem in the eye, and 

said, "Look, I have left no stone unturned, I have gone into every possible detail and I have found that I am 

not prepared to risk the $10 million to try and develop this complex." 

 

It is a queer thing, though, they'll stand up here in the House and they'll boast and they'll promise to spend 

millions and millions and millions. Oh, they are prepared to take over some of them, the potash industry, 

$800 million or $900 million. They are prepared, some of them, to go up and grab the pulp mill in Prince 

Albert. I don't know how much that will cost. They are prepared, some of them, to throw out the Dore Lake 

agreement. Let me tell you, if you do it might cost you some money. 

 

They are prepared to build government buildings in Moose Jaw at $1.5 million. What does a government 

building do? All a government building does is that is encourages the civil servants to fill it up with more 

civil servants. I forgot whose law they call it, but you could name it after Allan Blakeney if you want, and 

that costs the taxpayers more and more and more. They call that social capital. Well, there is lots of social 

capital to be spent and we agree with it. But, Mr. Premier, you had better balance it with business and 

enterprise capital because it takes that in the final analysis. Until such time as your Members change the 

whole system, until you wipe out the Capitalistic system, until you bring in this Utopia of Socialism, in the 

meantime while we are still struggling under the so-called Free Enterprise system, I suggest you play the 

game by the rules of the road, then when you have got this Utopia across the country, then you can play the 

game any way you want. 

 

Mr. Daly, what were his comments? Mr. Daly, president of the Choiceland Iron Mine Limited, on Monday 

blamed a badly researched feasibility study for the cancellation of the proposed development of an iron mine 

at Choiceland. Today he told the Leader-Post in a telephone interview that the feasibility study obviously 

suffered from lack of time and research in its preparation. The report was prepared without consultation, 

either with Denison, the major principal, or with Choiceland. He said the optimistic revised figures could 

indicate the project was substantially better than the feasibility report study showed. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

109 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . table it! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I should like you to table that. If you have tabled it, I am sorry, I will take a look at it today. 

 

I won't be surprised. I am not suggesting for a minute that the feasibility study based on a feasibility study, 

maybe your decision was a right one. I am not saying it wasn't. But what I am saying is: what have you done? 

I hope you have some report — you haven't reported it publicly. Why didn't you bring these two people in 

who are experienced in the mining field and say, what do you think of this report? You obviously haven't 

and now you have cancelled it. I would have done that, we would have done that. If they didn't have any 

answers and the report was that bad, then we would have washed it out. Let me make it very clear, Mr. 

Speaker, to the press, to the public of this Province, we put that clause in. We said, "if we get a feasibility 

report and we hire the company and that feasibility report shows it is not a viable project, then we'll wash it 

out, we'll back out of it." 

 

Well, okay, you got the feasibility report, but for God's sake, with the unemployment we have got, and the 

lack of industrial base I should think it would have been just common sense to have said, 'let's first, before 

we do that, call in the two people who have some experience in mining and say, what do you think of that 

report?' Then if they weren't satisfied with it and they put an honest doubt in your mind, say, 'how about 

giving me 30 days or 60 days leeway to look at a new report.' Sure, they would have done it. Maybe when 

you stand up you have got a good answer, I hope you have, because the people of this Province need to have 

that answer, especially those people looking for work. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, the opinion of two of the most prominent mine experts in the country, both say the 

original Choiceland project is economically sound and a good deal for this Province. On the other hand, we 

have little Allan — shortly he'll be an expert on everything — but right now, or at that time he was still just a 

city labor lawyer and I am afraid he wouldn't know a handful of iron pellets from a load of hay, and he said, 

"this isn't a good study, we are going to throw the whole thing out." 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . a corporation lawyer! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, I am sorry, he is a corporation lawyer — a Crown corporation lawyer he is now, I am 

sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said at the time this was thrown out that there was more behind it than appeared just in the 

press. I still say that our good friends, the Wafflers, were calling the tune, they don't want any of this 

Capitalistic money, not even Canadian money. I think that was the first instalment little Allan paid and I 

think that if he throws out the Dore Lake pulp mill, we'll see the second instalment. I can hardly wait until 

they have their commune meeting out on the weekend and hear the breathless results and follow it up next 

week when you make the announcement on the Dore Lake project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a black day for the unemployed when you threw that mine out without coming out — I 

hope you can do 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

110 

 

that today — and say that you have an alternative and not some "pie in the sky" thing about some 

development of the tourist industry up North, up in the Meadow Lake area that employed some 60 part-time 

people last year. Or some studies by some of your Socialist friends you have imported, to tell us we'll have 

study reports down the road somewhere and we'll find some jobs for these unemployed. They need them 

now, they need them now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a word about the Dore Lake pulp mill. This was a second industrial 

complex that we had negotiated but up to the point where we had signed the deal and now it stands in 

jeopardy. 

 

I should like just to take a minute or two to talk a bit about a philosophy. Now the Members opposite are 

very fond of talking in a philosophical strain, a civilization will be judged on how it treats the poor, the old, 

the sick, and the blind. Well, let me tell you a civilization will be judged on how it treats its unemployment. 

And the unemployed can't cash those phony cheques that come out of your mouths, they have got to have 

jobs, and until you change the system, somebody has got to invest a buck before somebody can go to work. 

As far as our Government was concerned, and as far as our Caucus is concerned, and as far as our 

philosophy is concerned, let me make it crystal clear — we don't and we never have worshipped at the altar 

of Free Enterprise nor do we worship at the altar of Government Enterprise. 

 

I have said this before and I'll say it now, lots of time I think the only thing that makes free enterprise smell 

anywhere acceptable is if government enterprise smells worse. Then when you get a combination of both, 

sometimes those Crown corporations are the real problem. I say the job of government today is to look at 

each situation and if that situation can best be developed by private people with enough government control 

to see that the ordinary man gets a fair share, then develop it that way. If it calls for government development 

through Crown corporations or any other government industry, then develop it that way. But please don't 

come in here as a Government and tell the people you have got the answers for jobs and the revenue and the 

resource development and to start calling people that come in here to invest their money pirates, robber 

barons, and say we'll throw them out without any compensation. All that Parsons and Whittemore ever did 

was come in here and make a deal with us. If we made a stupid deal, well, we made a stupid deal and the 

people threw us out of power. It wasn't their fault. Somebody got up and said, look at the way they . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Clap, sure, sure! They haven't seen the deals you made yet! I'll go back to some of those 

deals you made in 1944. You should really be put in jail for them. Don't talk about stupid deals, you haven't 

proven yet that you could run a single peanut stand, never mind a pulp mill or anything else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let me tell you something. One of your Members gets up there and says, look at the way 

Parsons and Whittemore treated the chemical plant up in Saskatoon. Let me tell you how Parsons 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

111 

 

and Whittemore treated the Co-op Chemical Plant. Don't let anybody tell you I don't know what I am talking 

about, I was involved for a year in that deal. I'll tell you about Parsons and Whittemore, Mr. Member from 

Saskatoon, Mr. man who wants to run all the Capitalists out and take their money from them and give them 

no compensation, calls people who come in here to develop our Province robber barons and worse. Parsons 

and Whittemore made a deal with the Co-op chemical Company to have them supply caustic soda, and 

fluorine to the new pulp mill in Prince Albert. They didn't grab their little co-operative hands and make them 

sign the deal, the Co-op was anxious to sign it, they were already in the industrial chemical business and they 

wanted to expand so they signed the deal of their own free will with Parsons and Whittemore. What did they 

do then? They bought some equipment and the equipment didn't work very well, and they were accused — 

among other things — of dumping mercury into the Saskatchewan River. 

 

I am not going to say whether they were dumping it or not, although some of the Members from Saskatoon 

who support the Co-op movement were quick enough to say that they were dumping that mercury and they 

got a law suit. They were alleged to be dumping some in, but I know something, it is not alleged, they had 

lots of problems. They signed a deal with an American co-operative that went broke to buy some of their 

chemicals and it went out of business and they found themselves in extreme difficulties losing money. In 

fact, it was almost a fact that the entire Federated Co-op across this country was in jeopardy. Because we, the 

Government, had lent them some money — you had lent them some money when you were in Government 

— we sat down with Parsons and Whittemore and the Co-op people. We re-arranged that whole contract, 

Parsons and Whittemore didn't have to do that, they could have said, "stick to the contract", because they 

could have got that chemical at that time from the Dow Chemical Plant at the same price. So they re-wrote 

the contract and when we finished, it was a much better contract to the Co-op Chemical Company. They 

gave them an increase in price that netted the Co-op Chemical Company of Saskatoon about $150,000 gross 

more a year and cost the Prince Albert pulp mill $150,000 more a year. That is exactly the beginning and end 

of what Parsons and Whittemore, through the Prince Albert pulp mill, did to the Co-op Chemical and the 

Federated Co-op in this Province. If that's a sin, if that's what is going to black-ball them out of this 

Province, then I think we should have more sins and more people like that in this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am saying this, if the Socialist Government wants to throw out the Dore Lake pulp mill, 

that's their business. That's their business. If they can come in and show that we made a bad deal, that's their 

business. If they can make a better deal, good for them. We never pretended we were the greatest geniuses in 

the world, all we ever said is, we are going to try and do something to find these people jobs. 

 

Let me show you the other side of the coin. Up there in LaLoche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, Meadow 

Lake, there are a great many people up there. Most of them are Indian and Metis and they have been living 

for generations on social aid. We white men went up there and we changed their way of life. Oh, we really 

changed their way of life. They had fishing and 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

112 

 

hunting and a reasonably balanced way of life, we gave them social aid, unlimited social aid by their 

standards, not by ours. Oh, and the liquor, the only free enterprisers that you find up there are the bootleggers 

and they come up on social aid day. I say to the social aid workers and all those brilliant people coming out 

of our universities, it is about time we thought of a better way, but in the meantime those people have been 

doomed by you, and by us, to a life of social aid, a life of degradation that is hardly comparable anywhere 

else in this Province. How are you going to help them? But in the meantime while you are waiting for your 

Utopia, you help people usually by offering them jobs, so they can hold up their heads and stick out their 

chests and say, look I'm a real citizen. I pay my way. 

 

I don't have to be told by anybody that the Indian and Metis of this Province, who are just as good as we are, 

sometimes a little bit better and most of them like most of us, would sooner have a chance at a decent job at 

decent wages. Okay, we want to help them, they are there, they are not going to move out of there. Now how 

do we do it? Somebody said the tourist industry. For God's sake, use your brains! The tourist industry 

employed 60 part-time people up there the year before last. Sure they have some tourist industry but it is not 

going to supply the thousands of jobs necessary to give some of those people some hope now, not 50 years 

from now. So we said a pulp mill can make it, a pulp mill because there is a lot of wood up there, a 

tremendous area of forest. 

 

Now let's look at the problems. The problem was to get somebody to come up there who knew how to run a 

pulp mill because there is no use starting pulp mills if you can't sell the pulp, and market conditions are 

tough enough anyway. The pulp mill market goes up and down like a roller coaster. Right now it is down a 

little, it will come back. You have to have somebody with know-how and a world-wide organization, so we 

went to every Canadian pulp mill in Canada. We said, come in. Somebody said, did you offer them the same 

deal you gave Parsons and Whittemore. We said, "No!" Of course we didn't, we offered them any reasonable 

proposition, let them negotiate with us. We didn't offer them the same deal because we negotiated with 

Parsons and Whittemore for about a year, but we would have offered it to them, exactly similar terms and 

conditions because we wanted Canadian capital first. Make no mistake, they wouldn't come in here, they 

wouldn't take the chance. Parsons and Whittemore said they would do it. It is a big risk and we were risking 

a lot of the taxpayers' money. I don't pretend we weren't. There are problems of pollution, and there are 

problems of reforestation, but today with technical know-how and science and good-will and intelligence, 

we could have solved those problems. If we didn't solve them, we wouldn't have a pulp mill. We wouldn't let 

it go ahead, Ottawa wouldn't let it go ahead. They were prepared to put money into this, we were prepared to 

take the risk. I don't argue there was a raw risk. 

 

But friends, let's look at the alternative. The alternative I am afraid is, we say to those people in a practical 

honest way, sorry brother, we haven't got anything for you. Stick on social aid for another 20 or 30 years 

until we find some nice clean-smelling 100 per cent Canadian industry that might come up there and can 

your blueberries or I don't know what they might do. I hope, Mr. Premier, that you do make a deal. I hope 

you do. We'll support you if you do, I know there are problems. If you can make a better deal than we did, I 

will say this, you are in 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

113 

 

a better bargaining position. I'll bet you've got them pretty scared right now. So if you can make a better deal, 

make it. Again I want to say we never pretended to be the greatest geniuses that ever walked. I am sure there 

is a better deal to be made. I don't think it could be much better, but maybe it could be. But make a deal if 

you can. Sure it is easy to laugh, Mr. Minister of Northern Affairs. I am being serious, what is your answer to 

those people? We . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Smoke jumping . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, make them smoke jumpers! We didn't have an answer for them. In honesty we didn't 

have an answer for those people until we found that pulp mill. You haven't got an answer today and you 

were there for 20 years. Twenty years and you didn't have an answer! You haven't got one now and that's 

your responsibility. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this in closing, I hope that you do make a deal. I don't know whether you will 

or not. I just want to say this. The people of this Province — sure we're talking back and forth here and Mr. 

Blakeney got up and said, you really don't expect us to do all our promises in five weeks. No, we don't. But 

you have been the Government for five weeks and you have called a Special Session, we didn't. I think the 

people of this Province are waiting, they are happy, I am sure that you are keeping those promises of 

utilization fees and so on. It is a good start. But they are waiting for something more than that, because that 

is only one side of the coin. They are waiting for an answer for the young and the unemployed and the people 

that want to build their careers and their jobs here in Saskatchewan. Okay, that's just good fun. The people of 

this Province already beat us, you can beat on us for another month or two months in every one of your 

speeches telling us how stupid we were and how inhuman we were in putting on utilization fees and so on. 

Bully for you! But I am going to tell you something, people of Saskatchewan are expecting a little more, they 

elected you, they didn't elect us as the Government. They know they defeated us, they know why they 

defeated us. I am going to tell you one thing, one reason they didn't defeat us for, one thing that didn't put us 

down to defeat — if you say you did, you are reading the tea leaves wrong — we didn't go down to defeat 

because we tried to get industrial development. People liked that part of our program and they are expecting 

you to do as well or better. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — When you rise in your place, Mr. Premier, and after you are finished tearing the strip off 

me, as I expect you will, tell them of what stupid deals we made and how and why we got beaten. I hope and 

I expect that you will give some concrete examples and some positive programs that will give the people, 

many of whom — most of whom I guess — supported you, who are out of work, under-employed, coming 

out of our schools, almost today without hope — that you will give them a ray of hope and you will give 

them something practical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, up to this point you haven't done that. I move, seconded by my seatmate, the Hon. Mr. Boldt — 

used to be Hon. he is just Mr. Boldt now — that the following words be added to the motion: 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

114 

 

but this Assembly regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to provide 

practical alternatives for employment for our jobless citizens; that the Government has failed 

to recognize in any meaningful way the financial plight of our farmers; and that the present 

Government has failed in its Throne Speech to outline concrete proposals for resource 

development or to maintain the high priority of the Liberal Government in the field of 

pollution control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I first want to take this opportunity — my first formal 

presentation in this House on the general business of the House — to compliment you on your election to the 

high office as Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Was elected to this office? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Ah, yes, you voted for him, Mr. Member for Rosthern. You had an opportunity to vote 

against him. We in fact even could have nominated the Member for Rosthern as Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But no one other there had sufficient confidence in big Dave, or is it little Dave, to make 

that selection and we have selected the Member for Wadena. He has served before as Speaker in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — He served well and I am very sure he will serve well again. 

 

I want also to compliment the mover of the motion, the Member for Saskatoon City Park (Mr. Dyck) and the 

seconder, the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson), for very, very creditable performances in their maiden 

speeches in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I want also to extend my compliments to all of the new Members of the House, first on 

their election and secondly, in respect of those who have already participated in debates, in their contribution 

to the debate. I think that this sitting is remarkable in the sense that in our third day of sitting, perhaps 15 or 

20 Members have been on their feet making their contribution to the debates in the House. 

 

I want to compliment the Member for Prince Albert West on his election to the office of the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and to compliment him on his maiden speech in that role. 

 

I join him in his tribute to his immediate predecessor, 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

115 

 

the Hon. W. Ross Thatcher and I know that Mr. Thatcher will indeed be sorely missed on the Opposition 

benches and in this House. 

 

I want now to deal with one or two of the points made by the Member for Prince Albert West, the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Steuart). And I want to deal first with Choiceland Iron Mines because, Mr. Speaker, the 

situation which this Government faced on Choiceland Iron Mines is very different from that painted by the 

Hon. Member for Prince Albert West. The facts are that in order to get an announcement to coincide with 

their election campaign, they rushed into a deal which provided for the feasibility study which they must 

have known would be inadequate. They know that the company which they themselves selected, General 

Engineering Company said that they would need some time to do a proper feasibility study and that it would 

take about $90,000. But instead they said, "No, we're not going to spend $90,000 for a feasibility study on 

this $90 million project. We want you to do a hurry-up, rush-up job for $15,000." And they further signed an 

agreement which operated like this: GECO (General Engineering Company) would do this hurry-up, rush-up 

job and they would present this feasibility study to the Government and to the other parties to the agreement 

and at that point the Government had ten days to move. The Government had to reject the deal in ten days or, 

if they did not, the Government was committed to sink a shaft for up to $10 million in costs — entirely a 

Government expense with nobody else participating. 

 

Now, under those circumstances the Government of the day had to act on the feasibility study. When you get 

a study and look at it for two or three days and think it's inadequate, then there is no time at this point to talk 

about getting in touch with people to rewrite agreements. At that point you have to make a decision and the 

decision was made that that deal, on that feasibility study, was a bad deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I want to say that I thought the feasibility study indicated a project which was not 

economically viable. The Member opposite might suggest that I'm only a lawyer and accordingly you don't 

know anything about these things and he may be right, but I can read a balance sheet. I can read a few figures 

and all you had to do was read a few figures and you could know that that deal was not viable. And I am 

encouraged in that belief by the fact that Mr. Steve Roman, whom he quoted, said that the report was a bad 

report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have been in touch with Choiceland Iron Mines and they say that the report is defective. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have been in touch with Interprovincial Steel Corporation and they say that they can 

show that that report is wrong. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

116 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The report in Mr. Roman's words was "ill-conceived and hastily done." All right, we 

therefore are at the position where we cannot go forward on that report. We start over again. But I want to 

assure Members opposite that the Choiceland Iron Mines deal is far from dead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I want to tell you that at the same time the decision was made to reject the project on the 

basis of the GECO report, I asked the Deputy Minister of Industry and the Deputy Minister of Mineral 

Resources together to organize a task force to get us a proper feasibility study, to see whether or not we 

could not go forward. I have since been in touch with Choiceland Iron Mines and IPSCO. They are perfectly 

willing to participate. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I'll bet they are, they've got no money! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Choiceland Iron Mines are the people who own the property and IPSCO has the market. It 

seemed to me that if either of those people want to involve anyone else, it's their selection. If they want to 

involve Steve Roman — by all means. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They tried for years, Al, they've got to get someone with money. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I hadn't been aware that IPSCO was in insolvency. I remember I used to hear that stated 

by Members on the other side of the House year in and year out when I had something to do with IPSCO, 

when they were telling me then that it was insolvent and they were wrong, and they're wrong now. IPSCO 

does have money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — All I can say is that this project will go forward if it is at all feasible. We are more than 

happy to deal with Mr. Steve Roman or Denison or with Mr. Daly or Choiceland or with Mr. Turvey and 

IPSCO or any combination thereof. And we are right now analyzing this project to see whether or not it can't 

go forward. 

 

Now, a word or two about the Dore Lake pulp mill. I should have thought Members opposite would be the 

last people to come into this House and talk about the problem of unemployment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Because I stood in this House approximately where the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) 

now sits 18 months ago and heard the Government who sat on these benches say that they fully approved of 

the Trudeau policy of deliberately creating unemployment. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

117 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, in December of 1969 Mr. Trudeau said that he could contemplate with equanimity 

six per cent unemployment . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . and in February, 1970, the then Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and his colleagues 

said they thoroughly agreed with this. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . I wish you would quote when I ever said that! I never agreed with him when he said that 

and you can't quote it so take . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would refer the Hon. Member to the Speech from the Throne and the 

Budget Speech of the Session of 1970 and you will find there a specific statement — I can't remember 

whether it was the Premier or the Provincial Treasurer now — to the effect that they specifically agreed with 

the idea that fighting inflation was the first priority and that is precisely what Mr. Trudeau said he was doing 

when he was creating the unemployment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — This was exactly what you said. This was part of the general flavor of the debate at that 

time . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Just a moment, Mr. Speaker. Everybody knows at that time that the issue was: shall we 

have inflation and employment, crudely put, or no inflation and unemployment, crudely put. Every 

economist of that day was talking about the trade-off. I suspect that the Member for Prince Albert West 

never consulted the economists in his department and he probably wouldn't have understood what they said 

if he had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But this was the discussion of the day — you either stood for inflation and employment or 

unemployment and no inflation. That was the trade-off, and you people elected unemployment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . What are you going to do? You're the Premier now! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I told you what we're going to do . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What? 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

118 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . we're going to try to find some jobs for Indian and Metis people and I want to tell you 

this — we are not going to invest $50 million or $75 million in a pulp mill to create 60 jobs for Indian and 

Metis people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You're announcing it, you're announcing you're not going to have that pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have announced nothing of the kind. I am just saying that the allegation that pulp mills 

create employment for Indian and Metis people has been conclusively disproved at Prince Albert . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . conclusively disproved and when Members opposite allege that the pulp mill project 

will have any significant effect on Indian and Metis employment, they fly in the face of the facts that are 

right there in Prince Albert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There are more unemployed Indian and Metis people in the constituency of the Member 

for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) right now than there were before . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — There are more people on Welfare in Prince Albert today. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What are you going to do for them? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am sure that we on this side of the House listen with sympathy to these allegations by 

the Member for Prince Albert West. We knew that he hadn't had much time to prepare; we knew that he was 

thrust into the role very suddenly and we knew that he certainly didn't have much time to prepare during the 

election campaign because he was pretty busy in Prince Albert West. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — As a matter of fact we missed his usual sort of flying saucer performance of going hither 

and yonder in Saskatchewan giving his little exposition in his delicate way of Liberal philosophy. As a 

matter of fact he stayed pretty close to home. He did get down to Saskatoon on one occasion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And he said to the people in front of him, 'That's a hell 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

119 

 

of a looking audience.' 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, concerning the people in front of me, what am I to say? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I know that since that time he has been tied up pretty well finding out 

whether he is the Member for Prince Albert West, and we've attempted to accommodate him here in that 

way. He is still having a difficult adjustment to make and I think he would do well to take a little time to 

repeat to himself that, 'I'm not Provincial Treasurer, I'm just barely an MLA.' 

 

I think it is pretty evident that there is some confusion in his mind, and I recall that he was confused before, 

as a matter of fact. As a matter of fact I remember when he was standing right here at the seat occupied by 

the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) and do you know what he said 

on that occasion — and this was in April, not so long ago. He said, 'Mr. Speaker, I will tell you what I 

predict, I predict here today that based on this budget and on our record and our platform, in the next election 

we will win 45 seats.' 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — He was partly right, 45 seats, but the wrong party. 

 

We've had predictions before from Members opposite and I know that many of us will remember the one 

repeated ad nauseum in 1964 and in 1967 and the years that followed it, how many times have we heard 

from Members opposite all this time saying that they were going to wipe out the Socialists; that they were 

going to exterminate them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — How many times have they consigned us finally to the grave. But if I may quote Mark 

Twain, Mr. Speaker, the report of our death was greatly exaggerated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We are not dead, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan have decided otherwise. 

They said on June 23rd, firmly and clearly that they want to wipe out, not the Socialists, but the sad, sorry, 

miserable record of seven years of Liberal mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They want to wipe out the dissension and the discrimination against the poor and the sick 

and the working people of the province. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

120 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And they want to wipe out, in spite of what the Member for Prince Albert says, they want 

to wipe out the give-a-way of our resources and the disregard for our environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What are you going to do for the unemployed, Allan? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite had their dreams, they had dreams of wiping us out. People of 

Saskatchewan have made those dreams their nightmares, and rightly so. We here on this side of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, represent not 42 per cent; not 46 1/2 per cent of the electorate — which is the best that the 

party opposite has ever attained in living memory — but we on this side of the House represent over 55 per 

cent of the Saskatchewan voters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And this 55 per cent said, 'Wipe out the last seven years, give us a New Deal.' And that is 

what they are going to get — a New Deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite decided that they were going to fight their election not on a program 

but on some schemes and ploys. They started out with their gerrymander, that diabolical redistribution bill. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A Daveymander! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But I tell you that when the people of Saskatchewan get a New Deal, it's going to be right 

on the top of the list — a new deal on redistribution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite have been planning and scheming for years to somehow take over the 

Progressive Conservative vote and in this election the conservatives ran only a handful of candidates. I can 

see that the Member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) was rubbing his hands, he said, "Here we are, we've got 

a sweet setup, we've got these constituencies all carved up in the Daveymander, we've got tiny pocket 

boroughs designed to over-represent the fat cats of south Regina, we've got people like the Member for 

Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) sitting for a little pocket borough, and the Member for Regina Whitmore 

Park (Mr. Grant) sitting for a tiny pocket borough." He saw this whole idea as one where he couldn't lose. 

Well he only forgot one thing, Mr. Speaker. He forgot the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 

Saskatchewan said they are not going to have this anymore. The people remembered and it wasn't only New 

Democrats that remembered, it was Social Crediters and Conservatives and, yes, many Liberals. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

121 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They remembered the seven years, the seven years of what I had called famine and 

pestilence. They remembered the years of broken promises. 

 

The Member for Prince Albert was busy reciting the promises we had made. Wouldn't it have been better if 

he had recited the promises that they made in 1964 and 1967? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Wouldn't it have been better if he had given an account of his stewardship, if I may put it 

that way? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Wouldn't it have been better if he had said, "Yes, we were defeated but we were defeated 

knowing that we offered the electorate something in our two elections and we delivered." That would have 

been a use of promises, but I never expect the Liberal Party in my time to reiterate the promises they had 

made and tick them off as to whether they have fulfilled them or not. We shall be very happy four years 

hence if you recite our promises made in our program card and see how we get along with them. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In your program card! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Or in our New Deal for People, either one. I want to say that while it is possible that we 

may not achieve everything, I believe that our record will be creditable and I now, in advance, issue a 

challenge to Members opposite to compare our record with theirs from 1964 to 1967. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — With all their planning they went too far and they lost any remaining credibility with the 

public. The New Democratic Party had a platform. People believed in it. The Liberal Party proclaimed that 

they "could do more." The people of Saskatchewan said, "No, we've had enough, we don't want any more of 

that." 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If the Leader of the Opposition wants to know why we called a Special Session, that's the 

reason. It is going to take a lot of time to wipe out the damage which has been done. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We've got to get on with the job right now. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We want to start right now and we want to start as fast as we can rebuilding this Province, 

restoring confidence, implementing our New Deal for People. Because, Mr. Speaker, these seven years of 

Liberal rule have done sad things for Saskatchewan. They've emptied houses and stores; they've sent 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

122 

 

our young people packing; they've created a new class of people — economic exiles. Construction workers 

in the thousands couldn't get jobs, and if they did their wages were lower than in Alberta and Manitoba, and 

so they left. Newly qualified teachers and other college graduates couldn't get jobs and so they left. 

Employees of some chains, such as Ashdown Hardware, who saw in one morning all the stores closed at one 

time, had their jobs disappear and they left. Employees of branch plants, machinery distribution centres were 

transferred to Winnipeg, Calgary, Edmonton and Brantford, and so they left. Potash workers, refinery 

workers, railway workers saw their jobs disappearing and so they left. And in 1970 alone, 32,000 people left 

Saskatchewan — 2,500 each month, 85 each and every day. That's the equivalent of emptying the City of 

Moose Jaw in one year. And all I want to say is this. The way Members opposite come in here and weep 

their crocodile tears about what are we doing to create jobs, what were they doing in the last three years? 

What were they doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — What were they doing that allowed 32,000 to leave this Province in one year? Even the 

City of Saskatoon — and he talks about potash mines — lost population in 1970, 32,000 people exiled in 

one year, and I want to say that even though these people opposite now profess concern for the unemployed, 

I want to say that when they were in power no Canadian province, large or small, has ever suffered such a 

population loss. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — You know on January 1st of this year there were actually 17,000 fewer people in 

Saskatchewan than there were when the Member for Prince Albert West mounted the Treasury benches. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And there are 45 less . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Liberals took office in 1964 and since that time more than 100,000 people have left 

Saskatchewan. And yet the Liberals went to the people and said that they "could do more." The voters said, 

"No, we've had enough." The Liberals said they "could do more . . . " 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Okay, we covered that! You've said that. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Liberals said they "could do more"; the people of Saskatchewan said, "No, they want 

a new deal, they want a new deal for the sick and a new deal for the elderly and a new deal for students and a 

new deal for working people and a new deal for the mentally ill." And we've covered those things in this 

Throne Speech and I want to say here that this amendment while it might be appropriate for a regular Throne 

Speech, is surely inappropriate for the Throne Speech for a Special Session where at their request we 

specifically limited the legislation which was brought in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

123 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I want to say that when the regular Throne Speech is brought in in February there will be 

lots of talk about the items mentioned here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But right now we are providing a new deal for the sick and a new deal for the elderly. 

We've already done something for the students, more than the Members opposite did in their seven years, in 

a bursary program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We are going to do something for working people; we are going to do something for the 

mentally ill and we are going to provide a new deal in resource development. This Government intends to 

see that the people of Saskatchewan get a new deal, Mr. Speaker. This Session is the first instalment and 

that, Mr. Speaker, is why this Special Session has been called. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to deal a little later with the programs which we have to 

offer. May I, just before I close, deal with this little allegation just tossed off by the Member for Prince 

Albert West (Mr. Steuart) of grandstanding. Grandstanding! If there is one thing that I should have thought 

the Liberals would have realized in this election it was that the people in Saskatchewan and, in particular, the 

people of rural Saskatchewan have rejected their farm policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The people of Saskatchewan have said "No" to Federal farm policies and they've said 

"No" to Provincial farm policies. The people of Saskatchewan have said that farmers need help. They have 

said that some farmers — and quite a few farmers — are in trouble and in deep trouble. Now we think that 

this trouble is temporary but it is nonetheless real on that account. And we are proposing to bring in a bill to 

help these farmers, to give them some relief, and what are we called from Members opposite? 

Grandstanding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Members opposite might think it is grandstanding to give some relief to 

hard-pressed farmers but I can tell you that the farmers of Saskatchewan won't think it is grandstanding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They will think it was what they elected their Members to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll have much more to say in this Throne Speech debate when we next pick it up, and 

accordingly I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

124 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

SITTINGS OF THE HOUSE 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow: 

 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, commencing Monday, August 2, 1971, 

meet at 10:00 o'clock each sitting day, and that there shall be a recess from 12:30 o'clock 

p.m. until 2:30 o'clock p.m.; and 

 

That on Wednesday, August 4, 1971, and on each Wednesday until the end of the Session, 

Rule 3(2) be suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 

o'clock p.m. until 9:30 o'clock p.m.; and 

 

That on Friday, August 6, 1971, and on each Friday until the end of the Session, Rule 3(3) be 

suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 o'clock p.m. until 

9:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

Notwithstanding Rule 3(4), on Saturday, August 7, 1971, and on each Saturday until the end 

of the Session, the Assembly shall meet at 10:00 o'clock a.m. until 5:30 o'clock p.m.; that 

there shall be a recess of two hours at 12:30 o'clock p.m.; and that the Order of Business shall 

be the same as on Thursday. 

 

Now I am the first to concede that this is a very rigorous schedule. We did not wish to accelerate the hours of 

sitting until Members opposite had an opportunity over the weekend to consider the various bits of 

legislation. We intend to adjourn tonight at 5:30. We do realize that these hours of sitting may put extra 

pressures on Members opposite and if they do wish to have some relief, if in fact the Session does go on for 

the whole week, we should certainly wish to consider it and be very happy to consider it. We do, however, 

wish to accommodate those good number of Members who have suggested that they do want to expedite the 

business of the Session and accordingly in order that there might be that measure of flexibility, I am moving 

the motion as it appears No. 2 on the blues. 

 

Mr. K. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to speak briefly to this motion. The 

time rules which are set forth in the rule book which has been presented to me contain, I think, a sensible 

approach, and are set out there because the Members here do require a little time to study the bills as they are 

presented. We require time to consider these bills and particularly the speeches given by the Minister and 

others in support of these bills. I think we need an adequate time to prepare our response to these, Mr. 

Speaker. Now the proposal which had been taken as read really says that we will sit all morning right 

through to the lunch hour and we will then sit until 5:30 in the afternoon; we will start at 7:00 and go right 

through until 9:30 at night, starting Monday. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

125 

 

We are particularly concerned, Mr. Speaker, that all the bills that are brought to the House be adequately 

scrutinized and scanned by the Members here, that we may adequately protect the people whom we have 

been elected to protect. We are particularly concerned about the farm Bill that is coming up, Mr. Speaker. 

We haven't even seen the Bill; we are asked to start a sitting on Monday morning that makes us rush through 

these things; we should like to see all of these things; it is obvious that the press gets a good view of them 

before we do. There are only 13 of us, Mr. Speaker. It means a lot of double work by us. Instead of spreading 

the workload among 24 Members as occurred in the last Opposition, we have to spread it among 13. 

Everybody here has to do practically double duty. 

 

I gave a good deal of time particularly to studying The Labour Standards Act and wish to deal particularly 

with Bill 2 and matters of this sort. These things take a little time, Mr. Speaker. I got the Bill on Labour 

Standards only at 2:40 p.m. yesterday. I think, of course, that we could spend a little time during the time the 

House is in Session away from here but it is appropriate that the 13 of us should spend as much time in the 

House paying as much attention as possible, and we can't be doing two things at once. It would be all right if 

we could spend all weekend, morning, noon and night, but I do not think that that is appropriate and it is 

particularly not appropriate because we aren't going to have the staff necessary to do the job. The only time 

that we can really prepare speeches is during the additional time allowed us — every morning, Wednesday 

night and on the weekends. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this proposal does not in any way shorten up the Session. All it does is get the 

same number of hours compressed into fewer days. That doesn't mean that we aren't going to spend the same 

number of hours dealing with the subject at hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my submission to the House is that we cannot support this, at least I cannot support this, simply 

because I don't think it gives us adequate time. Now I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is probably part of the 

grandstand plan. What has happened is that the Government has set the stage to get all its headlines up to 

and including Friday and then pressures a motion of this sort onto us which requires that we hustle ourselves 

into the House, morning, noon and night, all next week, without adequate preparation, to respond to the 

headlines that have been created this week by the Government. 

 

It is hard to accuse us of delay. Particularly, this farm Bill upsets me because we have been very 

accommodating; they have asked for motion after motion to be presented, bill after bill to be presented, and 

without any trouble at all we have given consent to have them brought on. We have been very co-operative 

and we should like to continue to co-operate but I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with the motion and 

will have to vote against it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, if I may say a word or two on this particular motion, I can 

appreciate as someone said, 'This is a motion we've seen before in this House.' I think the circumstances 

generally have been somewhat different than they are on this particular occasion. I can appreciate the 

Government's desire also 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

126 

 

to expedite the Session as much as possible but normally this kind of a motion comes to the House in the 

latter weeks or the latter days of what has been a normal Legislature with mornings off and time for 

preparation for the Speech from the Throne and so on. And I think particularly, Mr. Speaker, in view of the 

Bill that was outlined to the press this morning by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), I am 

disappointed in my colleague and friend, the Member for Hudson Bay or wherever his new seat is now, 

Kelsey or Tisdale, for making a move of this kind. I'm sure it was an oversight on his part. 

 

But here is a very far-reaching Bill, Mr. Speaker, not only for the farmers whom he is concerned about and 

I'm sure we all are but I know that they are concerned as we are about small businessmen, implement dealers, 

who are certainly affected by this Bill. It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, in all fairness and I do ask the 

Government to reconsider this. They will pass the motion, I'm sure. We shall be sitting here next week 

whether it is three days or four or five, I don't think it really makes that much difference to them, but I 

wonder if they would reconsider and instead of beginning at 10:00 o'clock in the morning, at least begin at 

2:30 o'clock for Monday and perhaps Tuesday. These arrangements can be made, I know, by passing the 

motion. We can still make that arrangement and I would very sincerely ask that they do so for the reasons 

outlined by my colleague who just took his seat, and the feeling of other Members on this side also. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words to the motion. The 

Members opposite argue that the proposed motion creates a hardship on them and two of the Members who 

have spoken, the Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) and the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) 

indicate that the most important reason for the hardship is the proposed farm Bill. They say that this Bill is 

likely to have very wide-reaching consequences and they will need time to study it. I agree. I think the Bill is 

a very important piece of legislation. 

 

It does have some important consequences and we want everybody, including the Opposition, to be well 

informed on it. But I want to remind the Hon. Member for Regina Albert Park and the Hon. Member for 

Wilkie that the Bill can't come before the House for its consideration until Tuesday at any rate. As the Hon. 

Premier has said, Members of the Opposition have the weekend, Saturday and Sunday; they have Monday as 

the time we permit to them for further consideration of the Bill; it doesn't come on for debate until Tuesday. 

It may very well be — and I direct this to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) — that the Members 

opposite after they have considered the Bill in principle may want to bring it on even earlier than the 

Tuesday rules. And that's the purpose. It may very well be. The Member for Regina Albert Park seems to 

laugh at it but it may be a Bill of some importance and some concern for protection of the family farm. The 

point is that the Premier's motion simply asks the Members of the House this. It says: "Give us the flexibility 

in rules." You have time to examine the Bill. If you want to bring it on early — in fact it is being tabled now 

— here are the rules that will allow us to consider the Bill at any early convenience, get on with the business 

of this House and get some relief to the farmers and the various people that the legislation is intended to 

cover. 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

127 

 

May I make one other comment. The Members opposite say that they are going to be unduly hard-pressed. I 

think that we are prepared to give consideration to the problem. Why don't we pass the rule; see how it 

works on Monday and if we are finding undue hardship, they can communicate it to us. The Government, 

I'm sure, will consider their position at that stage. But in order to get the rules expedited and get the business 

before the House and passed so that we can get on with the matter set out in the Speech from the Throne, we 

have to have this rule implemented. I would respectfully ask the Members of the Opposition to reconsider 

this position and to vote for this particular rule. 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I think we need another lawyer to explain what the first lawyer 

meant because the second lawyer just left us all confused. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — If you want us to listen to your yapping Monday morning, we have no time to study that Bill. 

If we get it today and if you are going to call the House on Monday morning, there might not be any Liberals 

sitting here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — We might not be here. Sure, that's what you want, that's what you want. You want to railroad 

this Bill through and you can have it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Railroad, railroad! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — All you want is to railroad something through. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You don't even know what a farmer is like. You don't know the first thing about a farm. You 

wouldn't know a load of hay from a load of beans. 

 

Here we have a Government that has 45 Members and if we are going to sit in this House here, we are going 

to tell you when this Session is going to close, not you. If you want to sit here on Monday morning, we shall 

fool around and waste your time. You are not going to get out of here any sooner. All we are asking is that 

we can come into the House having studied the Bill and give intelligent debate on it. But you want to refuse 

us this. You want to talk about the Bill and you are not going to give us any time to talk about it. I don't care 

whether you vote for this motion, you've got the majority you can vote us down. We are going to call for a 

standing vote. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) 

says, 'Pass this motion and then if you find it is a 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

128 

 

little drag on you and your 13 Members, can't quite keep up, well just mention it and we shall gloriously give 

you the morning or afternoon or night off or something.' Well, why not put the onus the other way. We are 

the 13, you are the 45. You've got the staff. You've had the Attorney General's Department and the lawyers 

telling you what to do; you've had the legislative lawyers telling you what to do. You are the ones that know 

— I think you knew what you were going to bring in, I'm sure you planned it a while ago, if you didn't you 

should have — we have never even seen it yet. So why not leave the rules the way they are then if we find 

we want to accommodate you at any time, the House is master of its own destiny, you can say, 'Shall we 

meet tonight, shall we meet tomorrow morning at 10:00 o'clock and if we find that we have got our 

homework done and we are in a position to do it, of course we shall accommodate you because we don't 

want to drag this Session out one hour longer than necessary. If that Bill is something that is extremely 

necessary, without the family farm or any other farmer in this Province, of course we will pass it as quickly 

as we can. But why put the onus on us. Put the onus the other way. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, there is one other reason why I object very strenuously 

to the motion put forward by the Premier and that is that Bill No. 9 has not only a impact upon the Members 

of this Legislature, this Bill has an impact on every farmer in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, certainly bills of 

the kind that have just been put on our desk this afternoon have an impact on every small businessman in 

rural Saskatchewan, every implement dealer, every garage man, every man who produces implements in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. Surely, in presenting a Bill of this kind to this House there should be an 

opportunity for the implement dealers, for the garage men to have an opportunity to study this Bill, to see if 

it has implications on their business, to see what impact it might have on their future sales, to see what 

impact it might have upon their central agency or their supplier and if this is not the most important single 

reason for delaying this kind of motion, then I'm afraid I am sadly mistaken. And that is the main reason that 

this kind of a Bill doesn't only affect the people in this House, it affects every businessman, every farmer in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. They need the opportunity to study this legislation; they need the opportunity 

to prepare any presentations that might have to be made. Perhaps we may want to send this to the Law 

Amendments Committee; perhaps they may want to come and present briefs to it. They are going to need 

time to consult with their legal people, to consult with their own organizations, to perhaps bring their 

associations together to study the real impact and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am very violently opposed 

to this motion. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add my words along with the Hon. 

Member who has just spoken, that the Members opposite have made a great point about the fact that there 

are only 14 Members on this side who should be concerned about the length of time that this Session lasts. 

The Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) just eloquently placed before the Assembly the very, very valid 

reason why we need to take a little bit of time to give an opportunity to the people of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned about this legislation. That, Mr. Speaker, I have always understood is one of the prime functions 

of the Opposition, to hold up legislation at times for the people of the country to study the bill, make 

presentations, to meet, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

129 

 

that you yourself would concur with that from this point of view. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker — and I am sure the Government is going to pass this motion — that when we do move 

into these new hours that once the Ministers have introduced the Bill because we, on this side, should like to 

listen to the remarks of the Ministers on these Bills and have a chance to study their remarks, that they won't 

press us for a continuation of debate on the Bill immediately after the Minister introduces it on second 

reading, and I hope that they will give us an opportunity, if we deem it desirable, to take a little longer on 

some of these Bills. We are not wishing to be obstructionists. It is obvious that we cannot be obstructionists 

even if we did want to as we should simply run out of time. But as for the preparation, Mr. Speaker, I hope 

that the Government also will keep in mind that we are not capable of working 24 hours a day; we don't have 

the staff, the people whom we require to assist us on Saturday and Sunday. Most of us come from the 

country and are hoping, at least, to go back and see our families for a few hours. So I hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

once this legislation is passed it will be used in a very moderate way. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask a question of the Premier or the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer). Has the Government Caucus seen this Bill? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, that has nothing to do with this motion. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I speak in support of the motion. We find ourselves in the position of having 

misunderstood some arrangements which were made. I propose to ask the House to pass this motion and 

then I want to assure Hon. Members opposite that they are going to have lots of time to consider things, lots 

of time to consider things. There seems to have been a breakdown of communications so I'm going to ask the 

House to support this motion and we will proceed from there. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following Recorded Division: 

 

YEAS - 41 

Messieurs 

 

Blakeney Robbins Faris 

Brockelbank Pepper Dyck 

Byers Michayluk Cowley 

Wood Meakes Cody 

Smishek Whelan Mostoway 

Romanow Brown Comer 

Messer Kwasnica Rolfes 

Snyder Carlson Lange 

Bowerman Engel Hanson 

MacMurchy Tchorzewski Oliver 

Kowalchuk Richards Feschuk 

Baker Owens Kaeding 

Thibault Larson Flasch 

Matsalla 

 

Taylor  

 

 



 

July 30, 1971 

 

130 

 

NAYS - 13 

 

Messieurs 

 

Steuart MacDonald (Milestone) MacLeod 

Coupland McIsaac McPherson 

Gardner Loken Lane 

Grant Weatherald MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) 

Boldt   

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:27 o’clock p.m. 

 

 


