



















































Hansard: July 28, 1971


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Wednesday, July 28, 1971. 

 

10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the 

nineteenth of July, 1971, for the meeting for the First Session of the Seventeenth Legislative Assembly 

of the Province of Saskatchewan and the Assembly having met: 

 

His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — I am commanded by His Honour to inform you that he does 

not see fit to declare the causes of the summoning of the present Legislature until later today, when the 

Legislative Assembly shall have elected a Speaker, according to law. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Blakeney, addressing himself to the Clerk, moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow, 

that Frederick Arthur Dewhurst, Esquire, member for the constituency of Wadena, take the Chair of this 

Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was resolved that Frederick Arthur Dewhurst, Esquire, Member 

for the constituency of Wadena, do take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The Clerk, having declared Frederick Arthur Dewhurst, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted to the 

Chair, where standing on the upper step, he returned his humble acknowledgements to the Assembly for 

the great honour they have been pleased to confer upon him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the Chair and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor re-entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil the 

important duties thus assigned to me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error I pray that the fault may be 

imputed to me and not to the Assembly whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable 

them to discharge their duty to their Queen and country, hereby humbly claim all their undoubted rights 

and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person 

at all seasonable times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most favourable 

consideration. 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

2 

Hon. R. Romanow (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His Honour, the 

Lieutenant-Governor to declare to you that he freely confides in the duty and attachment of the 

Assembly to Her majesty’s person and Government, and not doubting that their proceedings will be 

conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, he grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and 

allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure that you the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour upon all 

seasonable occasions, and that its proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly receive 

from him the most favourable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the session with the following Speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session for the Seventeenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

You come together saddened by the untimely death of the Leader of the Opposition and former Premier, 

the Hon. W. Ross Thatcher, P.C. I ask you to carry on the work of the Government in the same tradition 

that was pursued in the vigorous dedication by the Hon. Mr. Thatcher during his more that 25 years of 

public life. 

 

Free access to health care is given high priority by my government. The imposition of deterrent fees on 

persons requiring treatment in or out of hospital has proved to be a hindrance to health and on onerous 

burden on our citizens. You will therefore be asked to approve legislation abolishing all deterrent fees in 

the field of health care. 

 

Free access to medical and hospital care is particularly important to our older citizens. Therefore, 

legislation to abolish medical and hospital premiums for every resident 65 years of age or older will be 

placed with you. 

 

You will be asked to approve changes in the Mental Health Act which will have the effect of removing 

provisions enacted April 15, 1968. These provisions place on the families of the mentally ill serious 

financial burdens not placed on the families of those suffering from physical illness. 

 

The continuing farm income crisis is a matter of deep concern to my Government. My ministers have 

taken certain steps to assist farmers, notably by extending retroactively to January 1, 1971, the payment 

of hog premiums. 

 

As a further step, legislation will be introduced to protect farmers unable to pay their debts from seizure 

of their farm land and machinery. 

 

My Government has observed with serious misgivings the stagnation of the national and provincial 

economies, accompanied by a drastic increase in unemployment. In Saskatchewan, the lack of jobs, 

combined with the oppressive effects of legislation which is harshly discriminatory against working 

people, has resulted in an unprecedented exodus of our work force. Thousands of 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

3 

workers and their families have left the province. 

 

My Ministers have already moved to increase the number of jobs by setting up a task force on job 

creation which is undertaking a crash review of government projects to identify those which can be 

accelerated or set in motion before winter. 

 

As additional steps, you will be asked to restore free collective bargaining in Saskatchewan by the quick 

repeal of The Essential Services Emergency Act, and to reduce the hours of work. 

 

Certain other matters, including an enquiry into the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, will be 

placed before you for consideration. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

MOTIONS 

SITTING OF THE HOUSE 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Rule No. 3 states as follows: “The time of the meeting of the Assembly is at 2:30 

o’clock in the afternoon of each sitting day.” Leave is therefore requested to open the sitting time earlier 

than stated in the said rule book. Is leave granted? 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

LIST OF MEMBERS RETURNED TO SERVE IN LEGISLATURE 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly received from 

the Chief Electoral Officer lists of names of such Members as have been returned to serve in the 

Legislature. 

 

APPOINTMENT OF CLERK ASSISTANT 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Michael Arthur de Rosenroll has been appointed 

Clerk Assistant during the present Session. 

 

MOTIONS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — I move, seconded by the Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): 

 

That the Speech of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor be taken into consideration at the next 

sitting of the Assembly. 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

4 

Motion agreed to. 

 

PRINTING OF VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I move, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow): 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed after first having been perused by Mr. 

Speaker; that he do appoint the printing thereof and that no person but such as he shall appoint do 

presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RULES TO BE SUSPENDED FOR THE DURATION OF THIS SESSION 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I move, seconded by the Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health) and by leave of the 

Assembly, that the following rules be suspended for the duration of this Session: 

 

1.Rule 98 respecting lists of reports required to be tabled. 

 

2.Rule 105 respecting the report required to be tabled by the Legislative Librarian. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of Labour): 

 

That John Edward Brockelbank, Esquire, Member for the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair, be 

Deputy Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 1 – An Act respecting a Certain 

Election in the Constituency of Prince Albert West. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I think I can outline very briefly the contents of the Bill, speaking on second 

reading. 

 

The purpose of the Bill is to seat Mr. David Gordon Steuart as the Hon. Member for Prince Albert. It, I 

think, will be known that on polling day Mr. Steuart held a majority. There was a recount. The judge, we 

are advised, is prepared to certify that Mr. Steuart has a majority. The candidate who ran second to Mr. 

Steuart, Dr. Hjertaas, has issued a statement to the effect that he does not propose to appeal. The 

provisions of The Election Act provide that five days must elapse before the appropriate notice can be 

given to the Chief Electoral Officer. This is now a formality and I am suggesting in effect by this Act 

that this formality be waived and that the Hon. Mr. Steuart be seated forthwith. 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

5 

There is always reluctance, I think, in any Assembly to take upon itself the job of seating members. It is 

peculiarly the function of the voters and not the Members of the Assembly to fill a vacancy. However, I 

think in every practical sense the voters have spoken and they have selected Mr. Steuart. 

 

The Bill will leave open to any other candidate or any other elector in the constituency of Prince Albert 

West his rights to appeal, if that appeal is sought, of a re-count. It doesn’t seek to abridge that, although I 

am advised by the press and otherwise that that right is not going to be pursued. It also leaves open all 

rights to controvert the election. It doesn’t in fact abridge any rights. It has the effect of seating Mr. 

Steuart until all the procedures which might otherwise hold up his seating in this House have been 

completed and if, in fact, the procedures seat someone else, then of course, that someone else will be the 

Member for Prince Albert West. 

 

That is the effect of the Bill and with that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move to second reading. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that the Members on this side of 

the House will certainly support this Bill, however, we have an area of concern in that originally it was 

our understanding that this Bill would be broad enough in scope that it would make it possible for all 

three members who are now before a re-count, that when their re-count was completed and the judge has 

made the decision or officially declared him the winner, that then this Bill would make it possible for all 

three of those members to sit in the House. 

 

Our side believes that this is a technicality and that just as Mr. Steuart is duly elected by the people of 

Prince Albert West, he has won a majority, the judge has officially re-counted the ballots. He has been 

declared the winner by the judge and therefore we feel that this Bill should also make it possible for the 

member for Gravelbourg and of course the Member for Athabasca when the re-count has been finished 

or concluded, that they would be prevented because of the technicality of requesting a five-day waiting 

period from making a contribution to this House and on behalf of their constituents. 

 

We also feel it’s very essential that the Opposition be able to provide good opposition and that they have 

every member who has been elected to this side of the House able to contribute and to make his 

contribution on behalf of the official Opposition of the Legislature and the people of Saskatchewan. I, 

therefore, want to ask the Premier, in closing the debate, if the members on the Government side of the 

House would not consider amending this Bill to broaden its scope in such a way that should the judge or 

the re-count in Athabasca constituency and the re-count in Gravelbourg constituency be completed 

while the Session is sitting and the judge declares the winners, that then they too would have the 

opportunity of taking part in the official proceeding of the legislature and making their contribution. 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just before the Premier closes debate on this Bill, we had 

considered — as my seatmate mentioned — asking amendments and perhaps the way the Bill is worded 

and the title phrased, that may not be possible. I wonder if he would in lieu of considering an 

amendment, consider bringing in 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

6 

a similar Bill at a later date when the judge has declared the winner in Gravelbourg or Athabasca and 

dealing with those constituencies in a similar manner to Prince Albert West. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: —Mr. Speaker, I think it will be appreciated that Mr. Steuart, the soon to be member for 

Prince Albert West, is in a different position than the other two. No judge has spoken with respect to the 

other two. The re-count is still in progress. There are real possibilities of appeal, I would think, in at 

least one of them. Under these circumstances and because of our Legislature by an Act rather than by 

the electoral process, we thought that the appropriate procedure was to deal with the one case which is 

before us where the judge has in fact spoken. We have had in recent days some reference to the 

desirability of the regular rules applying and I felt that there was the prospect that this would also 

commend itself to the members opposite with respect to elections. But leaving that aside, I do feel that 

there is some merit in the points made by the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and the Member 

for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) and we shall certainly have a look at another Bill. I think it’s not appropriate 

to amend this one because of the purpose of this Bill, shortly put, is to seat the Hon. Mr. Steuart now so 

that he may assume his role as Leader of the Opposition or Acting Leader of the Opposition and in 

particular, so that he may be here when we move to Condolences when I know that he would like to say 

something with respect to the death of some deceased Members. 

 

Motion agreed to and read a second time. 

 

The Bill was reported without amendment and read the third time and passed. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): —Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Prince 

Albert West (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of three former members of this 

Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions each has made to his 

community, to his constituency, and to his Province: 

 

William James Arthurs died on July 14, 1971. He was a Member of this Legislature for 

Melville from 1944 to 1948. He was born in Janetville, Ontario, and came to Balcarres in 1905. 

He was a railway conductor, worked for the railway for over 40 years. He was secretary of the 

Provincial Legislative Board of the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen; chairman of the 

grievance committee of the Canadian National Railway Pensioners’ Club. He was past master of 

the Royal Black Loyal Orange Lodge in Melville. 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

7 

Gustav Herman Danielson who died on July 8, 1971, was a member of this Legislature for Arm 

River from 1934 to 1964. He was born in Sweden in 1883, he was educated there before 

emigrating to the United States in 1901. In 1903 he came to Canada, homesteaded near Elbow 

and later moved to the Davidson district. He was a director of the Davidson Co-operative 

Association for 40 years; Saskatchewan Wheat Pool delegate for three years; councillor of the 

Rural Municipality of Arm River for seven years; reeve of that Municipality for eight years; he 

was a school trustee for eight years and a member for the Davidson Hospital Board for 38 years. 

In June 1971 a Provincial Park near Gardiner Dam was named Danielson Park in his honour. 

 

The Honourable Wilbert Ross Thatcher, P.C. who died on July 23, 1971, was a Member of 

this Legislature for Morse from 1960 to 1971. He was born in Neville, Saskatchewan, in 1917. 

He received his public and high school education in Limerick and Moose Jaw. He graduated 

form Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario, with a Bachelor of Commerce degree. He was an 

alderman of the City of Moose Jaw from 1942 to 1944. He sat as a member of the House of 

Commons from 1945 to 1957. He was sworn in as a Member of the Queen’s Privy Council for 

Canada in 1967. He was Leader of the Opposition in this Legislature from 1960 to 1964 and 

Premier of Saskatchewan and President of the Executive Council from may 1964 to June 1971. 

He was Provincial Treasurer from May 1964 to September of 1970. He was a former president of 

the Moose Jaw Canucks Hockey Club, a member of the executive of the Saskatchewan Branch 

of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and a member of the Lions Club, the Masonic 

Lodge and Wa Wa Shrine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may add some personal notes to the formal condolences. It was not my privilege to 

know the Hon. Member for Melville Mr. Arthurs and I believe, in looking around, that probably the only 

Member of this Legislature who served with him in this House is Mr. Speaker. It indicates the shortness 

of the political life, to think that someone who served in this legislature in 1948 has only now one person 

who served with him. 

 

I did however serve in the Legislature with the former member for Arm River, Herman Danielson. I join 

with many in Saskatchewan who remember with affection and respect the long-time Dean of the House. 

I served in the House only for four years with Mr. Danielson but I knew better than that association 

would suggest since I had been a public servant from 1950 to 1958 and had many associations with him. 

 

Mr. Danielson was not the sort of person you overlooked or forgot. He was colourful in every sense of 

the world. My early acquaintance with him turned to admiration as I observed the very sincere and very 

spirited way in which he advocated the interests of his constituents. He was a great believer in the co-

operative movement and served his community both as a co-op director and long-time director of the 

Davidson Co-op and as a Pool delegate. 

 

As will be indicated in terms in which the formal condolence is set out, he was a true Saskatchewan 

pioneer. Like many others at the turn of the century he went to the United States first 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

8 

and then came up to Saskatchewan. He homesteaded and was in that sense a real pioneer. No man in the 

history of Saskatchewan as far as I can ascertain represented his constituency in the House for as many 

continuous years as did Mr. Danielson. He served from 1944 to 1964, 30 years, and I believe that is the 

all-time record. For 20 of those years from 1944 to 1964 he was an untiring member of the Opposition. 

Many will still recall the vigor with which he and the now deceased member for Saltcoats Minty 

Lopston used to pursue the government of the day in the Legislature. I think it is ironic that his 

distinguished career in the House ended when the Liberal Government was elected. I don’t know but 

perhaps he would really have been happier in Opposition in any case. It was with a no sense of regret, I 

think, that Mr. Danielson brought his criticisms to the House. 

 

Mr. Danielson’s career spanned the entire life of the Province of Saskatchewan, he served his province 

well, he still serves, in spirit, as Dean of the Legislature. On behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan I 

extend our deepest sympathy to Mr.s. Danielson and family. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I add a word on the passing, the very untimely passing, of the late Mr. Ross 

Thatcher. 

 

All of us, I know were shocked and grieved at the sudden passing of the Hon. Mr. Thatcher, the member 

for Morse, the Leader of the Opposition and former Premier. The shock was the greater because he was 

a man of untiring energy, great dedication — he seemed always to be in motion— and the sudden 

silencing of the familiar voice which had become so much a part of modern Saskatchewan history 

created a sense of loss felt by everyone in the Province. 

 

Mr. Thatcher had a long and distinguished career in public life. I referred to the fact that he was an 

alderman in Moose Jaw, a Member of Parliament for over 10 years and a Member of this Legislature for 

over 10 years. As leader of the Liberal Party he was Leader of the Opposition and then Premier. 

 

Mr. Thatcher has been described as colourful, controversial, decisive, energetic and single minded. He 

was all of those things. But most of all he was his own man. He led his party and his province along the 

road in which he sincerely believed. He applied himself with untiring energy and devotion. He worked 

at a pace which spared neither his time nor his health, as we all now know. In this House he earned the 

respect of both supporters and those who were his opposition. You could differ with Ross Thatcher, you 

could oppose him on many issues — I did and other Members of this House did — but you couldn’t 

doubt the sincerity with which he pursued his objectives. He earned the respect of all who knew him. 

 

I entered the House in 1960, the same year that Mr. Thatcher did. I found him to be a tough-minded and 

unrelenting antagonist when he was to your left, Mr. Speaker, and I was to your right, yet he had a sense 

of humor and this frequently came to the fore. I can remember two or three particular instances when I 

thought that his humour shone through in a way which particularly impressed me. He also had a sense of 

feeling for his constituents and a desire to listen to their problems and to do what he thought was best 

with respect to them. 

 

Perhaps the stature of the man in my eyes is better illustrated by the gracious manner in which he 

responded to the defeat 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

9 

of his party on June 23rd. As you may imagine at our party headquarters there was jubilation. With great 

composure and great personal courage Mr. Thatcher came to our committee rooms, went to the podium 

through a wildly cheering crowd and wished me very, very sincerely, good wishes as Premier elect. His 

party had lost, he wanted the government to carry on, and I didn’t in any sense doubt the sincerity of his 

good wishes. 

 

He was decisive in victory, energetic in office, gracious in defeat. He will long be remembered in this 

Province. His untimely passing will be regretted by citizens of every political persuasion. On behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan I extend our deepest sympathy to Mr.s. Thatcher, their son and other 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

In the formal words of condolence I move, seconded by Mr. Steuart, that in recording its deepest sense 

of loss and bereavement this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathies with the members of the 

bereaved families. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should first like to congratulate you on 

your elevation to that high office and offer to you the support and the co-operation of the Members of 

the Opposition. 

 

I should also like to thank the House for accommodating my entry into this Legislature this morning. I 

should like to say that it is an honour for me to second the motion of condolences put forward by 

Premier Blakeney. 

 

As the Premier pointed out, I am not sure that anyone on this side of the House knew and certainly none 

of us sat with William Arthurs of Melville. On behalf of the Opposition I should like to take this 

opportunity to say how much we respect him and his memory as we respect any man or woman who 

serves his province especially in the capacity as a Member of the Legislative Assembly and pass on to 

his family our deepest sympathy. 

 

I should like to turn now to Herman Danielson. I do feel that at a time like this, while it is a sad 

occasion, still some of the memories as Mr. Blakeney pointed out of these members, the ones we have 

sat with, certainly were anything but sad. The spectacle of Herman Danielson standing in his place 

between the aisles, refusing to speak into the microphone which he considered a confounded plot by the 

government of the day, and attempting to twist if off its stand here as he fought his battle over the years 

is a slight none of us will ever forget. Herman served for 30 years in this Legislative Assembly, certainly 

from my point of view he was one of the great giants of the Liberal Party during the 1940s during the 20 

years we sat in Opposition. I can remember listening to Herman on the radio, among others, and long 

before I ever knew him or had ever seen him I developed a great affection and a great admiration for 

him. When I used to come down into the Legislature first to sit as an observer, later as a member in the 

Opposition, Herman along with Minty Lopston had become known really by the government of the day 

as the ‘gold dust twins’. They sat there and they provided great and lively opposition. One of my fond 

memories is coming into the House and getting advice from both of them as a young and new Member. 

Minty said, “ never worry about the facts,” he said, “if you think the government has spent $5 million, 

accuse them of $10 million, they are just liable to tell you the truth and the truth will hang them every 

time.” Herman was just the opposite. When Herman came in to 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

10 

speak, he had to carry the files, he set them down and stacked them up. He never, that I know of, ever 

stated a fact in this House that he couldn’t prove by reference and cross reference, he had the most 

tremendous documentation and volumes and press clippings and reference of anyone that I have ever 

known who has ever sat in this House. But Herman was a serious man, he was a dedicated man. He 

served as a councillor, a hospital member, on the school board and he was a great pioneer in the co-op 

movement, the local co-op, the Wheat Pool, in fact, in every facet of the co-op movement of this 

Province. He fought for the co-op movement just as he fought for his principles inside and outside this 

House. He was a fighter, he was a dedicated fighter and he did over a long, long period of time render 

great and dedicated service to this Province and I am sure we all pay respect to his memory. 

 

I now turn to our former leader, Ross Thatcher. I would first pass on our condolences and our sympathy 

to his family, his most gracious wife Peggy, his son Colin, his mother, brothers and his grandchildren. 

Although Ross spent over half of his life in the public eye, in public service, he was essentially a private 

man. Anyone who was ever with him and saw him with his grandchildren, the love he had for those 

grandchildren was a very joyous and happy thing to see. He didn’t show this side to the public, because 

he considered it his own private affair. About three days after he had passed away I was speaking to a 

radio commentator, and he said, “All these condolences that are pouring in from across the nation, and 

from politicians in all walks of life and from all political parties, do you really think that they are 

sincere?” My answer was, “Yes, I think they are sincere. Politicians fight hard in this country, we hold 

strong beliefs, we state them strongly, but no one believed that or followed it more vehemently than 

Ross Thatcher. But we do respect each other.” I was on a television program with Woodrow Lloyd. 

After it was over, the same sort of comment was made by some people from the television station. “How 

can you politicians talk like this about each other the way you go after each other publicly?” Woodrow 

smiled and he said, “Well we do have a sort of a union, and we do have a great deal of respect for each 

other even though that doesn’t show up and really can’t show up in our public posture and our public 

utterances, because we are dedicated to certain principles and when we differ we have to take certain 

stands.” I think it is a mark of our Canadian democracy that when a tragedy like this happens people all 

over Canada and from all parties do join ranks and they pay tribute to the memory as we are doing to 

this great man, Ross Thatcher. 

 

I knew Ross as a friend and saw a side of him that maybe not too many people saw, warm, humorous, 

loyal. And again it was a side that he didn’t really try to show. Maybe he would have been better off if 

he had shown it publicly more often. I respect him personally and I thank him because he did give me 

and many others the opportunity to serve in this Legislature and to serve this Province in a way that we 

never, at least I never would have had, if it hadn’t been for him. He gave our party life. Ironically he 

found us with 15 members and he left us with 14 Members. But he left us with a great difference. He 

found us disorganized. He left us unified. He found us floundering sometimes almost without a goal. He 

left us with a definite goal and a definite role to play. He led us from defeat twice to victory, and once 

more to defeat. I think he led the Liberal Party in this Province as long or longer than any other man and 

he led the Liberal Party through more elections 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

11 

than any other man in the history of Saskatchewan. He left us with a goal and a memory. 

 

I think he left the people of this Province a great legacy. Mostly it is tangible things — new highways, 

schools, hospitals, auditoriums. He believed in those things. He was a believer in practical things. But he 

did leave us some intangibles. He had a great dedication for minority groups. For example, his work 

with native people, I think, will long be remembered. He was sincere and he was dedicated. His work for 

the Hutterites will long be remembered by that minority. Ross had a much deeper feeling and 

philosophy than most people realized or recognized. I am convinced that he made a great contribution to 

our party, to this Province and to our Nation. He fought hard, worked hard and he served well. I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that history will be kinder to Ross Thatcher than the electorate was on June 23. But this is 

often the fate of politicians and Ross Thatcher wouldn’t have had it any other way. He didn’t cry, he 

didn’t complain, he didn’t excuse. When he faced victory he savoured it; when he faced defeat, he took 

full responsibility. He was a man! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, want to add a few remarks to the condolences of 

these three men. 

 

Mr. Arthurs I did not know well not having sat in the House with him. I’ve heard many stories of him 

when he was in this Legislature and of his work. He was a man who enjoyed life to its very fullest. I 

want to add my condolences to the Arthurs family. 

 

To the untimely death of the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Thatcher, we were all saddened by its tragic 

suddenness. I could admire him for his dedication to those things that he believed in and he certainly 

never stinted his energy or his ability and strength in fighting for his political party — the party that he 

believed in. My sympathies go to Mr.s. Thatcher and family. 

 

I rose mainly to speak on behalf of my old friend, Herman Danielson. I sat in this Legislature with him 

for eight years and certainly as the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) said and the member for Prince Albert West 

(Mr. Steuart) has said, he added colour to this House. I recall many memories of him, which I won’t 

elaborate here. He too was a great fighter for his beliefs and I found out that underneath that very gruff 

exterior he was a very kindly and warm man and he too had a great feeling, a very deep feeling, for the 

underdog. He and I got to know one another because we had a mutual interest in the co-operative 

movement. He was dedicated to it, as has been previously recorded. I admired his deep dedication to the 

co-operative movement in his home community and in the province. I don’t know whether the House 

knows this but I believe that Herman Danielson guided more co-op legislation through this House than 

any other member that has ever sat in this House. He told me once with pride, “I have guided more co-

operative legislation through this House than any other man.” 

 

I knew him as a fighter for the co-operative movement. In this House he never failed to work on behalf 

of the co-operative movement. I know that in the co-operative movement he will long be remembered. I 

want to add my sympathy to Mr.s. Danielson and family. 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

12 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, may I extend to you my sincere 

congratulations on your elevation to this high post as Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

I didn’t have the good fortune to know Mr. Arthurs and only casually knew Mr. Danielson so I shall 

restrict my remarks to one whom I was very close to. 

 

Ross Thatcher was a decision maker, the very thing that leadership is made of. Being a leader has its 

rewards by way of recognition and satisfaction in accomplishment but at the same time it has its periods 

of loneliness, frustration and disappointments. Seven years with Mr. Thatcher gives you an opportunity 

to see how a leader handles and lives with a variety of situations. Few people are associated closely 

enough with any premier to appreciate the multitude of problems and difficulties he is faced with. He 

has two big operational areas, heading the government and heading his party. Either one by itself a 

formidable task but when combined it becomes a most demanding one. Ross Thatcher was loyal to his 

responsibilities. He put this loyalty first. It was the base line for his decision making. His loyalty in 

carrying out his responsibilities meant difficult decisions and at times unpopular decisions. Few know 

that Mr. Thatcher left a legacy between Regina and Moose Jaw and I speak not of asphalt and concrete 

but of a growing thing. It was his idea to plant trees and bushes along this highway and this will serve as 

a living and growing memorial to him. Our former Premier will be remembered as a dynamic leader and 

an untiring worker. He will be sorrowfully missed in Saskatchewan political life. I deemed it a privilege 

and a genuine experience being associated with him. I join others in this House, Mr. Speaker, in 

conveying my sympathies to his family. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I understand there are a number of others who wish to add tribute and in 

order that there may be an opportunity to do that this afternoon, I would move that this Assembly do 

now recess until 2:30 o’clock p.m. today. 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted proceedings on the condolence Motion. 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker I should like to identify myself with the main motion 

presented by the Premier. 

 

Although I did not know the senior gentleman from Melville I understood in the Resolution that he was 

born in 1888 and died this summer. That would make him more than 80 years old or over four score 

years. A man who lives to be over 80 years must have been a good man and I’m sure that those who 

knew him will agree and appreciate the services that he rendered to this Province and to the community. 

I should like to share in the motion, to those he left behind, our sympathies and best wishes. 

 

I knew Herman Danielson quite well. I came into the House in 1960 and as a rookie I appreciated the 

advice and the concern that he had for the younger members and the advice that he freely gave to us who 

needed it. In 1960 he was then well into his seventies and members will recall, those that were in the 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

13 

House at that time, that he never did come to the evening sittings. He felt it too burdensome for his years 

but that didn’t mean that he wasn’t well aware and well on top of what was said the previous evening. 

He would work in his room in the King’s Hotel and the next morning when he came to the House he 

would be fully armed with material and quotes from all Members and he would participate in the debate. 

I had a great deal of respect for him. 

 

As was mentioned today he was a great man for the co-operative movement. I remember his saying back 

in 1964 that the Davidson Co-op was perhaps the only truly co-op store left in Saskatchewan. It was run 

and operated by the local people and not by Federated. He worked for the municipality and served as a 

Member of the Legislature for 30 years and this is a record that certainly must be appreciated and is 

appreciated by all of those that knew him in the constituency he represented. 

 

As Members will appreciate, it is with a great deal of difficulty that we speak of a leader and a friend 

who passed away only a few days ago. Many generalizations in praise of Mr. Thatcher have been made 

in comments from all over Canada but I should like to say a few words of the personal experiences that I 

had with Ross Thatcher. 

 

In 1961 when the then Government called a session in February, we were advised by the leader that 

most of the MLAs, the Liberal MLAs, would stay at the King’s Hotel. I had registered a few weeks 

before for a room. I had reserved one and I came to the King's Hotel a few days before the session 

started. For some unknown reason the gentleman behind the desk was quite specific that I take room 

214. I enquired why I had to take room 214, whether I couldn’t have a choice, and the answer that I got 

was Mr. Thatcher had insisted that I be given this room. He had room 212, a corner room that he 

requested and that I be given the next room. He claimed to know me as a quiet sort of a chap and he 

wanted the least possible disturbance while at the hotel. For five sessions this arrangement remained and 

it was through this close neighbourly association that a very personal friendship developed between the 

Thatchers and myself and my wife. There was many an evening we would be out in the country at a 

political gathering and we would return in the early hours of the morning, catch a few hours of sleep, 

and be ready for the committee meetings the next morning. I have never met a man who had the drive, 

the energy, the enthusiasm and the love for work and the dedication for public service as had the late 

Ross Thatcher. Much has been said in the last few days about the qualities and as I said before I should 

like to be a little more personal. 

 

On many occasions, we, the Government, and he personally, had been at times accused of putting 

dollars before people. As Minister of Welfare in the first years of our government, he and I yearly 

visited our correctional intuitions in Regina and Prince Albert. My deputy minister at the time informed 

me that this had never been done by any other Premier in the Province. Great changes were made at his 

request for the welfare of the inmates. We went down before lunch and had lunch with the workers there 

and we would speak with the inmates and he would ask them to come to his office after discharge or 

release and he personally would see that they would be employed. We visited Dale’s House and I saw 

the primitive structure, a three-storey building. I believe it was the old CN station. 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

14 

It served its purpose — I’m not criticizing the building at all — but it was obsolete. It had become a 

holding unit for delinquent girls. That afternoon Ross and I sat down and discussed the seriousness of 

the condition of the institution and later that day I instructed my deputy to go to the architects and draw 

up plans for a new home for delinquent girls. We visited the geriatric centre, saw at first-hand how 

unfortunate some of our citizens were. More staff and funds were made available within a few days and 

later on Ross told me when he went home that night he had not slept because of the condition of many 

of our fellow citizens 

 

I believe that it will be said and admitted by all church conferences, Protestants, and Catholics alike, that 

nobody would have done it better than Ross, to impress upon the citizens of Saskatchewan, the real 

plight of our native people. He wanted to know and do something about their deplorable conditions. No 

premier in the past, I believe, has ever visited the Reserves as often as he did to gather first-hand 

information. 

 

I am confident that the Indian and the Métis will long remember him as their friend. Less than a year ago 

he was called upon to organize, by a federal organizer of the North American Continent, a Premier’s 

Prayer Breakfast, as it is called in other provinces. He called me to his office one day and asked me to 

organize a Prayer Breakfast, and he said, and I quote: 

 

Dave, I don’t want it to be called a Premier’s Breakfast. I don’t want my office to be accused of trying 

to catch votes through a Prayer Breakfast. 

 

This is how I knew his private life. He was deeply concerned and worried when reference was made to 

his behaviour and conduct and his personal life, which were in most cases unfounded. But never would 

he lash out publicly at those who became personal. 

 

Ross was a hard worker and he expected us all, as public servants, to give of our best. Of the years as a 

Member of his Cabinet, I must say they have been the most rewarding seven years of my life. My 

colleagues and I did not always agree with Ross. We had some very strenuous debates, but we were a 

team. If we made mistakes we made them as a team, we made them together. Ross was a good friend, a 

good leader, a good Premier. Saskatchewan has lost a friend and a gallant man. 

 

May God comfort Mr.s Thatcher, Colin and other members of the family. 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself with the other Members of 

this Assembly in paying tribute to the former Members of this Legislature, including The Hon. Ross 

Thatcher. I want to extend sympathies to Mr.s. Thatcher and the family. 

 

One of the other deceased Members whom I knew very well personally and with whom I had the 

pleasure of working with when I was a young student was J.W. Arthurs, at one time CCF Member for 

the Melville constituency. 

 

Mr. Arthurs was known to young and old as Jim Arthurs and was a prominent figure in local and 

provincial politics. He served Melville constituency as a member of the Saskatchewan Legislature from 

1944 to 1948. He was born in Janetville, 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

15 

Ontario, in 1888. He came West to Balcarres in 1905 and started work on the railway in 1913 as a 

brakeman and then as a conductor, where he served faithfully for 40 years and finally retired in 1953. 

 

Jim Arthurs was an active man. He was active in community affairs. He was chairman of the Melville 

Lodge of the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen for 20 years. He was Secretary of the Provincial 

Legislative Board of the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen, Chairman of the Grievance committee of 

the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen and an executive member of the Canadian National Railway 

Pensioners’ Club. He was a Past Master of the Royal Black Loyal Orange Lodge in Melville. 

 

Surviving are his wife Cara, two sons and three daughters. Jim Arthurs moved to Vancouver after 

retiring from his railway job, where he completed his life, passing away on July 17 at the age of 83 

years. 

 

To Jim Arthurs we say, a job well done, the toils of life well preformed. To Mr.s. Arthurs and the family 

we should like to offer our sincerest sympathies. 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take a few moments on this particular 

Resolution before us to associate myself with remarks made by the Member who just took his seat and 

others who have spoken. 

 

I, of course, didn’t know Mr. Arthurs. I was only slightly acquainted with Mr. Danielson. I knew him 

largely through two avenues, first his speeches on the air and secondly, through my association with 

Jack Horsman, former Wilkie MLA who was my predecessor in that constituency. Mr. Horsman, of 

course, was a close associate of Mr. Danielson, as you can well appreciate having sat in this Legislature 

for 16 of those 30 years while Mr. Danielson was here. 

 

Now those of you who know Jack Horsman — and I am sure that Mr. Speaker knows and there are 

others — know that he is not and never was given to overstatement. I did use to question some of the 

tales of Mr. Danielson and others that John would relate to me until such time as I came down here 

myself and then, of course, I heard many others reiterate some of the anecdotes that Mr. Steuart and 

others mentioned here this morning. 

 

I wish to extend, my sympathy to his family, not only on my behalf, but on behalf of my predecessor 

and great friend, Mr. Jack Horsman, former Wilkie MLA. 

 

Ross Thatcher. I met Ross at the time of his election as Liberal Party Leader. I never really spent that 

much time with him until the summer of 1963, when he came to Wilkie to meet our executive and 

myself and see whether or not I wanted to run in that constituency. 

 

Certainly it was through him and urging of some close friends at home that I did agree to run and contest 

that nomination and eventually win that constituency for the last three elections in a row. 

 

I worked, of course, with Ross very closely as Party Whip that first session when we were the 

Government. I came to 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

16 

know and appreciate his many great attributes, his sincerity, his conviction, his energy and his 

purposeful determination at all times. 

 

Later on that year 1965, he called me into his office. The Moosomin by-election was on, in its last week, 

I believe. He talked generally about the election, politics and so on. And out of the clear blue he asked 

me if I wanted to come down and join the Cabinet. I remember well one comment that he made at that 

time. He said, “Cliff you will find politics very demanding. Very frustrating and, in fact it is best 

described as disorganized confusion most of the time. I’ll tell you if you come down it will get into your 

blood and despite the frustrations you will come to enjoy it and anything else other than politics will 

seem very dull thereafter.” I am sure that anyone who has been in public life or politics knows the truth 

of that statement. 

 

Shortly after being appointed, he called me over to his office one day. I had given some misdirection to 

a municipality representative who was in to my office in interpreting a new policy and I thought one 

thing that he would do would be to put me straight on that, but it wasn’t. We talked about totally 

different things, that he was looking to and considering for future. And when I referred to this fact that I 

had inadvertently misinformed the municipality about a new policy that had just been brought down by 

the former member of Qu'Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) who was then the Minister. Ross said, 

“Oh, that is nothing. Don’t worry about that. Anyone can make a mistake. But I will tell you this, Cliff, 

one thing that I can’t stand is stupidity, be it in public office or anywhere else.” 

 

Other instances could be cited by me in the same vein as the member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) did to 

demonstrate some of these personal qualities of our former Leader, as we came to know and appreciate 

him. His genuine concern for the underdog in society, the Hutterites of this Province, the Indian and 

Métis people, will certainly mark him, Mr. Speaker, as one of the great humanitarians of this Province, 

and as a true Liberal — not a Conservative — and but I am sure that word would be, and has been, used 

to describe Ross and his philosophy — but his concern that every man must have, above all his own 

dignity as the most basic of human rights. 

 

He didn’t have an ounce of personal bias in his soul, largely because he just didn't have any time for it. 

As I listened in Moose Jaw on Monday to the eulogy at the funeral, one thought crossed my mind. I 

know that Ross will leave many legacies and some have been alluded to here today. But I hope and I 

believe that one that will remain; if more and more people in public life, be it in political life, church or 

academic circles or other circles, will follow his principle of always coming out forthright, four-square 

with what their thoughts really are, and are prepared to state them and back them up; then I think that he 

will have made a contribution to this province and indeed to this country. That will certainly long outlive 

many of the other qualities that he will be known for. Calling the shot as he sees it, calling it with 

sincerity and conviction. 

 

On behalf of myself, my family and my constituents, Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with others in 

extending condolences to his family and his friends. 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

17 

Mr. D. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to the memory of Herman Danielson. 

 

I never had the opportunity of meeting Mr. Danielson or sitting in the House with him, but I feel that in 

a way I came to know him through visits that I made in the constituency. I feel that there are probably 

very few members in this House who will have memories of the visits and the work that they did for 

their constituents, brought to the attention of someone 30 – and in some cased almost 40 years later. 

 

Mr. Danielson distinguished himself, in my opinion, not so much by his contributions in this House, but 

rather as setting a model of service to his people. I heard many, many times, in every part of the 

constituency, stories of things that he had done for people during the ’30s. His memory was cherished 

by those people. I am sure that for Mr.s. Danielson and the family, that continuing memory must be the 

greatest tribute. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Danielson was predeceased this year by his only daughter. His last years were spent 

in considerable suffering. I wish to extend to his wife and to his family my sincere sympathies, and those 

of this House. 

 

Mr. K. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to refer briefly to Mr. J. Herman 

Danielson, late of Davidson, Saskatchewan. 

 

He was, Mr. Speaker, a child of another age. I am very interested and fascinated by the fact that he 

arrived in the United States in 1901 at the age of 18, almost 19 years, some four and one half months 

prior to the time the Wright Brothers had flown their first aircraft. Not only before the age of radio and 

television, but prior to the age of aircraft and the modern convenience. 

 

He arrived in Canada when he was 22 years old. He arrived in the North West Territories. He came to 

the area of Elbow, Saskatchewan to take up a homestead in what was free land in this great North West 

Territory, prior to the birth of our province. For those who believe Mr. Speaker, in fortuitous 

circumstances, it is worth noting, I think that in the year 1938 the Hon. John Diefenbaker was not the 

Honourable, he was in fact John Diefenbaker, leader of the Provincial Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan. And he sought to unseat Mr. Danielson in that election, but Mr. Danielson defeated him. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker what might have occurred had the result of that election been the other way 

around. I think that it is very unfortunate for all, that John Diefenbaker went down to defeat, because I 

think that this House was blessed over the years with a rare and distinguished personage, and I think that 

our House of Commons in our federal field was given one of its outstanding parliamentarians. For those 

who suffer defeat, occasionally defeat leads on, Mr. Speaker, if I may philosophize momentarily, to 

something far better, far better not only for the man, but for the people. 

 

And if I may speak briefly of the Hon. W. Ross Thatcher. It has occurred to me, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

Hon. Ross Thatcher was an irritant to our people, it was, I think, the kind of irritation that comes from 

the roadbuilder’s noise as he builds a road to your house. The irritation, I think, caused by the 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

18 

carpenter’s hammer as he improves your home. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the improvement of our lot was well known by the late Mr. Thatcher to 

involve sacrifice and discomfort. The goal throughout, I am convinced, was a better Saskatchewan. 

 

If he appeared, Mr. Speaker, on occasion to overlook some needy, it was because he saw someone else 

even more needy. If he seemed not to give enough to the poor but comfortable senior citizens or others, 

it was because he knew of Indians and Métis in the northern part of the province living in dirt shacks, 

with dirt floors. With so much to be done, Mr. Speaker, his impatience may be well understood. 

 

I know that almost single-handedly he drove this Province towards industrialization. I am sure that he 

couldn’t always do this by waiting for all of us to agree. I suspect that a man with so many virtues may 

well be forgiven for having some giant size failings. It is not necessary that we like everything about the 

way that he did things. And for the matter it may not be necessary that we like anything about the way 

that he did things. It is, I think, Mr. Speaker, beyond doubt that we do owe him., and he well deserved, 

the highest tribute that I have ever been able to give any other man, Mr. Speaker, when I say ‘there was 

a man’. 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself and the people that I 

represent in paying tribute and expressing sympathy to the former Members of this House who have 

passed on during the past year. 

 

I want to direct particularly my remarks to Mr. Ross Thatcher, the former Premier of this Province, with 

whom I had occasion to know and sit in this House during the past term. His untimely passing, of 

course, shocked me and the people of this Province. 

 

Mr. Thatcher has had, I would say, an exciting and challenging career in politics. He had often placed 

himself in a controversial position and expounded his views bluntly and in a straightforward manner. He 

displayed strong beliefs and he worked with great energy and untiring effort towards his objectives. If 

one were to illustrate strength of character and decisiveness, he would find that Mr. Thatcher fulfilled 

these qualities. 

 

With some 29 years in public life, Mr. Thatcher has left a mark in Canadian and provincial politics that 

will not be overlooked, nor will history not make a record of. His contribution to our process of 

government will prove valuable to many of us living into the future. 

 

Along with other condolences already expressed by the Premier and other members of this House, I 

want to convey my sympathy to Mr.s. Thatcher and the family. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, let me first offer my congratulations to you in your 

elevation to the very high office you now hold. 

 

It is usually a very happy occasion when a Member makes his first utterances in this very august 

Chamber, however, the, 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

19 

recent death of Ross Thatcher has saddened me, as I know it has saddened many of the people that are 

sitting in this Chamber today. 

 

I knew Ross Thatcher and without Ross Thatcher’s guidance and confidence I should not be sitting as an 

MLA in this House today and I thank him personally for the opportunity that he has given me. 

 

As a young person I knew the frustration of dealing with a man whose ideas were very, very strong, 

whose views were very, very strong. I had often approached Ross Thatcher with some ideas and I have 

had them bluntly shot down in a very, very arbitrary manner. But I respected him because I found out as 

I got some experience that his views were usually right. He had a great love of the people of this 

Province and he knew the people of this Province; and his experience and his love and his knowledge 

often justified the stand that he had taken in our discussions. I began to learn that his concern for the 

future of this Province was the same as mine, his concern for the peoples of this Province was the same 

as mine but above all — and I don’t think this has been mentioned — I realized that he brought with him 

his own personal honesty and integrity to government and I hope this legacy will be remembered by all 

of us. It’s a very, very tremendous thing that he tried to do inputting this stamp of honesty and integrity 

on every one of the functions of government and the functions of politics. I know this great effort in this 

regard by Mr. Thatcher will be remembered by myself and I hope that it will be remembered by all here 

today. 

 

I regrettably did not know Mr. Arthurs and Mr. Danielson but I join with the other members of this 

House in expressing condolences to their families. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, this is a regrettable occasion where, in the 

immediate aftermath of the Hon. Ross Thatcher’s death, I have the first opportunity to address this 

House and I intend to keep my remarks brief because the subject has been so eloquently dealt with by 

the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition and the other members that have already spoken. 

 

My first encounter with Ross Thatcher, was, Mr. Speaker, in 1963. I had talked to him on a number of 

occasions on the telephone and I had seen him at Liberal Party conventions but never personally met 

him. In 1963 when the nominating convention for Cannington constituency was held, he was the speaker 

at which I was the candidate. He’d already had two meetings that day and he walked into the hall 

somewhat late and after the balloting had been conducted — and it was a hard-fought convention with a 

substantial turnout of people — he came to speak to me afterwards and he said, “Tom, get those 

memberships in.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was my first encounter with his boundless energy that all of us will remember. 

 

I shall particularly remember him for three distinct qualities: his total honesty, sincerity of purpose 

(regardless of controversy) and his boundless energy. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that I in my lifetime shall not know another man who had the energy and drive 

that characterized this particular person. I am convinced that it will be a long time before Saskatchewan 

sees anther person of this tremendous 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

20 

energy, boundless courage and great vigor, by which he enunciated and carried out his policies. 

 

This boundless energy and ambition I think will be long time before seen again. In my time I have yet to 

see another with these characteristics to such a great extent, although politics is characterized by people 

who have high ambition and great energy. I think that he would most want to be remembered for his 

total honesty, both intellectual and financial — whether you agreed with him or not — and with his total 

honesty as far as finance was concerned. He looked upon the province’s finances as though every dollar 

was his own and he conducted the financial affairs of Saskatchewan as carefully as though it was his 

own money. This was one of his characteristics which he most firmly believed in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate myself with all of the previous remarks made, as I said at the outset, and 

his total dedication and great love for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I wish to pass my condolences on to Mr.s. Thatcher and her family and wish them every success. 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself with the other members 

of this House on this motion now before us. 

 

Having known neither Mr. Danielson nor Mr. Arthurs, whom I am sure contributed greatly to the 

constituencies and to the province which they represented, I rise at this time to express my condolences 

in the recent passing of the Hon. Mr. Ross Thatcher, with whom I had the privilege of sitting as a 

Member of the Opposition while he was the Premier, during the period of time from 1964 to 1971. Mr. 

Thatcher gave unstintingly of his time and his energy towards working for and promoting his political 

beliefs and his desires in a very public spirited way, and his name will long be remembered, I am sure, 

for the part he played in the political arena of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

On behalf of the Weyburn constituency and myself, I should like to express to Mr.s. Thatcher and the 

Thatcher family, our deepest sympathy on this recent sad bereavement. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I join with other Members of the House in 

associating myself with the resolution proposed by the Premier and seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

You know, I think if Mr. Thatcher is looking down on us today he would be saying, “I hope that this 

finishes very quickly,” because Ross loved life and certainly this was one day that he never did enjoy 

very much. 

 

I should first like to make a comment or two about Herman Danielson. When I first finished university, I 

had the opportunity of going to teach in the community of Craik and Herman Danielson was my MLA. I 

never had the opportunity of sitting in the House with him but I can recall very vividly some of the 

stories that have been told about Herman, his vigorous opposition, his color, his dynamic personality and 

I recall the first time I met Mr. Danielson was on the street of Craik. I strolled down the street after 

school had been completed and there was Herman holding court with a group of people from 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

21 

that community — farmers. His arms were going in both directions and you would think he was still in 

the House giving the government the ‘dickens’ about something that he didn’t believe in. I think 

Saskatchewan lost a very distinguished citizen. 

 

You know, life is a continual learning experience and occasionally a figure comes into the sphere of 

influence of people after which your life is never quite the same. Ross Thatcher was such a catalyst. I 

think he taught all of us who came in contact with him many things. He taught us that integrity was 

more important than victory and I don’t think it was ever more clearly illustrated than the night of June 

23rd when all of us around Saskatchewan, and particularly Members of this party, watched his 

appearance on television and certainly we were never prouder of Ross than on that occasion. He also 

taught us that tolerance was certainly far more important than bigotry and as my seatmate said, Ross 

Thatcher didn’t have a bigoted bone in his body. 

 

Mention has been made of his treatment of minority groups, his interest in the Hutterite community, but, 

you know, I think of it in other ways. For example, a man’s religion. The thing that was important was a 

man’s ability. In his selection of a Cabinet, he broke all the traditional rules. He felt that it made no 

difference what our race or color or your creed was as long as you could make a contribution, that was 

what was important. 

 

I think he taught us also that truth was the most prized possession of all. And you know, probably of all 

the things he was criticized most for was the fact that, occasionally it was said, that he put his foot in his 

own mouth because he always spoke exactly as he felt. He was blunt, he was straightforward, and he 

never hesitated to say what was in his mind, whether it was popular or not. 

 

I think he also taught us that loyalty was perhaps the most desirable quality of character of all. You 

know, whenever anyone was in trouble, that’s when Ross was at his greatest, whether it was a personal 

family problem, whether it was a political problem, or whatever it may be, you could always count on 

Ross when the going got tough. 

 

He also taught us that if you believed in something, it was worth fighting for. I don’t think there is 

anybody who has ever sat in this Legislature that will ever forget the vigor with which he fought for 

what he believed in. He wasn’t always right but he gave his life for what he believed was right. 

 

I think he also taught us that out of adversity came strength. Ross Thatcher had many ups and downs in 

life. I think most people in public life do but whenever adversity was at its greatest, he always felt that 

out of that would come unity and strength. And that was the one message he had for his party and for his 

friends after June 23rd. 

 

He taught us many other things but you know I should like to go back just on a personal note. One of 

things that I think all of us will remember — most of us on this side of the House — it was Ross 

Thatcher that got us involved in politics. I remember one day when I was in my house in Wilcox, in 

came Father Murray, a great friend of Ross Thatcher’s, and Ross himself, puffing on that great cigar. He 

didn’t seem to have time 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

22 

to sit down and take a few moments but he came out very, very bluntly and said, “Will you run or will 

you not, because you know we’ve got a big job to do and we’ve got to get started?” 

 

I think of another area. Very few people remember that Ross Thatcher was interested in young people. 

Very few people remember his association with the Moose Jaw Canucks. He was interested, particularly 

in hockey and it was Ross Thatcher who conceived the idea of a Youth Agency which was one of many 

firsts that he did implement. 

 

I think that Ross Thatcher will always be a part of the Liberal Party and certainly a part of this House. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to compliment you upon your 

appointment to the highest office in this House and I know that you will carry it with dignity and ability. 

We know that you will be fair in all your dealings with the House. 

 

At this time I should like to say a few words in commemoration of Mr. Herman Danielson. It was my 

privilege to sit during two Legislatures when Herman Danielson was in the House. It was my privilege 

to be Speaker during a couple of those sessions and you will possibly appreciate with me, Mr. Speaker, 

just what the privilege was of being Speaker when you had someone like Herman Danielson in the 

House. If he kept the rules at any time, it was purely coincidental but being who he was — it was 

impossible, absolutely impossible for the Speaker, shall we say, to throw the book at him. It was one of 

those things that you put up with and you like it. Herman Danielson went his way in the House, 

unimpeded by the rules, but he went ahead and did what he thought was right and I am sure that he was 

firm in his convictions that he was right in what he said and did. 

 

As I say, he may have been a thorn in the side of the government of the day as well as of the Speaker, 

but I have had occasion to talk to people who were members of his constituency who were his 

constituents and they said that there was a sterling worth in Herman Danielson that was not missed by 

the people of his constituency. When the chips were down, he had stood up for that which was right 

even though it was not to be his own advantage and this was not soon forgotten by his constituents. I 

think it was largely due to this sort of thing and to the fact that he worked hard to try to service his 

constituents and to do things for his constituents that he remained a member of this House for as many 

years as he did. 

 

I should like at this time to express our condolences for those who are left and our respect for Mr. 

Danielson who has gone. 

 

I should also like to say a few things concerning the Hon. W. Ross Thatcher, P.C. 

 

It was my privilege again to be Speaker of the House when Mr. Thatcher first came to this House. I was 

a new Speaker. Mr. Koester was just new in the chair as the Clerk. Mr. Thatcher was new to his role as 

the Leader of the Opposition. I was quick to recognize the courage and forthrightness and the 

determination of Mr. Thatcher. I should like to say that his is the first one, so far as I know and I think I 

am right in this, to bring in verbal questions on the Orders of the Day to this 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

23 

House. Verbal questions on the Orders of the Day had been a practice in Ottawa but in my first term 

here as a backbencher it never was done, it was always written questions which were answered on the 

Orders of the Day. Oral questions on the Orders of the Day had never been brought in and Mr. Thatcher 

was the first one who brought these in. We recognize them as something that was recognized in Ottawa 

and, of course, we are prepared to go along with them. As all Members are well aware this procedure 

has become an honoured precedent in this House. 

 

Mr. Thatcher was forceful and he was dedicated in what he did. I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think quite probably that my association, I should say my first ;meeting with Mr. Thatcher, antedates 

that of any other person in the House or in this place at this time. My first school teacher was a sister of 

Mr. Thatcher’s mother. We boarded the school teacher and I think the future Hon. Ross Thatcher was a 

babe-in-arms when he came to our house on the farm. So I doubt if there are any here who have known 

Ross Thatcher longer than I have. 

 

I wish, at this time, to express my appreciation of the man. A man, I think, with courage, determination 

and dedication to what he believed. I should like to express my sincere sympathy to Mr.s. Thatcher and 

the family at this time. 

 

Mr. D. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, as the Member from Moose Jaw North, I am 

very grateful to have this opportunity to say a few words about Ross Thatcher. 

 

Moose Jaw was home for Ross Thatcher. It has often been said that one of Moose Jaw’s greatest exports 

is talented and great people. We have had more than our share of people leaving Moose Jaw and going 

on to greatness in their fields. Ross is one of the truly great but he never left Moose Jaw. His political 

career has taken him to Ottawa and Regina while serving the people of our province but home was 

always Moose Jaw. This was never more obvious than during the past 10 or 11 years. It was a rare 

weekend that didn’t see Ross travel to his ranch and family in Moose Jaw. These short visits home 

provided Ross his chance to renew his strength and to gain a freshness with which he could face the 

challenge of a very demanding week as Premier. 

 

Relaxation for Ross was an exhausting day in the wind, in the sun and the rain and the dirt at his ranch. 

Pleasure for Ross was attending an auction sale and chatting with fellow farmers. On the weekend Ross 

was truly a fellow farmer. Satisfaction for Ross was seeing one of his newly born calves or watching one 

of his bulls being judged a champion. Enjoyment for Ross was visiting with old familiar friends. 

 

Ross was a devoted family man. His wife, Peggy, is a woman with outstanding attributes. Ross realized 

this and seemed to draw strength and encouragement from her. Ross was proud of his son, Colin, whom 

he watched grow, receive an education and then return to work with his father. Together, Ross and Colin 

turned a small farm into one of Western Canada’s most successful purebred ranches. As a grandfather 

Ross Thatcher was the granddaddy of them all. The Ross Thatcher that I knew from his visits home was 

a man of warmth, sensitivity and sincerity. Ross Thatcher was a friend, a leader and example and an 

inspiration. 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

24 

Mr. H.E. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I should also like to add a few words to those of 

the other Members on the passing of our former Premier and friend. 

 

I feel Saskatchewan has lost one of her ablest men. Ross Thatcher never spared himself in his dedication 

to the people Saskatchewan. He worked hard and he expected the same from those around him. I 

considered Ross a friend and a very sincere friend. It was because of Ross Thatcher that I entered 

politics shortly after he became the Leader of the Liberal Party. I have never regretted it. I feel it has 

been an honor to work with Ross for the betterment of Saskatchewan. Ross always knew where he was 

going and he was never afraid to let people know even though sometimes things were not that popular. I 

am convinced that the former Premier, Ross Thatcher, will go down in history as the greatest Premier 

Saskatchewan ever had. I think the things he did and tried to do will be long remembered by the people 

of Saskatchewan and also across Canada. 

 

I should like to extend my sincere sympathy to Mr.s. Thatcher, Colin, his mother and wish them well in 

the future. 

 

Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to add today my few words to those already spoken 

in memory of a great man, a great leader, and former Premier, Ross Thatcher. 

 

Ross Thatcher was my friend. He was responsible for getting me to run for the Legislature and he was 

responsible for getting me elected. I, along with every other Member on this side of the House, shall 

sincerely miss him in the days and months ahead. 

 

Ross Thatcher took a poorly organized Liberal Party in 1959 to form a government in 1964. From 1964 

to 1971 Ross provided good, honest government to the people and the Province of Saskatchewan. I am 

certain that the people will miss Ross’s style and intent of leadership. The Liberal Government in its 

seven years did more for Saskatchewan than any other government in her history. Mr. Speaker, even you 

and the Members opposite must surely regret the loss of Saskatchewan’s most prominent citizen of the 

last several decades. Ross worked for the betterment of Saskatchewan. All of us on this side of the 

House will remember him as a good example of a public servant. 

 

My wife and I wish to extend our sincere sympathy to Mr.s. Thatcher and her son, Colin. We wish them 

well in the days and years ahead. Ross Thatcher died a fighter; it is only fitting that the Liberal Caucus 

continue to fight his fights. He would have wanted it that way. Mr. Speaker, we have lost one of the 

greatest men who has ever sat in the House. We shall all be sorry for it. 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, the accomplishments of Ross Thatcher are certainly 

well documented, they are clearly on record and many have been mentioned here today. Many of you 

here knew Ross Thatcher better than I did, but I feel that few of us knew him really well. Most people of 

the province only knew the image that he chose to present to the public. He was a man of great feeling 

and great compassion. In a Leader-Post editorial a few days ago a reporter who had travelled across the 

province with 



 

 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

25 

Ross, mentioned that he had detected a tear in his eye on certain occasions when they had seen 

particularly distressing social or living conditions. And I know this to be true. 

 

I have four Indian reserves in my constituency and I am sure that Ross Thatcher spent more time visiting 

Indian reserves than any other Premier here or any place in Canada. He would call me on the ‘phone, 

arrange to meet me, and we would visit some of the people on one of my reserves. H was not there to 

make political speeches, he very carefully refrained from doing so. He was sincerely interested in 

improving the lot of our native people and he was frustrated because he felt that we were not making 

enough progress. 

 

Often his gruff manner hid his true feelings. I recall several months ago an occasion when a large 

delegation of municipal people came in from my constituency with a certain request for the Premier. 

After their request had been denied and the delegation had left I was talking to Ross and complaining 

about the fact that my people had not got what they wanted because I felt it was a worthy project. He 

told me that his waiting room was filled every day with people who had worthy projects but he said, “I 

have to consider them carefully because all of them cost the taxpayer money. When I say, ‘Yes’, it 

means spending money.” And then he added rather wistfully, “You know, Gardner, before I leave the 

job as Premier, I wish I could have just one day where I could say ‘Yes’ to everybody.” I think this was 

an indication of his true feelings. 

 

Ross Thatcher was a man who held no malice towards his political opponents, either within his party or 

the Opposition. This was demonstrated on many occasions. It was well known that he damned the 

socialists collectively but individually he held a grudge against no one. Ross Thatcher was a man who 

had a soft spot for anyone who needed help. He had been known to help both friend and foe alike and it 

was often to the consternation of his political colleagues. He has been known to dig into his own pocket 

to help someone in dire financial need. But the Lord help anyone who dared to mention this publicly. 

Mr. Speaker, it is ironic that we often have to wait until a man has gone before we truly get to know 

him. 

 

I wish at this time to express my condolences to the family. I am proud of my association with Ross 

Thatcher. 

 

Mr. D. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — I should first like to associate myself with the other 

members in expressing regret for the death of a former Member from Melville, the late W.J. Arthurs. I 

did not know this gentleman but he served this House from 1944 to 1948 and his record is certainly here. 

 

I knew Herman Danielson very well and I can only say, along with what the Member for Arm River 

(Mr. Faris) said, that he was a great Member of this House. 

 

Just a few words I should like to say about Ross Thatcher, knowing him as well as I did. He was 

certainly a kindly man and he had a big heart. He loved Saskatchewan and he loved to see Saskatchewan 

grow and he certainly loved the City of Moose Jaw. Never a day went by or an industry that approached 

him that he said, “Would you not set up in the City of Moose Jaw.” He certainly loved that city. He 

loved his family and loved his two grandchildren. 



 

July 28, 1971 

 

 

 

26 

This man loved the business world. He like to go out and trade and he liked to see it make a profit. He 

loved ranching. He got into ranching because in the hardware business in order to sell when things were 

moving a little slow, he would take grain and cattle in trade. Hence he bought the farm and he started 

from there. He got into the Hereford business and bought a lot of cattle at the start, along with trading, 

and he didn’t do very well when it came to showing cattle with what he had. Being the businessman and 

the earnest gentleman he was, he decided that he was going to go out and buy the best females in the 

country and make the ranch pay. He won the grand championship in 1969, and I went up with him that 

night when he received the trophy and he was certainly pleased. 

 

He will long be remembered in Canada as a great leader and I am proud to have known Ross Thatcher. 

 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:45 o’clock p.m. 

 


