



















































Hansard: March 05, 1971


721 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

14th Day 

 

March 5, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I want to introduce to all Members of the Legislature 

the following groups of students in the galleries: from the constituency of Weyburn, represented by Mr. 

Pepper, 29 students from the Goodwater School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Medwid; from 

the constituency of Rosthern, represented by the Minister of Highways, Mr. Boldt, 57 students from the 

Aberdeen Composite High School, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Peters; from the 

constituency of Swift Current, represented by Mr. Wood, 64 students from St. Patrick School under the 

direction of their teacher, Mr. Schumay; from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana South, represented 

by Mr. Forsyth, 31 students from the Alvin Buckwold School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. 

Loewen; from the constituency of Moose Jaw North, represented by Mr. Snyder, 29 students from the 

Palliser Heights School under the direction of their teacher, Mrs. Wood; from the constituency of 

Melfort-Tisdale, 22 students from the Gronlid School and 20 students from the political theory class of 

Professor Sperling of the Regina Campus as guests of the Premier of the Province (Mr. Thatcher). And 

seated behind the bar a very fine looking group of 45 air cadets from Nipawin, Saskatchewan, 

represented by Mr. Radloff under the direction of their Commanding Officer, Captain Harry Moore. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members will wish to join with me in extending to these students and to the air cadets 

the warmest of all possible welcomes to the Legislature of the Province of Saskatchewan and to express 

the very sincere wish that they will find their stay here enjoyable, educational and wish to each and 

everyone of them a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

MR. A. E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might also introduce 

to the House, sitting behind the bar to your left, Mr. Speaker, the former Member of this House from 

Kelsey, Mr. J. H. Brockelbank, and with him the MP for York South and Deputy Leader for the New 

Democratic Party in the House of Commons, Mr. David Lewis. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to join Members on this side of 

the House in welcoming Mr. David Lewis, MP to this House. Mr. Lewis is an old friend and colleague 

of mine and I have known him very well. I don't want to put the kiss of death on him but I would 

certainly say that he is one of the more sensible of the candidates that are running in the next election. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
722 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

HOMECOMING '71 GRANTS 
 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to clarify a misunderstanding 

which has arisen in some centres in connection with Homecoming ‗71 grants. Some communities have 

applied for provincial grants covering two or three different projects. I think the city of Moose Jaw has 

applied for four. It will be Government policy that the Homecoming grant can be used for only one 

project, a single project, in a city or an area. Grants to which rural municipalities are entitled may, of 

course, be used for a specific rural municipal project or assigned to urban centres in that rural 

municipality. 

 

INTERNATIONAL CATTLE SALE 
 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the House of a project which has 

only been decided during the last several days. The various cattle associations of Saskatchewan have 

decided to hold in Regina in late November, an international purebred sale and commercial sale. Not 

only will it be a sale but there will be many displays. The associations are working in conjunction with 

the Regina Exhibition. They expect to obtain cattle from Britain, the United States and elsewhere. The 

feeling is that it could be one of the biggest cattle exhibitions that has ever been held in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Hogs and sheep will be included if hog and sheep organizations are interested. 

 

I might say that the Government is helping with the project financially but the cattlemen will be raising a 

good deal of money on their own. I am sure Members on both sides of the House will wish them every 

success in this agricultural venture. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

SASKATCHEWAN NEWSTART INCORPORATED 
 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if 

I might put a question to the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac). Mr. Minister I have been given a 

photocopy of a memorandum dated February 26, 1971 which has been directed to all staff of 

Saskatchewan Newstart Incorporated in Prince Albert that the Government is in partnership with the 

Federal Government. I shall be pleased to table the memorandum. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might just 

have some very brie^ latitude in order to be fair to the Minister in putting the question. The 

memorandum says this: 

 

I want it to be clearly understood that no employee is to engage in activities for the purpose of 

subverting Federal or Provincial government policies or programs. It is my understanding that 

one or more employees are actively campaigning against the pulp mills present and projected in 

Saskatchewan. As these projects are, in part, financed 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
723 

by the Department of Regional Economic Expansion, which is our Federal parent, I insist . . . 

 

(the memorandum reads) 

 

. . . that this activity cease immediately. I want it absolutely understood that I am not prepared to 

jeopardize the future of Saskatchewan Newstart and your jobs so that a few people may 

campaign against the policies and programs of our sponsoring governments. Anyone involved in 

this kind of activity will be subject to dismissal. 

 

Would the Minister undertake to tell to this House that his Government does not approve of such a 

policy that restricts freedom of speech and threatens the loss of employment if an employee concerns 

himself, for example, in the area of citizen participation with respect to pollution, as an example, and 

further that he will take immediate steps with the appropriate officials to see that this memorandum is 

rescinded forthwith? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this is the first that I have heard of this 

memorandum. From what I have heard of it I rather like it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — But on the other hand I can tell my hon. friend 

opposite that I shall check into it. This is a corporation that doesn't operate under the Department of 

Education, as he well knows, but I shall have a look at it and report back to him later. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, if I might just ask one supplementary question of the Minister. 

Would the Minister assure this House then that it is not Provincial Government policy to jeopardize the 

future of Newstart by advocating the cutting of the funds if continued public debate concerns itself 

around the pulp mills in Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — Well, very far from it. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we were discussing with federal officials and urging them to continue the Saskatchewan 

Newstart operation in Prince Albert. 

 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier): — We want some sensible . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order: It seems to me when the Member started his question he stated that 

he had some type of memorandum that he was prepared to table. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, I certainly am. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, it is with extreme regret that I rise in the House 

today to speak of the loss of one of Saskatchewan's and northwestern Saskatchewan's - and North 

Battleford's - leading 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
724 

citizens. I speak of Norm Lehman, bandmaster of North Battleford's city Kinsmen Band for the past 20 

years who died Wednesday in Regina Grey Nuns' Hospital after a lengthy illness. He was 62 years of 

age. Born in Aurora, Ontario, Mr. Lehman joined his first band in Riverhurst, Saskatchewan in 1922. He 

later moved to Regina with his family and spent 12 years as a cornet soloist with the famous Regina 

Rifles. He joined the Royal Canadian Air Force in 1940 and spent five years during the war as an Air 

Force bandmaster. Following the war Mr. Lehman returned to Regina where he became Legion 

bandmaster. In September, 1951 after three years of coaxing by the late Robbie Robinson, the founder of 

the North Battle ford city Kinsmen Band, he was persuaded to move to North Battleford. Mr. Lehman 

always admitted being a hard task master. One of his favorite sayings was, ―If it isn't right, it's wrong, to 

keep trying and practicing until it is right.‖ He was not only a perfectionist but a great showman. 

 

Illustrating Norm's sense of humor - I remember a sign in the band hall - it was an empty chair, it said, 

"Hair today gone tomorrow." He didn't have too many long-haired ones, in fact none, except the girls in 

the band. 

 

Under the baton of Mr. Lehman the band marched from one triumph to another. The same year he came 

to the city, Mr. Lehman first led the band to first prize in the annual Saskatoon Exhibition parade three 

years in a row. In the following years the band entered the parade but not in competition. In 1954 the 

band placed second at the Calgary Stampede. In the following year they went back to win first place - 

the coveted Eaton trophy - over 30 other entrants. The trophy was again won in 1956 and 1958. They 

won the red ribbon for the best band on parade. This was retained in 1956, 1957 and 1958. Further top 

honors have been taken at the Kinsmen band festival in Moose Jaw. In 1964 and 1965 the band won first 

prize for marching at the Edmonton Klondike Days parade. In 1967 the band played at Expo. As 

recently as 1968 the band played to a full house at the Saskatoon Centennial Auditorium. For the past 

two years Mr. Lehman has been actively involved in the work of the Provincial Youth Band. In 1969 he 

accompanied the band on a tour of Saskatchewan and in the following year on an expanded tour of 

Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

 

He had also instructed the percussion section of the band. Bandmaster Lehman demanded and got the 

best from his students. He always believed that "a band is only as good as its poorest player." 

 

Funeral services will be held at 2:30 central time on Saturday - that's tomorrow - from St. Peter's 

Anglican Church in Regina. 

 

Mr. Lehman's dedication to youth and truth and beauty was absolutely unmistakable. Young women and 

men across Canada, Mr. Speaker, are better citizens because they were under the tutorship of a man of 

Norm Lehman's calibre. North Battleford is certainly a better place for Norm having been there and we 

will be everlastingly grateful that he spent those years in Saskatchewan and in North Battleford. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

WEDDING CONGRATULATIONS - PIERRE ELLIOTT TRUDEAU 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
725 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if on 

behalf of Hon. Members I could take note of the marriage of our Prime Minister. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier): — I should think this marriage indicates again that the Leader of 

the Liberal Party in Ottawa is a courageous man. I think it indicates that no challenge is too great and I 

am sure I speak for all Members when we wish him the very best in the future. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

MR. J. E. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon Mayfair) First, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the 

Member from Regina Centre, Mr. Allan Blakeney, on his selection as the Leader of the New Democratic 

Party in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — To occupy that position of this young party is to have gone through a 

rigorous and open selection process which tests each facet of a person's overall ability. To have 

succeeded in the attainment of that position is in itself a mark of superior quality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Having been selected he will go on to prove his mettle as all previous New 

Democratic Party leaders, federal and provincial have done. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate my fellow MLA from 

Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), first on his election to Deputy Leader of the party, second on his 

appointment as financial critic of the New Democratic Party, and finally and probably most important 

for his searching and revealing analysis of the Budget document which was delivered last Monday. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — I also want to take this opportunity to say bon voyage and good health to 

Members who will no longer be in this Legislative Chamber providing there is an election held, such 

Members as the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd), the Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff), the Member 

from Prince Albert East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky), the Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. 

Davies) and the Member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher). There are others who 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
726 

will not be returning such as the Member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) who I understand will not stand for 

renomination later this month. And also the Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) who is with us today, 

whose reasons for retirement, I suggest, will probably remain shrouded in secrecy. 

 

I wish them all good luck and good health. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — I should like to comment on a number of topics, Mr. Speaker, beginning 

with Homecoming ‘71. 

 

I have no hesitation, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming back residents who have left the Province of 

Saskatchewan. We all know that the pace with which they leave the Province of Saskatchewan has 

accelerated rapidly in the last two years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Do you realize, Mr. Speaker, that in 1970 we lost about 32,000 people 

from the Province of Saskatchewan. This figure represents hundreds of people who weren't able to carry 

on their businesses in Saskatchewan; thousands who were unemployed and were forced to go elsewhere 

to find employment; hundreds of professionally-trained who went where their talents were more fully 

appreciated; thousands of older, retired people who realized they could escape our Liberal Government 

and our severe winters with one simple move; thousands of farm people caught by the Liberal cost-price 

squeeze and the Liberal Party's total acceptance of the Federal Task Force on Agriculture Report. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — They left, Mr. Speaker, on an average of 86 people every day. It has been 

said and oft repeated by a "ranking" authority in the Liberal Party that population figures are the "acid 

test" of growth. Since Saskatchewan's population is lower now than in 1964 I suppose that the people 

left in Saskatchewan could fairly conclude that the Liberal Government has failed the ―acid test.‖ 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — For a moment, Mr. Speaker, I should like to deal with a situation that was 

rather close to me and that is the situation of oil refineries in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier and his Ministers have experienced fits of unbounded optimism about the oil refining 

industry in the Province of Saskatchewan. In 1964 the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) 

was ―highly excited‖ by the possible development of an oil refinery costing $80 million to $100 million, 

140 miles north of Meadow Lake. There were suitable headlines in the newspapers. No development, 

and later the Minister claimed the press had misquoted him. 

 

In May, 1969 - coincidentally just before the Kelvington by-election - the Premier hinted at a $60 

million heavy oil 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
727 

refinery to be built at Lloydminster, Saskatchewan. There were suitable large headlines in the press. The 

by-election is past - which we won by the way - and the one-year time limit has passed and there is no 

development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — During the time that the CCF and the NDP were in power I recall that all 

three Saskatchewan major oil companies expanded their refining capacities in major ways. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Since we have a Liberal Government the trend has reversed itself. In a very 

short while the Saskatoon oil refinery will cease operations after over 20 years of continuous operation. 

Moose Jaw's largest refinery will retrench its operations with an accompanying reduction in staff 

employed, after operating for a longer period of time. The other, but smaller Moose Jaw refinery 

announced that they would cease operation early in 1971. According to the headlines the Premier was 

incensed to find that the closure of this refinery would fall amid his planned spring election campaign 

and subsequently he must have strong-armed the company into postponing its shutdown to later in 1971 

after his spring or fall re-election. I suspect the Premier is also keeping some other secrets under his hat 

while he prepares to sneak another mandate from the Saskatchewan voters. For example: I have heard, 

and I stated yesterday in this House, from usually reliable sources and I have re-checked my sources, 

Mr. Speaker, and find they are accurate, that far from seeing a refinery built at Lloydminster, the 

Premier presently has learned the news that the Lloydminster refinery is actually considering reducing 

its refining operations after mid-1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — I cannot let this opportunity pass, Mr. Speaker, without saying something 

about the Canada Winter Games. I was quite surprised to hear the Member from Nutana Centre (Mr. 

Estey) and the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) infer that the Member from Riversdale (Mr. 

Romanow) and I and some others on this side of the House were anti-Canada Winter Games. The 

ridiculousness of their charges was obvious because these charges were made before we even rose in 

this House to speak at this Session. Last Monday, Mr. Romanow stated his position when he rose to 

speak in the Budget Debate, saying that he was pleased to have taken part in the presentation ceremonies 

of the games. Mr. Berezowsky from Prince Albert East-Cumberland saw his granddaughter win not one, 

but two medals at the competitions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — The MLA for Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) announced with obvious pleasure 

that a former student of his won a medal at the Games. Finally, Mr. Speaker, I think I probably deserve 

some recognition. I shook hands with the Member for City Park- University (Mr. Charlebois) at least 

five times and that should be worth a bronze medal or some special commendation. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
728 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Seriously, I realize it was somewhat of a coup for Saskatoon to obtain the 

Winter Games and consequently those Saskatoon officials who executed that coup on behalf of 

Saskatoon and Saskatchewan deserve credit. A great deal of credit is due to the volunteers who gave so 

freely of their time and talent to make the Games a success. The athletes from across Canada deserve 

credit for all of their activities conducted in good sportsmanship. The construction of the mountain at 

Blackstrap was bound to be a contentious subject when you consider that this province is reeling under 

the triple blows of major depopulation, economic stagnation and oppressive taxation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — I want the Member from Nutana South to note that I consider the project at 

Blackstrap economically advantageous because of the large infusion of federal financial assistance. 

 

Secondly, I consider the addition of Blackstrap Mountain to be a positive recreational asset to 

Saskatchewan 

 

I cannot observe that Liberal Members demonstrated such an objective assessment of the first ski facility 

we prepared at White Track when we were the Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, they openly and publicly damned that project and were 

supported by at least one editorial in a Saskatchewan daily newspaper which attempted to ridicule and 

downgrade the construction of a worthwhile sports facility. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Members such as the Member for Nutana South and Nutana Centre should 

realize that we do not criticize worthwhile projects even though they were constructed during the term of 

a different government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I get to the topic that is of serious concern to a lot of people in the Province of 

Saskatchewan and that is resource development and a wide, wide credibility gap. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have been asked to practise the kind of 

blind faith in, ;the Liberal private enterprise Government. After a few years of trust in this Liberal 

private enterprise Government, the people of Saskatchewan are becoming concerned and are beginning 

to investigate the basis of their faith in this Liberal type private enterprise Government, not so much 

because we suggest it should be examined but because Saskatchewan people are astounded at the huge 

credibility gaps this Government has been unable to hide. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
729 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Let me give you some concrete examples, Mr. Speaker. For example: it 

promised 80,000 new jobs. What is the performance of this Government? The largest unemployment in 

the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. It promised reduced taxation. Mr. Speaker, we have the 

highest taxation and the highest debt levels in the history of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, it promised to get Saskatchewan moving. All major 

economic indicators are pointing down. 

 

The Government was successful in obtaining a pulp mill to utilize our forest resources. There is no 

doubt, Mr. Speaker, and no one should have any doubts about it, while we were in government we tried 

to obtain a pulp mill. We were not successful because we were not prepared to submit to the terms 

which the present Government willingly submitted to. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Even so, Mr. Speaker, we were successful in obtaining a number of other 

major basic industries which now employ Saskatchewan people. A steel mill, a cement mill, lots of 

them. In addition we successfully built Crown corporations to a level where they now provide valuable 

services to Saskatchewan people and in some cases dividends to the Provincial Treasurer so he may 

make his false claims that he has balanced the Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — With regard to the pulp mill and the credibility gap the Liberals promised 

pollution control. Its performance is this: the Saskatchewan River is polluted more than it ever was 

before. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that Parsons and Whittemore 

Company placed a number of advertisements in newspapers to tell their side of the Prince Albert Pulp 

Mill story. These advertisements appeared about February 4, 1971 to February 8, 1971, and among other 

things they said, in the words of Mr. Landegger, ―It is not a joke when I say that the water we put back 

into the river is much cleaner than the water we take out.‖ The assumption is that the pulp mill effluent 

is clean in the true sense of the word. 

 

After the advertisements, on February 23 this year, two years after the Deputy Premier said the pulp mill 

was not polluting and two weeks after Mr. Landegger said the pulp mill effluent was clean, it was 

announced that a secondary sewage treatment plant costing $1.2 million would be constructed to treat 

the pulp mill effluent. 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Isn't that good: 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Therefore it would appear that the pulp mill effluent 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
730 

was not clean as claimed. In fact, there was added chemical pollution. Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, 

that Saskatchewan people are concerned by the possibility of further pollution in the clean Churchill 

River system if a new mill is constructed in this area with the same Government in charge of our 

resources. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Parsons and Whittemore spent the following sums to pay for their 

advertisements, which we in fact, the Saskatchewan people may be paying for in part, because of our 

involvement in the operations. 

 

In the Saskatoon Star Phoenix for a full page advertisement it paid $669; for a full page advertisement in 

the Leader-Post it paid $744; for a full page advertisement in The Financial Times of Canada it paid 

$1,250; for a full page advertisement in The Toronto Globe and Mail it paid $4,000; for a full page 

advertisement in The Financial Post it paid $4,433, for a total of $11,097. Parsons and Whittemore may 

have placed other advertisements which have not yet come to my attention. The inevitable conclusion is 

that we are being misled by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) as well as some other people as 

regard pollution control. 

 

In the same advertisements. Parsons and Whittemore mention that a Provincial Crown corporation cuts 

pulp wood for delivery and further states ―Pulp wood costs of $18.50 per cord with any losses in this 

operation to be borne equally by the Company and the Government.‖ 

 

Last year's report of the Crown corporation, Saskatchewan Pulpwood Limited, showed that the 

Saskatchewan people absorbed a loss of $629,000 for 1968 and 1969. I also notice that in 1970 

$269,000 more were lost which makes a cumulative total of $898,000, Mr. Speaker. Since we share 

equally in the losses, it is to be assumed that Parsons and Whittemore's loss was also $898,000, in this 

area, which we again share in by virtue of the fact that we own 30 per cent of the shares of the company. 

Of course, these advertisements which appeared in page print did not point out to the public that the 

Government is providing an expensive network of pulp mill roads at a high cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited put out another advertisement in Time Magazine. One of the 

paragraphs reads: 

 

Stands of spruce and pine, once dormant and deteriorating, are now being harvested as carefully 

as the prairie farmer harvests his golden grain farther to the south. 

 

This is the advertisement, Mr. Speaker. The advertisement is misleading in that it shows a huge sweep of 

uncut forest and lake, obviously taken from a tower or an aircraft. The advertisement apparently 

incensed a constituent of mine who brought it to my home last Saturday. He stated the he owns a cabin 

at Candle Lake. He further brought two snapshots taken of an area clear-cut about four years ago 

immediately east of Candle Lake. The snapshots, one of which I shall table, show the area as Prince 

Albert Pulp should have shown to substantiate their claim in the advertisements that ―Stands of spruce 

and pine are now being harvested carefully.‖ One look at the snapshot, Mr. Speaker, 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
731 

will lead you to conclude that there is no way the snapshot would substantiate that quotation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Young trees are lying strewn about on the ground, there is far less cover 

for wildlife and the recreation value is gone for many, many years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Those snapshots, Mr. Speaker, illustrate in my view, a sad commentary on 

the multiple use of our forest. My constituent obviously was upset by this misleading advertisement 

which I understand cost $1,130 to place in Time Magazine. Added to the cost of the other 

advertisements, the total cost would be more than $12,227. Participation in this type of advertisement 

campaign by the pulp company can only lead one to the conclusion that the public is being deliberately 

misled by their own Government, who are being assisted by false advertisements, costing thousands of 

dollars which tell us the water is not polluted and the multiple use of the forest is being practised. 

 

Another subject, Mr. Speaker, that affects the people of my constituency quite severely, is taxation. With 

regard to Liberal election promises, Saskatchewan people will find it difficult, if not impossible to 

believe the Liberal Party seriously intended to reduce taxes, let alone attempt to hold taxation levels in 

some equitable relationship to incomes. Since this Government has come to power the number of 

increased fees, taxes and new taxes has exceeded 1,477, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, which I shall table if the Members so 

wish. It is from a constituent of mine and it was written on January 25, 1971. It reads: 

 

I wish you would remind the Government that it is about time they do something about the 

staggering amount of school taxes the older people living on fixed incomes - in my case the Old 

Age Pension - have to pay. Oh yes, Mr. Thatcher will say, we pay $60 Homeowner Grants, but 

let's look at the facts. I have before me my tax increase for 1964 and 1970. In 1964 my total tax, 

not including local improvement, was $243 and an odd number of cents. School taxes $150. In 

1970, the total tax went up to $386.25 and school tax up to $238.61. A difference of $88.77 in 

school tax alone. 

 

The letter continues: 

 

It makes a pretty picture of Liberal tax reductions. I do not suggest that the taxpayer with 

children should pay more. The Government could find the money some other way. They seem to 

have a lot of it to spend in order to catch more votes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a great many senior citizens in 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
732 

Saskatoon Mayfair in similar predicaments. This Liberal Government has done very little for them. 

Costs for necessary services for our senior citizens have risen sharply under Liberal induced inflation. 

Oh, their Federal-Liberal counterparts recently came through with a magnificent 42 cent increase in the 

Old Age Pension. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — All that increase demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, was that the Liberals are once 

again, too little and too late. Senior citizens from Saskatoon Mayfair, Regina North West, Moosomin, 

Bengough or any other Saskatchewan constituency need increased assistance so they can cope with the 

high cost of living. 

 

With a New Democratic Government senior citizens can be assured that: 1. Deterrent fees will be 

abolished. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — 2. A prescription drug program will be started. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — 3. We will provide hearing aids, eye glasses, dentures, braces and 

wheelchairs at greatly reduced cost. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — 4. We will make Level 4 care an insured service under our Medical Care 

Plan - probably most important. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — These points and others will allow our senior citizens to exist in dignity in 

the province they helped to build. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — In addition to that letter, Mr. Speaker, I received numerous telephone calls 

about lack of jobs, about the welfare programs and the questionable level of assistance, about the 

oppressive taxation. Additionally, I have received numerous representations from people whom I have 

met in the grocery store while shopping or on the street elsewhere in the city of Saskatoon. These people 

are highly dissatisfied with the actions of the Government during the last three years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — They want a change. They feel the earlier they have an opportunity to 

make the change the better they will like it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — What about a change, Mr. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
733 

Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan should be warned that their desire to change the Government is 

something the Liberal Party has deliberately planned to subvert. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — This subversion by the Liberals takes the form of a political gerrymander 

of the constituency boundaries. Each Liberal Member on that side of the Legislature is cheating the 

democratic system because they all voted in favor of that frontal attack on democracy in 1970. Every 

one of them said that it is democratic to have some constituencies with 400 per cent more voters than an 

adjacent constituency yet each constituency only has one Member in this Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will know that a Government which cheats its electorate in the 

fashion that the Liberals have done, must and will be defeated for the sake of the democratic way of life. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Not to mention many other reasons, Mr. Speaker, which I could recite if I 

had time. You may have gathered, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the motion, I will support the 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this Budget we are debating is the 

fourth one to be brought down by the Provincial Treasurer, the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. 

Steuart), and I want to join with others in this House and indeed, the majority of the people in the 

province, in congratulating him for this Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — He has not only balanced this Budget from the 

viewpoint of dollars and cents, but he has balanced it from the viewpoint of priorities for people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — He has expanded the financial aid to municipalities 

and to municipal programs which were very ably outlined to my friends opposite last night by my 

colleague, the Minister from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). We have expansion in direct relief to home owners 

and to property owners in the form of an increased homeowner grant this year. We have expansion in 

dollar assistance to all of our health plans and indeed some new ones which were again outlined very 

ably by my colleague, the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant). And above all, we have expansion in dollar 

assistance to all facets of education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I think you know that this Government 

and 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
734 

government spokesmen pointed out on many occasions that we give and have given education top 

priority. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — Now surely the spending priorities given to education 

in this Budget should make it abundantly clear to the people in the province and indeed to my friends 

opposite that we continue to maintain that objective. And what is more important, we are backing that 

claim up with the necessary dollars to give our people the kind of system they want and the kind of 

system that all of us can be proud of. 

 

In spite of the fact that the past year hasn't been an easy one for this province, this Budget makes 

provisions for further improvement and enrichment in every area of education. From the University 

level to the elementary and secondary level, in special education, in adult training, in school financing 

and school construction. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, Members opposite must agree with this because they 

haven't been able to criticize the figures in this Budget speech on behalf of spending in education. 

 

I want to discuss in some detail, Mr. Speaker, some of the many worthwhile developments in elementary 

and secondary education provided for in this Budget, and for reasons of time I won't be able to go into 

all of them at this time. Continued financial support is contained in the Budget for the construction of 

comprehensive schools now underway in Melville, Weyburn and Regina. This Government's plan of 

comprehensive high schools and comprehensive high school programs was launched shortly after we 

took office, in 1965. Since that time we have a network of 11 comprehensive schools throughout the 

province. This provides today a modern high school program for something over 10,000 students, and 

next year close to 2,000 additional students will be served by the completion of those projects to which I 

referred. 

 

As with any new development, Mr. Speaker, be it in education or industry or elsewhere, there have been 

some problems, I suppose comparable to some degree to the start up costs and the start up difficulties of 

any new industry. But these problems are being overcome and are being worked out. Enrolments are 

going up in the various vocational courses every new school term. These facilities, as everyone is well 

aware, cost a great deal of money to erect, and they cost a great deal of money, as well, to operate. And I 

want to tell the Members of the House, that these buildings with their shops and their equipment are 

being utilized to a greater degree each and every year. And not only by school age students but by 

people of all ages. Because the lights are on in these schools night after night serving hundreds of adults 

who are taking Board sponsored courses or Manpower sponsored courses to upgrade their present skills 

or to learn new skills and hobbies for that matter. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the reasoning 

behind the development of such schools is more valid today in this country than ever before. The 

majority of our high school students will be taking their place in society not as radiologists or as 

chartered accountants but as skilled tradesmen or in the growing retailing and merchandising field or as 

technicians in a wide variety of service industries and others. The comprehensive schools and their 

programs represent a workable philosophy in education that meets practical present day needs and gives 

us programs and facilities to allow for the future. They are schools for students of all interests. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
735 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the reorganization of the high school curriculum which has been 

discussed in earlier debates as well as outside of this House and the development of the comprehensive 

high schools are among the most significant education developments that have taken place in this 

province in many, many years. The capital vote for the construction of comprehensive high schools is 

below last year's vote and for the very obvious reason that the program as such is nearing completion. I 

say, obvious, obvious to almost all except perhaps the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) who is 

not in his seat, I am sorry. But as I gathered from his remarks in this debate earlier, he apparently wants 

us to build schools merely for the sake of building them. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Sounds like Socialism. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — Now I should like to turn for a moment, Mr. Speaker, 

to the provisions in this Budget for school construction other than comprehensive high schools. It's a 

well known fact that in recent years rapid rising building costs has brought the entire question of school 

facilities into sharper focus. The Department together with trustees have been looking at, and utilizing, a 

wider variety of building materials and approaches and techniques than has up to now been made use of 

in school facilities in this province. I think of such materials as steel. We have built some excellent small 

gymnasiums throughout the province for $50,000 to $60,000, built of steel, facilities that are easily 

moved or converted to other uses. 

 

Changing curriculum patterns and new teaching methods such as team teaching have generated the need 

for a variety of classroom sizes. Ironically enough, the physical facilities in many of our schools today 

with their numerous boxlike areas of small classrooms frequently tend to hinder the implementation and 

the development of new teaching methods and indeed more modern and up to date school organizational 

patterns within the school itself. Our emphasis in the planning of school facilities in Saskatchewan has 

been to provide the best possible environment for the best practices in education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget provides for capital assistance to approximately 50 different projects across the 

province being planned by some 30 different school boards all over Saskatchewan representing a total 

estimated value of about $7 million. This is an increase in the normal building program actually carried 

out by boards this past year. Building projects were included in preliminary budgets submitted last fall 

by school boards, and the great majority of these requests are included in this Budget for grant support. 

This $9.1 million construction program for schools will not only support a larger program than last year, 

but it's one more facet and one more aspect of this Government's effort to improve employment 

opportunities in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — In this regard, it might be interesting to note, Mr. 

Speaker, that the last year of the Socialist government they spent approximately $3.5 million in these 

particular sub-vote grants to support school construction. 

 

It gives me a great deal of pleasure at this time to announce 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
736 

a new policy to provide a substantial increase in the capital grants formula. Under the present formula 

which we inherited from our friends opposite, Mr. Speaker, and which I might say is one of the very few 

policies that haven't been revised and expanded and updated under this administration, school boards 

received as low as 5 to 10 per cent of the cost of the project, and the rest had to be raised locally. The 

average ran around 20 per cent. Under this Government's new policy, Mr. Speaker, the minimum will be 

20 per cent with the average being more like 30 per cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — The actual assistance in each case will be related to 

the foundation grant percentage. This policy will apply as of March 1, 1971. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that Members might be interested in a few examples of projects that are proposed 

for this year by the various school boards of the province: (a) A gymnasium to the value of $135,000 is 

planned by the Hudson Bay School Unit to accommodate over 1,000 students, about 440 in high school 

and almost 600 in elementary. It should be interesting to the former Member for Kelsey who was in this 

House earlier today and for all the years that he sat in this House when they were the government - that 

it took this Liberal administration to build schools, to build roads in Hudson Bay and in that whole 

Kelsey constituency. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — (b) A gymnasium for nearly 400 students in the 

growing potash community of Allan, (c) A new open area elementary classroom space to replace a 

dilapidated facility in Blaine Lake. (d) A new elementary school in the city of Moose Jaw to replace the 

building here that is well over 50 years old, and again a city, Mr. Speaker, that has been represented in 

this House by two Members opposite who still sit with us and who did not see fit to renovate those 

buildings in their time of office. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They were sleeping. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — There are two projects here for the Saskatoon Board 

of Education . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Socialist stock taking. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — . . . which were not included in their preliminary 

budget because most Members here are aware the chairman up there doesn't believe in preliminary 

budgets. In fact at times I am not sure he believes in budgets. This Budget here provides for an extension 

to the Caroline Robbins elementary school and the Alvin Buckwold elementary school in that city . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Well, there you are. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — . . . to a total value of something over one half a 

million dollars. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
737 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — A major extension to the Holy Cross High School in 

Saskatoon to the value of $1 million to accommodate increased enrolments in the system in that city. 

 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, there are very few totally new schools in the program as such because many 

school boards are adding library accommodation, science labs, home economic labs, industrial arts and 

open space classrooms, this kind of accommodation. As such, most of the projects are for program 

extension, renovation and additions to existing facilities. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Forward looking. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, perhaps in no other area of this entire 

Budget is there a better illustration of the results of the sensible, practical policies of this Government  

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Very sensible. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — . . . than in the area of school grants and the support 

that is going towards school operating costs. The Opposition's financial critic, the Member for 

Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) in his remarks (still not in his seat) demonstrated his complete lack of 

knowledge in many fields in the course of his remarks in this debate. But I think nowhere did he show 

so clearly his illogical, Socialist mathematics as when he attempted to discuss educational finance and 

educational spending. This Budget provides for over $81 million in operating grants to the schools of the 

province. This will enable school boards in the province, Mr. Speaker, to accomplish two major 

objectives. Firstly, to maintain and indeed improve in most cases, a top quality instructional program. 

Secondly, to do that with no increase in local mill rates. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — This achievement is for the second year in a row 

under this Liberal administration. Mr. Speaker, Department officials are currently engaged in the second 

annual round of budget review with school boards, and it is precisely because this Government initiated 

budget reviews coupled with policies of improved staff utilization that we can do this again this year. I 

had to think, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) that he was 

disappointed and that he complained because costs are not continuing to rise in the school system at the 

rate of $14 million to $15 million a year: He seemed disappointed: Now I could expect that from my 

friend the Member from Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) but I expected the Deputy Leader of the Opposition to 

show some concern and appreciation for the problems of the taxpayers. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Irresponsible. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — I want to remind my friend, the Deputy Leader, that 

he had better get out and talk to some of his NDP supporters across the province, to the farmer for whom 

they have expressed so much concern in this debate, and to the working man for whom they have 

expressed so much concern here. These people will tell them this, that they are glad to see a Government 

that is taking steps in 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
738 

looking at where the education dollar is going. School boards have not set their final budgets for 1971 

but every indication points to two facts. Provincial grants support over 50 per cent of basic costs, and 

that many Boards, as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, will not only be able to hold their mill rate but 

many should be able to lower their mill rate by a mill or two. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — I wish to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to this Government's 

record of achievement in providing extended opportunities for the training of adults in non-university 

programs. This year, 1970- 71 about 8,500 people will have taken a wide variety of training courses at 

institutes and other various centres across the province. The 1971-72 Budget provides for training 

opportunities for an additional 1,500 people. In other words, next year we can look forward to a total 

enrolment, if you like, of approximately 10,000 trainees. And a budget, I might say, to support these 

programs of over $10 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — I think, Mr. Speaker, that the House will be interested 

to compare this figure to the figure of the total trainees accommodated in the last year of my NDP 

friends opposite when they were the government. Did they have 6,500? No they didn't, they didn't even 

have 2,500. They had 2,300 students looked after in 1963-64. And I ask my hon. friend, the union 

Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) who is also out of his seat, to note that figure particularly. 

2,300 trainees only a few short years ago - 6 or 7 years ago - by a party that professes not only to be the 

friend of the working man but one would almost think to listen to them that they invented them. 

 

Where are these expanded opportunities being provided?" The institute at Moose Jaw should have an 

enrolment of something over 2,300, about 600 of these people will be enrolled in two- year technology 

courses at Moose Jaw. The Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences in Saskatoon should accommodate in 

1971-72 something like 3,200 students in a wide range of courses and programs, Mr. Speaker, including 

one new program this year, chemical technology. The Weyburn Vocational Centre will continue to offer 

a variety of trade courses, largely supported by Canada Manpower to a number of people estimated 

about 300. The Regina Vocational Centre will continue to offer courses in occupational English, 

academic upgrading, several other courses to approximately 1,000 people. Programs offered in Prince 

Albert at the vocational centre there will not only be maintained but expanded to a total estimated of 

about 450 for next year. Canada Manpower programs will also be provided at Broadview, Meadow 

Lake, Melfort, North Battleford, Yorkton, Estevan, Lloydminster and Swift Current. A total of 

something over 400 trainees will be accommodated in these various centres in the 1971-72 training year. 

I want to remind the House too, Mr. Speaker, of the $2 million sub-vote in the Department of Labour 

Estimates for the major new third institute that is going to get under way here in Regina. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — It will be under way in approximately two months' 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
739 

time, not later than May 15th as I mentioned in an earlier debate in this House. I know that the Member 

for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) while he has been talking about this project is going to be really 

disappointed, I suggest, when this actually comes about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there has been one area of adult training that has been constantly emphasized by this 

Government it's in the field of upgrading and occupational training for Indian and Métis citizens. This 

year we shall accommodate over 1,500 trainees in a wide variety of programs sponsored at a great 

number of centres from Black Lake and Fond du Lac in the North, as well as in many points in southern 

Saskatchewan, Fort Qu'Appelle, Kamsack, Indian Head and many others. One of the highlights of our 

efforts in this regard is the Cutbank project opened earlier this year and discussed in this debate by the 

Member for Arm River (Mr. McIvor). 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC (Minister of Education): — What about our schools in northern Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker? What about the Northern Areas School Board where there are about 5,000 Indian and 

Métis students in the various centres across the north half of the province. The Budget this year provides 

for $1.3 million to rebuild and extend schools across the North. And I think this figure serves as one 

more illustration of Liberal action and Socialist talking (if indeed another example is needed.) Now I 

said $1.3 million in the forthcoming year. I should like my hon. friend, my good friend from Prince 

Albert East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) to take particular note of this. This compares to a total of 

$1.2 million in all of their 20 years in office. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, such a shocking record by a 

government that professes to be the lovers of all things in education, the great lovers, the great friends of 

the downtrodden and the underprivileged; 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just to conclude. What does this Government provide for students because after all 

that's what the whole enterprise is about, the student? It provides for the handicapped student better 

opportunities than ever before in this province, including transportation assistance for those students in 

larger urban centres, Regina, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. It provides for the students in private high 

schools, Mr. Speaker, an increase in grant support by $25, from $110 to $135. This policy in support of 

private high schools was initiated by the Premier and this Government a few years ago. This Budget 

provides new facilities for dozens of schools across the province. It provides dozens of new laboratory 

programs, new classroom spaces, new school programs, new language programs in schools from one 

end of the province to the other. It provides for the continuation of a completely free text book policy for 

grades one to twelve which was initiated last year. Another Liberal first. 

 

For the university student, this Budget provides a $1.5 million item for a bursary program. This, Mr. 

Speaker, is not all new money, and we never pretended that it was. But, I suggest. Sir, it is a substantial 

increase over last year. This Budget also provides for the provision of 1,000 or more jobs in the Civil 

Service for students. It provides an item in the Department of Labour Estimates of $1.5 million to 

stimulate over 1,000 additional job opportunities for students. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
740 

Mr. Speaker, in this respect Liberals believe that the great majority of our students prefer the opportunity 

to ear their own way. The majority of students do not want handouts. And I am convinced that the 

combination of these two programs for post- secondary students, the bursary plan and the employment 

program, represents real and tangible assistance to Saskatchewan students. 

 

Because this Budget provides for a continuation of progressive Liberal policies and achievements in 

education; because it provides for an increasing share of school costs to be borne by the province; 

because it provides for expansion in training opportunities in university and non-university courses; 

because it extends provincial library service to thousands more people in rural Saskatchewan; and 

because it contains so many provisions for increased and improved opportunities for all of our people, 

Mr. Speaker, in this province, I will obviously be supporting the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN (Minister of Labour): — Members of the staff of the Department of Labour 

along with many people associated with the labor movement and business were saddened last week with 

the sudden death of John Elchyson. For the past ten years John Elchyson was the Chief Industrial 

Relations Officer for the Department. He first joined the Department in 1952 as a Labour Standards 

Officer. John Elchyson was highly respected by all who had the opportunity to know and work with 

him. I am sure all Members of this House would join with me in expressing our deepest feelings of 

sympathy to the Elchyson family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget brought down last Friday as we all know was a balanced one. It provides more 

direct benefits to our people through new programs and expanded programs. The people of 

Saskatchewan, I am sure, appreciate the fact that there are no new tax increases. This is a remarkable 

feat when comparisons are made with other governments on this continent. It is even more remarkable 

when one realizes that school boards will be able in some cases to reduce the mill rate because of greatly 

increased education grants. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, regardless of the fact that the NDP belittle the Homeowner Grant, the people do 

appreciate the $10 increase making the total grant $70 per home owner. Homecoming '71, Mr. Speaker, 

will inject even more money into the pockets of our people. This will be done in two ways, Mr. Speaker; 

one - direct Government grants for approved community projects, and secondly, by attracting thousands 

of former residents to visit Saskatchewan this summer. These people will spend millions of dollars here. 

 

It was typical of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, when they attacked this program. They never were concerned 

about the private operators engaged in the tourist industry. Who are these people, Mr. Speaker? First of 

all they are employers, secondly they are taxpayers. They are service station operators, they are motel 

and hotel operators, they are suppliers, they are restaurant operators, they are outfitters, they are guides, 

they are many people. They are people who are happy that the Government embarked on this program. 

They are people who were disgusted when they read and heard NDP spokesmen knock this program and 

describe 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
741 

it as a political gimmick. 

 

The NDP, Mr. Speaker, are not only bankrupt of ideas but they refuse to support and promote programs 

initiated by this Government that will bring real and immediate benefits to all the people of 

Saskatchewan. The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has been quoted as saying that he would enjoy 

fighting an election based on this Budget. I agree wholeheartedly with him. The NDP, Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of this Budget and the six previous budgets brought down by this Government are defeated long 

before they get in this campaign. The people of Saskatchewan know that the Member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) had a difficult job when he was given the role of being the Budget critic. 

This Budget that he found very difficult to criticize is one that will accelerate the economy of 

Saskatchewan to a new high. The massive amount of money being injected through public works will 

lower Saskatchewan's unemployment rate. That unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker, is already the lowest 

one in Canada. 

 

I was appalled, Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the remarks made by the NDP financial critic. It has 

always been my understanding that the Opposition financial critic when speaking in the Budget Debate 

would devote his time discussing the Budget. This he did not. He spoke at great length, that we all 

know, but let me remind you what he said or talked on. He discussed corporation lawyers and Izzy 

Asper. He talked about Senators Argue and Sparrow and he talked about Prime Minister Trudeau 

signing autographs - rather enviously I suppose and today for probably more than one reason. He quoted 

the Provincial Treasurer, not on remarks made by him on matters dealing with the Budget but on 

remarks made by the Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) concerning Manitoba dealing with 

political matters not related to this Budget. 

 

He went on, Mr. Speaker, to read the NDP election platform. This he need not have done because most 

of us are aware of the early history of the CCF and the Regina Manifesto. The platform presented by the 

NDP to the people of Saskatchewan a few weeks ago was almost identical to the one the CCF used in 

1938 when they elected five Members to this House and I suggest they will be lucky to win that many 

seats again. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN (Minister of Labour): — His speech, Mr. Speaker, contained some amazing 

statements. He referred to the sum of $8.3 million as a "Measly and paltry sum of money." I point out, 

Mr. Speaker, $8.3 million is seven times as much money as his party spent on capital public works in 

1961-62 fiscal year. A year when unemployment was even greater than it is now. How would he 

describe $1.2 million, when he has used the word paltry and measly? $8.3 million, Mr. Speaker, is more 

than his party spent on the entire agriculture budget both capital and ordinary in the years 1961, '62, '63 

or '64. He might, Mr. Speaker, refer to the sum of $8.3 million as a paltry and measly amount of money 

but I remember one political who scoffed at $1 million and his party was defeated in that election. Just 

as the NDP will be defeated once again by people who do respect and appreciate what $8 million means. 

In short, Mr. Speaker, we did not get an analysis or a commentary on the Budget from the Member 

opposite. One thing we did get from the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) was an insipid label. 

He referred to the Budget as a ―Bogus Budget.‖ He also said Liberal 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
742 

budgets of the past would qualify for the same label. I must remind him, Mr. Speaker, that it was Liberal 

budgets of the past seven years that: (1) initiated Homeowner Grants; (2) allowed the use of tax-free gas 

in farm trucks; (3) a Liberal budget not a bogus budget abolished the mineral tax on farm lands; (4) it 

was a Liberal budget and not a bogus budget that introduced equalization grants for our municipalities; 

(5) it was a Liberal budget and not a bogus budget that introduced snow removal grants; (6) it was a 

Liberal budget that introduced grid road maintenance grants and not a bogus budget; (7) it was a Liberal 

budget that introduced grants to help meet the cost of police protection, not a bogus budget; (8) it was a 

Liberal Government and a Liberal budget that provided grants to aid in diversification of agriculture and 

not a bogus budget. I ask, Mr. Speaker, are these achievements to be called "Bogus?" 

 

It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that thousands of miles of highway have been hard surfaced in the past seven 

years as a direct result of Liberal budgets and not bogus budgets. It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that eight 

major bridges have been undertaken as a result of Liberal budgets and not bogus budgets. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN (Minister of Labour): — It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that under Liberal 

budgets that the number of beds in special care homes have more than doubled. Is this a bogus 

statement? No, of course not. Mr. Speaker, I have listed but very few of the many achievements and 

accomplishments that have taken place here in Saskatchewan as a direct result of not "Bogus budgets", 

but Liberal budgets. This Budget, Mr. Speaker, like the six other budgets brought down by this 

Government is to be commended and applauded. Time will prove this to be true. Time will prove this to 

be true. Time will also prove that the speech given by the financial critic is the bogus one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to provide further details of the jobs for students plan mentioned in the 

Budget Speech delivered by the Hon. D. G. Steuart, the Member from Prince Albert West in the 

Legislature on Friday, last. It has been forecast that many hundreds of students will have difficulty this 

year in locating summer jobs. In order to afford these young people the opportunity to gain valuable 

work experience and acquire the financial resources to further their education, the Government of 

Saskatchewan will establish a student employment program, applicable to both Provincial Government 

service and farm employment. The plan is intended to aid students in post-secondary institutions who 

are seeking temporary employment for the summer months. It is anticipated that at least 2,000 student 

jobs will be provided under the program. The sum of $1.5 million has been made available for this 

purpose. To be known as the Student Temporary Employment Program or STEP, the program will offer 

incentives in the form of subsidies to farmers to encourage them to hire students for temporary jobs. The 

amount of the subsidy will re- present 50 per cent of the wages attached to each job filled by a university 

or technical institute student, up to a maximum monthly Government contribution of $150 per student. 

The subsidy will be paid for three months, beginning May 1st. At the end of this period, it is hoped that 

farmers will be in a position to keep these employees on independently until classes resume in the fall. 

The plan will be administered by the Department of Labour, through a special STEP office set up within 

the 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
743 

Department for this purpose. This office will be responsible for: (1) the processing of applications to 

participate in the plan, which will be received from employers and students; (2) the placement of student 

applicants in employment created under the program; and (3) the handling of employers' claims for 

reimbursement of the portion of the student employees' wages to be paid by the Government. 

 

Application forms are now being assembled by the Department of Labour and will be made available 

shortly. Student application forms may be obtained from the Students' Representative Councils of 

Regina and Saskatoon campuses of the University of Saskatchewan, the Technical institutes in Moose 

Jaw and Saskatoon, or from the offices of the Department of Labour located in various centres in the 

province. Students applying for farm employment should complete the special STEP form designed for 

this purpose. Those wishing to apply for a position in Provincial Government service are requested to 

use the regular Public Service Commission application form. Farmers who intend to participate in the 

program are asked to contact their Agriculture Representatives, RM offices or the Department of 

Labour. The deadline for receipt of farmers' applications is April 15th. To be successful, the Student 

Temporary Employment Program must have the wholehearted support of our farmers. May I ask farm 

employers and potential employers to give every possible consideration to the creation of jobs for our 

young people this summer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN (Minister of Labour): — By doing so, you will be giving them a chance to 

show what they can do and you will enable them to meet the cost of continuing their studies in the fall. I 

am certain that you will receive full value for your investment and that the students you take on will 

more than compensate through their energy and willingness for anything which may be lacking in terms 

of experience . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened with a great deal of interest on Wednesday to, what I suppose what he thought 

was logical reasoning by the Hon. Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) when he criticized 

the Student Temporary Employment Program. 

 

There was just one small difficulty, Mr. Speaker. He used his logic to proceed from unwarranted 

assumptions to totally false conclusions. In the first place, he seems to have the notion that the program 

will be of six months' duration. In actual fact as I have just pointed out, the subsidized portion of the 

program will apply for three months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has also asserted that the students placed in employment under the program will be the 

lowest paid workers in North America and that they will^, be earning less than $1 per hour. This is not 

so at all. Those students working in Government Departments and Crown corporations will receive the 

salary normally attached to the positions they fill. 

 

I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that it will be far in excess of the minimum wage. The subsidized portion 

of the program has been set up with a view to providing students working outside Government service 

with a salary of $300 per month, half of which will be paid by the Government. Again, this is well above 

the minimum wage. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
744 

The Hon. Member is also under the delusion that the student employed in this way will not have 

anything left over after paying room and board. Well, in the case of Government employees, the salaries 

to be paid are regular Government salaries and the student should be able to save an ample amount over 

and above his expenses. The expenses, if he is away from his office headquarters naturally like all 

Government employees, are provided. 

 

As for students working on farms it is hoped that room and board would be provided, which means that 

the student should be able to save for his education almost all of the money he earns. 

 

May I respectfully suggest that instead of rushing to criticize the student temporary employment 

program, the Hon. Member would have been better advised to wait for the relevant details before 

passing judgment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN (Minister of Labour): — The student worker will also receive employment 

experience which will prove invaluable for the future and which cannot really be obtained in the 

classroom. In a great many cases the program will permit the student to return to school in the fall, 

which will be impossible if he does not earn enough in the summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this one program indicates why I feel that as a Member of this House I should vote against 

the amendment and support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, first of all it is a pleasure for me to 

participate in this debate today. It is rather unusual on the last day of the Budget Debate to find that we 

have been in the Session of the Saskatchewan Legislature for almost three weeks and instead of having a 

Throne Speech and a Budget Speech we have had a debate of political philosophies. Socialism versus 

Free Enterprise. Never have the people of Saskatchewan had a more clear-cut choice in the next 

Provincial election than they will have in this coming election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Never have two political parties stood at more 

opposite ends of the pole than the Saskatchewan Liberal Government and the NDP Socialists. This 

Session of the Legislature has witnessed the most vicious attack on foreign investment, foreign capital, 

resource development, job creation, that has ever been unleashed in the history of Canada. ^Speaker 

after speaker, man after man, individual after individual, has stood on their feet and attacked free 

enterprise and private investment. Never have two men, Blakeney and Romanow, ever changed the 

direction of a political party as have these two apostles of Marx and Lenin. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Never in a period of six months has a political 

party jumped from a moderate Socialist left wing labor party to an 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
745 

extreme left wing Socialist political philosophy. Blakeney and Romanow, with the ghost of Don 

Mitchell, with the ghost of Professor Watkins, the Waffle movement, breathing down their necks, have 

surrendered to their demands, have given up personal convictions and unhappily led their party down the 

road of state control and state ownership of all our resources, our land and our industry. Never was this 

more apparent than in the reply of the Budget Critic. Never in my experience in this House have I seen a 

speech so void of substance, so shallow in content, so completely lacking in knowledge and 

understanding of the whole financial process of Government. In his haste to promote his Socialist's 

goals, he forgot to do his homework. His arguments were so ridiculous that in some cases they were 

almost laughable. 

Let me examine in depth some of the criticisms of the Budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, his theme was and I 

quote: 

 

This Budget is a Bogus Budget. 

 

To substantiate his argument he used two factors, the first was the principle of equalization payments 

and let me quote the Budget Critic: 

 

Do you know how they balanced the Budget? $70.6 million from the Federal Liberals. The 

Liberal boys have had to come in and bail out their Liberal friends in Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what did his seatmate, Mr. Blakeney, say when he was the Budget Critic back in 1967 

when equalization payments were going down? I quote: 

 

This area of Federal-Provincial relations is absolutely crucial in measuring the competence of a 

province in this area, the Government Opposite has struck out. They didn't even hit a foul ball. 

 

When equalization payments were going down, Blakeney says that we were poor negotiators, but when 

they go up Romanow says, ―Those terrible Federal Liberals are bailing us out.‖ 

 

What unmitigated stupidity. Everyone knows that fiscal transfers have been an integral part of budgeting 

in all provinces since 1948. Under the NDP in 1963-64 they received $51.4 million in equalization 

payments, representing 28 per cent of their total budget. This year equalization payments represent 15 

per cent of the 1971 Budget. Were the Federal boys bailing out the Socialists in 1963? That argument, 

Mr. Speaker, is as phony as a $4 bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — The second argument he gave for a Bogus 

Budget was that the profits from Crown corporations were used to balance the Budget. We heard the 

Member from May fair (Mr. Brockelbank) say the same thing today. Also from the Member, the former 

Mayor (Mr. Baker) and every NDP speaker time after time. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we put $16 million into the consolidated revenues. The only thing different is that we 

only put 50 per cent of the profit in, while the NDP put in 100 per cent. 

 

Let me illustrate the difference. Here are the transfers 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
746 

from the Saskatchewan Telephones from 1960 to 1964; 1960 - $1,955,000, 100 per cent profit; 1961 - 

$3,253,000, 100 per cent profit; 1962 - $3,670,000, 100 per cent profit; 1963 - $4,158,000, 100 per cent 

profit. When we became the Government we reduced this to 50 per cent and gave the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 50 per cent for growth and expansion. 

 

What about the Power Corporation? Well, Mr. Speaker, this is another story. The Socialists couldn't 

make enough profit on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to contribute anything to the consolidated 

revenues. Their inefficient, socialistic management was incapable of making a decent profit. Their profit 

was a little over 1 per cent of the total investment. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation is without 

question one of the great success stories of the Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Let me tell our Socialist friends about the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation since 1964: the electricity supplied up to 2 1/2 times; gas consumption 

doubled; sales revenue up 90 per cent; profits up 40.0 per cent; equity owned by the Saskatchewan 

people from 8 per cent to 19 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, all this was done with over 100 less employees 

and without raising the power rates. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation this year will contribute $10 million to the consolidated revenues and still leave double the 

amount that was ever provided by the NDP for its own growth and expansion. 

 

Another argument by Mr. Romanow that is as phony as a $4 bill. But the real humor, Mr. Speaker, is in 

his description of these two public utilities and let me quote: 

 

They are putting into the coffers of the public from the Crown corporations a total of $16.1 

million from those big, bad bogus Crown corporations that the CCF put in. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the biggest joke of all. Old Romanow would take credit for the sun rising if he 

thought it would get him a vote. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation was formed in 1929, the 

Saskatchewan Department of Telephones in 1913 and originally set up in 1908. These two public 

utilities were established before anyone even heard of the Socialists. 

 

Well just to refresh your mind - I'll tell you about a few of the CCF Crown corporations. How many of 

you remember the box factory? The shoe factory? The tannery? The fish board? The lumber mill and all 

the other Socialist nightmares that cost the people of Saskatchewan millions of dollars? They lost 

millions of dollars. Do you remember the shining example of the great Socialist mismanagement - the 

Guarantee and Fidelity Company that suffered $3.5 million loss and to cover up they transferred profits 

from the general insurance fund to show a false profit. 

 

Yes, these same CCF Crown corporations paid no interest on capital from the Treasury, concealed 

deficits in other government departments. Yes, we do remember those big, bad bogus CCF 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
747 

Crown corporations. That distortion of truth, that inaccuracy is also as phony as a $4 bill. 

 

Next the great Budget Critic outlined his second reason for calling this Budget a Bogus Budget and I 

quote: 

 

We all know what happened after the election in 1968, ‗Why,‘ he said, ‗the sales tax went up 25 

per cent.‘ 

 

Well I want to tell the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) that Socialists look alike, they act alike 

and they are alike whether they are in the Province of Manitoba or in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let's take a look at what Mr. Schreyer did the day after he was elected, in the very first session. He 

raised personal income taxes to 39 per cent, the highest in Canada. He raised corporation tax to 13 per 

cent, the highest in Canada. They are now talking about raising the sales tax. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — What about the health tax? 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Oh, it is still $25 or $30 higher than in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. Don't ever kid yourself. Yes, Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba after a little over one 

year of Socialism they have the highest taxed province in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — What was Saskatchewan like under the 

Socialists? Well, Mr. Speaker, my friend from the constituency of Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) outlined the 

unbelievable tax increase of the NDP in 1961 and 1962. Never in Saskatchewan's history were we hit so 

hard. Let me review them for you: 2 cents on gasoline; 5 cents on diesel fuel; increased liquor taxes; 1 

cent on corporation tax; 6 per cent on income tax; 2 cents on education and health tax. This was in 1961 

right after the election of 1960. The Saskatchewan people became the highest taxed people in Canada. 

Under the Socialists in Saskatchewan, we were the highest taxed citizens of Canada and under the 

Socialists in Manitoba, they are the highest taxed people in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — No, Mr. Member for Riversdale you better not 

try to sell that bill of goods to the Saskatchewan people because everyone in this province knows the tax 

record of the Socialists. Also he forgot to tell the people a few other things about 1968. 

 

When we became the Government in 1964 we had the highest sales tax in Canada and in 1970 we have 

the lowest. Yes, from the highest to the lowest. The sales tax in Saskatchewan is 5 per cent. It is exactly 

the same as it was in 1962 after seven years of Liberal Government. 

 

The Provincial income tax surcharge is the same as it was in 1962 after seven years of Liberal 

Government. The Provincial surcharge on corporation tax is the same as it was in 1962 after seven years 

of Liberal Government. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
748 

Mr. Speaker, this Liberal Government has a record in the field of taxation and balanced Budgets that the 

NDP could never equal. The Socialists have proved that they gouge more out of the taxpayer's pocket 

than any other single political party in the history of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the most unbelievable, distorted statements that the Budget Critic made were related 

to oil and mineral production. Let me quote his remarks: 

 

Oil production since 1964 under the Liberals has seen a steady decline - under the Liberals it has gone 

down, down, down. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, he said, ―Why in 1964 oil production went up 14 per cent.‖ I have never heard so 

much garbage in my life. I want to remind Mr. Romanow and the Socialists opposite, that it was in 1964 

that the people of Saskatchewan kicked them out. The NDP were the Government in 1964 and for that 

fiscal year for exactly 22 days and then another 30 days they stole. 

 

In 1964 when the Socialists were kicked out the oil industry flooded into Saskatchewan and the greatest 

increase in oil production in the history of this Province took place. 

 

In one year when the Socialists were kicked out oil production jumped from 71.3 million barrels to 81.3 

million barrels. What has occurred in oil production since 1964? In 1970 oil production was at 89.5 

million barrels, up from 71.3 million in 1963. A total of 21 million barrels more each year than under the 

highest year of the NDP. Of all the oil produced in the Province of Saskatchewan since oil was first 

discovered in the 1930s, 51 per cent of this total was produced in the last six years. In the past six years, 

more oil has been produced than in the past 25 years. Of the total revenue accruing to the Province of 

Saskatchewan since oil was first discovered, 50 per cent was accrued in the past six years. 

 

Why did the Member for Riversdale not state these facts? Another argument that is as phony as a $4 bill. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, he turned to metals and let me quote his remarks: 

 

What about metals? Sure we were going to have a big boost in this new Saskatchewan in metal 

production. Is there an increase there? No spark and no priming of the pump, down $200,000, other 

minerals down $1,000. 

 

Imagine, Mr. Speaker, down $1,000. Of all the silly, nit-picking I have ever heard of. Is this the total 

substance of his argument? Of all the subjects that the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) should 

have stayed away /from, is hard rock mining. Of all the industries that point to 2^0 years of Socialist 

stagnation, it is in the field of hard rock mining. 

 

What are the facts? The sad and dismal story of the Socialists is that in 1944 when they took office, 

Saskatchewan was producing 2,726,000 ounces of base metals - by 1963 it was reduced to 729,000 

ounces. But that is only a part of the story. It all came from one mine. Where was that mine located? In 

the town of Flin Flon in the Province of Manitoba, the Hudson Bay Mining Company. The main office 

and all the major works are in 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
749 

Manitoba. They had one shaft sunk near Creighton that was there long before anyone ever heard of the 

Socialists. 

 

The Socialists had nothing to do with establishing this mine and were unable to encourage any other 

development in the Precambrian Shield. It is a story that would shake the faith of any Socialist, no 

investment, no exploration, no development, nothing but 20 years of Socialist stagnation. 

 

Look at it today, the North is humming. In 1963 the last year the Socialists were in power there were a 

handful of mining companies. Less than one quarter of a million was being spent in the North. In 1970 

under a Liberal Government, there were 150 major mining companies in our North, with a total 

expenditure of close to $10 million. Go to Athabasca, go to LaRonge, go to Uranium City and see the 

interest and the exploration. We anticipate from $12 million to $15 million being spent this year. The 

exciting Wollaston Lake uranium discovery holds the promise of our Northland finally reaching its 

potential. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, if the Member from Riversdale ever misrepresented the truth, it was in his comments 

on mineral production. Another argument that is as phony as a $4 bill. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, he turned to agriculture. After listening to him preach about federal agriculture 

problems for exactly 31 minutes - 31 minutes on the Task Force Report on the LIFT Program and 

anything but the Province of Saskatchewan's responsibilities. I have come to the conclusion he couldn't 

plant a garden in his back yard. I want to tell the Members opposite that the farmers of Saskatchewan 

know that Premier Ross Thatcher and this Government do not hesitate to stand up for the prairie 

farmers, whether it is the Federal Government, Wheat Board or any other organization. 

 

Then he got to the real nub of his message, and he gave us the Socialist answer, 'a land bank.' The 

Socialists' answer "to the agricultural problems is for the state to purchase the land. The NDP will then 

lease it back to the farmer. You know, Mr. Speaker, Socialists the world over have been trying to gain 

control over the agricultural land as the first step to a complete Socialist State. The Russians did it, the 

Chinese Communists did it, Castro did it, the East Germans did it. Every Socialist state has at some time 

attempted to control and seize the farmers' land. We are all aware, Mr. Speaker, of the young NDY, of 

the Waffle Movement, and their demands that the NDP in the Province of Saskatchewan own the 

farmers' land. How could the NDP accomplish this? Well, Mr. Speaker, it is now obvious, the 'land 

bank' is the Saskatchewan Socialists' idea of how to gain control and ownership of the Saskatchewan 

farmers' land. There isn't a farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan who can't remember the old 

operation of the Lands Branch by the Socialists prior to 1964. Remember the Czar of that Branch, his 

name was Elchuck. Before any farmer could have a lease he had to have NDP stamped right on his 

forehead, he had to pass the Socialist political blood test. Now let me tell you, the farmers of 

Saskatchewan will keep their cotton picking fingers off their land. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Don't ever worry. But, Mr. Speaker, what was 

the real message of the financial critic, what was he trying to sell 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
750 

the people of Saskatchewan? What was behind his whole speech? It was pure unadulterated Socialism. 

Never in annals of this Legislature or any Legislature in the country have we witnessed a more vicious, 

hate-filled, deliberate attack on any single enterprise, than the attack by the Member for Riversdale and 

the other Members opposite on the Prince Albert pulp mill and the proposed Athabasca mill. We have 

also witnessed the most deliberate and conscious threat to the entire potash industry in the NDP 

platform. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — What is the cause of this vicious and deliberate 

attack? Was it because of recent actions of the pulp mill? No, Mr. Speaker, because it originated from 

the day the pulp mill was announced. Was it because they failed to live up to their agreements? No, Mr. 

Speaker, the Prince Albert pulp mill has honored every agreement it has made with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Was it because of their use of our resources? No, 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) outlined their very progressive reforestation 

program. Was it because it failed to benefit the people of Saskatchewan? No, Mr. Speaker, I don't have 

to enumerate, again the tremendous benefits to the people of Saskatchewan in wages, in standard of 

living, in stumpage fees, in taxes, in employment. Was it because of pollution? No, Mr. Speaker, it 

started long before the mill was even in operation. We recognize that pollution is a danger, but the 

Prince Albert pulp mill is now putting in a secondary pollution system, at a cost of $1.2 million, that will 

commence operation before the end of this year. Our experts indicate to us that when this anti-pollution 

unit is installed, and the city of Prince Albert completes the sewage treatment plant, the river will be 

cleaner than it has been for over 50 years. If every industry and every pulp mill and every plant in 

Canada gave this kind of co-operation to governments across Canada, we should soon control the 

pollution problem in this country. 

 

What then was the reason for this vicious and deliberate attack? The answer is obvious. First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, the Socialists recognize that their biggest failure has always been their inability to develop 

Saskatchewan's Northland. They must destroy any political advantage that the Liberals might gain for 

any progress in the North. But more important, they hate American capital, they hate free enterprise, 

they hate private initiative. 

 

Then they turn to the potash industry. Once again their hatred of private investment became apparent, 

and this, Mr. Speaker, I cannot understand. The potash industry is not just American capital, it is not just 

foreign capital, the potash mines represent American capital, yes, European capital, yes, and Canadian 

capital. Mr. Speaker, the stupidity of the proposition is beyond explanation. The problem in the potash 

industry is not one of production; the problem in the potash industry is marketing. Under some of the 

biggest sales organizations in the world we still have to have pro-rationing and they can only sell a small 

portion of their supply. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
751 

AN HON. MEMBER: — The NDP don't understand marketing: 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — That's right! Yet here in Saskatchewan, where 

the Socialists couldn't run a two-bit box factory, they now threaten to take this billion dollar industry 

over. We remember that fiasco of those Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, they couldn't even make a 

decent profit out of Crown corporations, even though they had a complete government monopoly within 

the Province of Saskatchewan. Now they ask the citizens of this Province to let them take over a billion 

dollar industry. But the real tragedy is that they have created an atmosphere of suspicion and doubt and 

fear among the investment community. Who will be the next to fall under the Socialist list for state 

control and state control ownership? Will it be the hard rock miners? Will it be the oil industry? Will it 

be the manufacturing plants? We know it is going to be the farmers' land. What unbelievable hypocrisy, 

in one breath they cry out for the unemployed, and the next breath, they are going to kill the goose that 

lays the golden egg. 

 

In Saskatchewan and in Canada, the most important single item to get the economy moving is to give 

confidence to the investment community. The Socialists have destroyed this for themselves in 

Saskatchewan. They have surrendered every vestige of common sense, to the extreme left-wing segment 

of their party, the wafflers. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this Session has been a confrontation, the class for 

political philosophies. On one side, Blakeney and Romanow and all those Socialists preaching anti- 

Americanism, anti-investment, anti-pulp mill, anti-potash industry, anti-everything, but state control and 

state ownership. On the other side, the Liberal Party led by Ross Thatcher, preaching the need for 

expansion, investment, development, job opportunities. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Socialists 

opposite that we on this side of the House welcome this confrontation, because we welcome the 

opportunity to fight state control and state -ownership in this House and in the election campaign that is 

coining. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Believe me we will carry the fight against state 

ownership and state control in every town, every community and in every constituency in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes 

to get away from politics and talk about the Department of Welfare. One of the major impacts of the 

economic slowdown across Canada has been the increase in welfare expenditures. The increase has not 

been related to one province, or to one region of the country, but to every province in every region of 

Canada. Unemployment figures indicate that there are more Canadians looking for work in 1970 than 

for many years. Every province has experienced major over-expenditures in their appropriated public 

assistance budget. Saskatchewan is no exception. Let me indicate the scope of the problem across 

Canada and particularly Western Canada. The Province of Alberta according to the Globe and Mail of 

January 21, 1971, and I quote: ―Alberta Raises Welfare Budget $14.1 million.‖ 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
752 

The Alberta Cabinet yesterday approved special warrants which will increase the province's 1970-71 

welfare budget to $55.3 million from $41.2 million. 

 

In the Vancouver Sun, Wednesday, January 20, 1971: "Gagliardi Admits $30 million Overspent by 

Department." 

 

Rehabilitation Minister Phil Gagliardi said Tuesday, his Department had exceeded its budget by 

more than $30 million. 

 

Let me point to the biggest and richest province in Canada, Ontario. According to the Ottawa Journal, 

January 20, 1971, I quote: 

 

Regional forecast - $18 million welfare bill seen for 1971. Regional government can expect a 

whopping $18 million welfare bill this year, its share of the darkening cross-Canada 

unemployment dilemma. 

 

Now let's look to that Socialist Mecca to the East, the Province of Manitoba. According to the Winnipeg 

Free Press, Wednesday January 20, 1971, I quote: 

 

Jobless crisis, welfare office a Times Square. Winnipeg welfare department is being swamped as 

never before this winter. Men, women and children sit jammed in rows of benches on both sides 

of long lines of people awaiting service at the front counter. 

 

This is Manitoba, the Socialist Mecca: Then later in the same article: 

 

Welfare administrators naturally are distressed as they try to stretch limited staff and resources to 

cope with the increasing demand. 

 

And in another article from the Winnipeg Free Press, January 16, I quote: 

 

Unemployment welfare crisis. Mayor Steve Juba has called an emergency meeting of Winnipeg 

City Council for 10:00 a.m. Monday to deal with the problems of rising welfare and of 

unemployment. Winnipeg Welfare Director, R. H. Hooper, has told the city that welfare costs to 

the city rose 50 per cent in 1970. There was a 34 per cent increase in the number of people on 

welfare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 

Saskatchewan's unemployment rate has had the effect of keeping our over-expenditures below the other 

provinces. This is nevertheless small consolation to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. The total expenditure 

under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan was budgeted at $27,787,000 for the 1970-71 fiscal year. Our 

latest estimates indicate that we shall spend $34,300,000 for a total over-expenditure of $6,513,000. This 

will result in a net cost to the Saskatchewan taxpayer of $3,256,000. In analyzing the expenditures the 

comparative caseload figures for 1969-70 are as follows: 

 

December 1969 payroll, 14,438 cases - 33,075 persons; Regional Services Account, 3,360 - 9,523 

persons; vouchers 1,438 - 2,859 persons compared to December 1970 of 14,853 cases - 34,780 people 

on the payroll; Regional Services Account 5,669 - 16,069 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
753 

persons; vouchers 1,726 - 3859 people. It is important to note that in analyzing these statistics, these are 

a summary of individual payments. The Regina Services and voucher payments indicate payment to the 

same people, because they relate to emergency and special needs. The table indicates a small increase in 

our payroll or long-term cases but a dramatic increase in our Regional Services Account. The Regional 

Services Account is the method of payment used for short-term or employable persons. 

 

The two areas of Saskatchewan that have experienced the major problems have been the cities of 

Saskatoon and Regina. In the city of Regina we budgeted for an expenditure of $5,780,000, and we 

anticipate that we could be over-expended by $2 million. This reflects an increase in the combined 

payroll and Regional Services Account caseload from 3,428 in December of 1969 to 3,851 in December 

of 1970. 

 

In the Saskatoon region we budgeted for an expenditure of $6,196,000 and we anticipate an 

over-expenditure of $1.5 million. 

 

In assessing the cause of increased welfare costs, several significant factors stand out: 

 

1. Anticipated increase resulting from a 10 per cent increase in food and clothing allowances of 

one year ago. 

 

2. In addition, the 8 per cent increase in special-care home rates have had a substantial impact on 

costs. The increasing number of special-care beds in Saskatchewan will continue to take a 

substantial portion of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan budget. The total cost of this program is 

now approximately $6 million. 

 

3. The employment situation has had a major impact on the estimated over-expenditure. Close to 

4,000 employable people were on the caseload as of January 1. 

 

4. The four-bushel quota of the last crop year forced many farmers to apply for short-term or 

emergency assistance. 

 

5. The construction strike of last spring and summer had a disastrous effect on many working 

people. Not only did it prevent hundreds of working people from finding jobs in the construction 

industry during the strike, but it prevented many construction workers from qualifying for 

unemployment insurance benefits this winter. In addition, others found their benefits cut short. 

They soon absorbed their entitlement and found no alternative but public assistance. 

 

6. The increasing use of the special needs section of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan is 

escalating costs. This section of the Act provides for essential household furnishings and repair, 

educational expenses, special rehabilitation and clothing needs, moving costs and funerals. 

 

7. Another significant factor in assessing Saskatchewan welfare costs is the number of registered 

Indians leaving the reserves and coming to the population centres. We estimate 1,100 persons per 

year are leaving the reservations. The majority of these people become 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
754 

welfare recipients and are high cost cases. We estimate it costs the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan over 

$600,000 per year to meet the needs of these people. 

 

We consider this movement off the reserves as healthy and essential. However, Mr. Speaker, it stresses 

the importance of our Indian and Métis Department and the need to assist them in their relocation. It is 

absolutely essential to help them find jobs, improve their education and to assist them in integrating into 

the community. 

 

In contrast to the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan child welfare costs are under-expended by some 

$76,000. The approved budget for 1970-71 was $3,160,000 and the estimated expenditure is $3,084,000. 

For the first time in many years, the number of children in care has been reduced from the previous year. 

In December 1970 there were 3,211 children in care compared to 3,420 at the end of December 1969. 

The most significant factor in this reduction has been the effectiveness of the adoption program in 

Saskatchewan over the past number of years. In 1963-64 a total of 358 children were adopted in 

Saskatchewan, in 1969-70 a total of 672 children. To date, we have placed 519 children in adoption 

homes in 1970-71. The reduction in the age of majority has also had an impact on the number and 

expenditure in the area of child welfare. 

 

One of the major items of the Budget Speech was an indication of expanded assistance in the 

construction of special-care facilities for the aged. I want to take a minute, Mr. Speaker, and review the 

development of this program. When we became the government in 1964, there were 2,583 special-care 

beds in Saskatchewan. As of February 1, 5,759. Construction grants prior to April 1, 1964 totalled 

$3,721,000. Construction grants from April 1, 1964 to 1971 totalled $5,012,000. In no area has this 

Liberal Government demonstrated its concern for a very essential and urgent need than in the provision 

of special-care facilities for the aged. In addition, Mr. Speaker, there are 774 beds either under 

construction or in the planning stages. This will put Saskatchewan in the forefront in the care of the 

aged. 

 

A few months ago, several new homes were announced in the accelerated public works budget to speed 

employment. One, in addition to Jubilee Residence in Saskatoon. It is a new facility and two homes 

were replacements of existing inadequate facilities. The first is Canora where a new unit will be built to 

replace the temporary facility set up in the old hospital some two years ago. The other is in Maple Creek 

where a new home will be built to replace the old facility that was established from wartime buildings. 

Because we were able to announce these additions in the accelerated public works program. Jubilee 

Residences and Canora have informed me that they are ready to commence the minute that spring 

arrives. Maple Creek is in the planning stages and I hope, will commence in the immediate future. 

Porcupine Plains, Wadena and North Battleford will also be building new special-care facilities in 1971. 

 

When the special-care homes now under construction are completed, the number of special-care home 

beds available to our senior citizens of Saskatchewan will substantially exceed the number 

recommended by the Aged and Long-Term Illness Committee of 1963. Future construction of these 

types of facilities will only be required to accommodate shifts in population and changes in levels of 

care requirements. However, the majority of our senior citizens do not require, nor do they want nursing 

home 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
755 

care. These senior citizens are living in their own communities and wish to remain there as active, 

respected, contributing members of society. I am pleased to announce that the Department of Welfare is 

initiating a program to develop and maintain community services for our senior citizens which will 

enable them to live meaningful and useful lives in their own homes. During 1971-72, $170,000 will be 

required to develop these services in 10 Saskatchewan communities. Of this amount, my Department 

will provide $62,000. These services will include senior citizens' day centres, information and referral 

centres, transportation services, meals on wheels, visiting homemaker services, leisure time activity 

centres, shut-in services, and other selective services which will allow our aged people to continue to 

live independently. These services will develop in consultation with individual communities and will be 

designed to meet the specific needs of the aged people in a particular community. These services will 

provide the opportunity for all citizens to contribute actively to improving the quality of life of our 

senior citizens. 

 

In order to develop our present network of special-care homes the interest and co-operation of local 

government was required in many areas of the province. It is expected and hoped, that local 

governments will continue to show the same kind of interest, initiative and co-operation in the 

development of community programs for the aged. My Department will pay 40 per cent of the cost of 

developing and maintaining these programs. It is expected that the community organizations and local 

governments will pay the remainder. The development of these services will have great social benefits 

for our aged people, and in addition, will be of great economic benefit to the province by curtailing the 

needs for special-care beds in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, in following the Hon. Member for Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald), I can only say that he has displayed his usual ability and his courage, that he is a genius in 

his own right, but he falls very short when he is fighting for the protection and the rights of the people of 

our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — I had not intended to take part in this Budget Debate, but I feel it is important to keep 

the records straight. When one reads and analyzes at some length, this document that was prepared and 

delivered by our Provincial Treasurer, the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart), this document 

known as the Provincial Budget for Saskatchewan,' I find that I am compelled to make a few comments 

about it, because we have, in the past, seen some very inconsistent ways of shifting figures and quoting 

statements without much thought as to the correct interpretation of them. But this Budget, Mr. Speaker, 

takes the cake. 

 

My colleague, the Member from Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), certainly gave the people of 

Saskatchewan a true picture as to its contents and how highly inflated many of the figures and 

statements were, and if ever a balloon was punctured, Mr. Speaker, it was punctured by our critic, Mr. 

Romanow on 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
756 

Monday last. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — And I have heard comments from my constituency of Weyburn, all agreeing that it is 

shallow and hollow in content; that it contains nothing but promises and an empty cupboard to offer to 

the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if one can base his judgment on signs and indications I am sure we are soon to be in the 

midst of another election. The Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) stated that he was 

willing and would be happy to go through an election on this Budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, it looks to me 

as though he has no other alternative; they have to go; they have, as in the past, drained every little piggy 

bank that they can lay their hands on. Again this year they have drawn out of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, a Crown corporation set up by the former CCF Government, it has drawn from it $10.2 

million as well as $6.9 million from Sask Tel and the Government Finance office group of corporations. 

Mr. Speaker, the piggy banks are empty again so its senior government came across with a sizeable sum 

- some $71 million which will help considerably to bail this Government out. So putting it all together 

Mr. Provincial Treasurer says and we can tell the people our Budget is again balanced. 

 

I ask you just whom does this Government think it is kidding? Take away that $88 million and it would 

spell disaster for this Government and it would show the true picture of our finances in this province and 

display also the incompetent and inefficient manner in which the affairs of our province are both 

handled and are financed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — You know, Mr. Speaker, since this Liberal Government took office in 1964 there 

have been over 1,470 new taxes and increases in taxes imposed on the people of our province and this 

does not even take into consideration the implementation of deterrent fees on the sick. And even with 

this increase in taxes, Mr. Speaker, our Government still cannot operate without other assistance from its 

senior partner. 

 

So I ask you, just what are the future prospects for our people if this Government is re-elected? You 

remember 1968, the year after the last election, the year when close to $40 million of extra taxes were 

placed on the shoulders of our people, crushing them still lower into financial difficulties - this is exactly 

what would happen again. Because, Mr. Speaker, when a government operates under a free enterprise 

system its main motive is profit before people. Humanity and equal opportunities are of little importance 

and it isn't what you know that is important, it's whom you know, and taxation based on ability to pay is 

not the order of the day. So our Provincial Treasurer says, "Let's just increase the tax load a little more 

on those who are already carrying more than their share, they will forget about it when the next election 

rolls around." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me warn you you might fool our people once but they are waiting and watching 

when the opportunity arises the second time and will give their answer in a 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
757 

very definite and decisive manner. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this Budget is failing many areas of our economy, but I feel 

that the area which again is the most obvious is the area of agriculture. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — Sure enough it has again given an increase of some $80,000 to this department over 

that of last year, but in proportion the percentage of the Budget that is being set aside for agriculture in 

this 1971 Budget is even smaller than it was last year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — Last year it was some 3.83 per cent and this-year it is 3.63 per cent of the total 

Budget. So you see, Mr. Speaker, just how important the Liberal Government sitting opposite considers 

agriculture. What a friend of the farmer! Some $15.5 million for agriculture and yet it can make a total 

investment of around $177 million in a pulp mill in the northwestern part of the province; 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — To me, Mr. Speaker, agriculture has been, is now, and will continue to be the 

backbone of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — But let me remind you it will only develop to its fullest extent and importance if our 

Government provides assistance which will make it possible to do so. Might I also remind you, Mr. 

Speaker, the risk is considerably less if taken on rural and our farm people than that which will be taken 

in the development of this northern pulp mill. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, 3.63 per cent of a total budget is a pretty small portion to set aside for helping our 

rural people in this province, our farm people, those people who have pioneered this province in many 

cases. Now some of their sons and daughters are carrying on and deserve greater consideration than that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — Do you know what is happening? Our small towns are gradually being eliminated, 

small merchants and business places are closing their doors; recreational facilities such as skating and 

curling rinks no longer exist in many of our villages and yet in this Budget the same as former Liberal 

budgets, not nearly sufficient consideration is given to these rural people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
758 

MR. PEPPER: — These people are finding that they can no longer, in many cases, carry on. So what 

are they doing? Many of them are moving to other provinces seeking new jobs, yes, as many as 23,000 

left this province last year. Others have moved into larger centres hoping to get employment that has 

been promised by our Premier, the Member from Morse, but yes, Mr. Speaker, they too found it just 

another unkept promise. They found that their visions of work and employment faded and all that was 

awaiting them was social aid. Yes, social aid in a province where, Mr. Speaker, there are so many things 

that can be and need to be done so many things which would provide our people with a standard of 

living which they deserve and for which they are looking. These things would create opportunities in 

which they could help themselves and provide a living for their families so that they too, Mr. Speaker, 

could live with dignity and pride and be a part of building this province in a manner in which all of us 

might be proud of. 

 

But instead, what is happening? It is creating more slums in our city, forcing these people to be a burden 

on our taxpayers by doling out a social aid cheque to them each month as well as crushing their morale 

to an all-time low. We need work, Mr. Speaker, provided for these people. We need more nursing 

homes, we need more money spent on expansion and buildings of hospitals and hospital facilities 

instead of closing them. We need more money spent on education in the building of technical facilities 

and vocational fields of education. This is only to mention a few of the ways in which work could be 

provided for our unemployed people today. I firmly believe that if the Hon. Member from Prince Albert 

West (Mr. Steuart) when he brought down the Budget the other day had spent more time in making 

provision to look after our unemployed and less time in envying the merits and trying to misinform the 

general public about those of us in the New Democratic Party, that he would not only have fulfilled his 

obligations as Provincial Treasurer but he would have done it in a responsible manner and been a credit 

to his party. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — I suppose, Mr. Speaker, when a Budget is finally prepared and when it is brought 

into the House, we, the Members have an opportunity to peruse it. One of the first things that comes to 

our mind is just what it contains that would be of benefit to our own constituencies, and as I was looking 

over the Estimates and comparing them with last year's Estimates in various departments, I find the 

answer is that many things are just shifted and in some cases the Estimates are lower, and if the 

municipal and property taxes of our province do not have to be increased, I miss my guess. And it seems 

that many other municipal people are saying the same. 

 

True enough, Mr. Speaker, we have a $10 increase in Homeowner Grants. I call it an election bait at this 

time and particularly when it is administered in the manner in which it is. The taxpayers of this province 

could be saved many thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker, if this Homeowner Grant was distributed 

through their local tax office and without creating any added expense. Of course it would not have the 

added blessings of the Premier on it, but I believe it would put more money in the pocket of the taxpayer 

and I think this, to our people, is very important at this time. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
759 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the Hon. Member for Rosthern, the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), 

while he delivered his Budget address Wednesday, I must confess that many of his remarks I could not 

agree with. They proved to me that constructive criticism is neither given nor is it received by this 

gentleman and that there is only one way to do something, that is, Mr. Boldt's way. However, I want to 

thank him and express my appreciation to him in his announcement of the grading of Highway No. 18 

from Oungre to Lake Alma and oiling from Lake Alma to Minton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have requested consideration that this be done many times since I became a Member and 

I know the people in this area will be grateful that it is now to become a reality. I certainly hope that it is 

more than a promise. 

 

We, in the Weyburn constituency, have received some consideration in the last year by having an 

industry established within our city. I am referring to the distillery that is to be opened shortly. I hope 

and I believe it will create a few jobs for the personnel operating this plant and that it will give some 

farmers who might be growing the proper kind of grain an opportunity to sell a quantity of it. I can 

assure the Government sitting opposite that I am grateful for their consideration of Weyburn being the 

location for it. I understand there are some local residents of Weyburn involved in it as well and I wish 

them all success. As for the new location and splendid structure of the wire and cable factory, it makes 

also a nice addition to our fair city of Weyburn. But, Mr. Speaker, I should not be fair to all concerned if 

I didn't remind you, that this was not a new industry brought into the city, it is just a new location for the 

factory which was established in Weyburn some years ago by the former CCF government.\ 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — I suppose this will be looked upon by the Government sitting opposite as a 

settlement for closing out or phasing out the provincial hospital in Weyburn. I can assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, that people of Weyburn do not consider it a settlement and they still hold the Liberal 

Government sitting opposite responsible for the position Weyburn finds itself in today from the vacuum 

that was created by many of our citizens having to move away for other employment. And now we hear 

each year that money is being set aside to renovate the hospital and turn it into an intensive care nursing 

home. This is fine, Mr. Speaker. I have recently read in the news that a committee has been set up to 

operate this building and to act as a board of directors or something to that effect. I hope that this is just 

not another promise and that this soon develops into a very worthwhile and much needed nursing home 

and that it will help to alleviate much of the congestion that we find in our local hospital caused by many 

of the patients who were discharged from the provincial hospital being placed in our Union Hospital 

now when they need medical attention. 

 

Might I just say the record of this Liberal Government in the advancement and promotion of good health 

in this province is a pretty dismal record. If this Government cannot provide a drug program and if this 

Government cannot see fit to abolish the deterrent tax on the sick, which they imposed on them, and if 

they are prepared to compensate the estates for those unfortunate people - our mentally incapacitated - 

retroactive to 1944, the 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
760 

least they can do is to try and provide facilities that are adequate and give them kindness and comfort 

while they are confined to hospitals and nursing homes, whether they are physically or mentally ill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I might be permitted to return just for a moment, to mention again where I think this 

Budget falls far, far short. That is in providing the necessary assistance for our agricultural people. It 

provides just a continuation of its present policy with nothing new to offer to this important industry.\ 

 

So I take it, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is only prepared to continue to support the Federal Task 

Force Report and Hon. Mr. Lang's proposals, where two out of every three farmers must fold up and 

seek employment elsewhere, where railway stations and post office buildings are closed and further 

recommendations for closing are being studied. 

 

Small hospitals are being closed and no alternative use being made of these buildings in spite of the 

great need for senior citizens' homes and nursing care homes. A policy where a reduction from 1,000 to 

100 grain buying points throughout the province is recommended and where schools and classrooms are 

being closed in our rural towns because of the teacher-student ratio now implemented. These all point to 

further deterioration of our rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So since the Liberal Government opposite, Mr. Speaker, is offering no protest against the proposals, I 

can only say they are endorsing their senior government's stand on agriculture and are prepared to sell 

out our Western agricultural program and to sell out our farmers along with it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — They have no new programs '" apparently to offer. 

 

We in the New Democrats have presented our policy and our program which we think, Mr. Speaker, will 

halt the trend that is taking place today in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if this Liberal Government 

is not prepared to take a stand and endeavor to halt this exodus from rural Saskatchewan, our very best 

resource - our rural people - I can only suggest and invite them to give the people of Saskatchewan, by 

holding a Provincial election, an opportunity in which to express their opinion as to how they would like 

to settle the very serious situation they find themselves in today. 

 

The citizens of our province deserve it. It is the duty of the Liberal Government sitting to your right to 

give them the opportunity to secure, Mr. Speaker, a new deal for people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, from my remarks I am sure you will know that I cannot support the 

motion but I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
761 

MR. J. R. MESSER (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, it appears we have a few moments left before the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has an opportunity to wind up his debate in regard to the Budget he 

has brought down. I think it would be highly unfair for us on this side of the House if we did not say 

something in answer to the Minister of Welfare's (Mr. MacDonald) speech that he gave some moments 

ago. 

 

He used throughout that speech, many times, a reference I regard to phony $4 bills. Mr. Speaker, if 

anyone in the Province of Saskatchewan has been passing phony bills it has been the Liberal 

Government of the day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — If one wanted to make reference to bills in this province I suggest he make reference 

to the bills that the Government passes out during elections. What about the phony bill that this 

Government passed out in 1964 in regard to the 80,000 new jobs that they were going to create for the 

Province of Saskatchewan? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Seven years have gone by since that promise and we have not seen 80,000 jobs. We 

have not seen 50,000, 40,000 or 30,000. In fact we have seen a total increase of somewhere in the 

neighborhood of 18,000 jobs, not 80,000 jobs. Phony bills: How about the election bill about the 

promise to decrease taxes in this province? After the election of 1967 the people of Saskatchewan in 

1968 on that black Friday were subjected to the highest tax increase that has ever been seen in the 

Province of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . probably in the Dominion of Canada. The Minister of Welfare makes reference 

to the Budget which the former CCF government brought down in 1962 in which we had tax increases. 

Yes, we had tax increases, and provided to this province, the first province in the Dominion of Canada, 

with a totally comprehensive medical care plan. A totally comprehensive medical care plan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — What about the bill of goods the Premier of this province used to pass around before 

he was elected to Government in regard to the acid test he had for the province, an acid test in regard to 

population growth in the province? He suggested at that time that during the 20 years of the former CCF 

government we had nothing but decreases in population - which were inaccurate statements. 

 

Yet since forming the Government, the Liberal Party has caused over 100,000 people to leave this 

province since 1964. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
762 

MR. MESSER: — 33,000 in the last year. The Minister of Welfare also made reference to the Power 

Corporation and the Telephone Corporation that were formed in 1929 - Power, I believe. He stopped 

there but he didn't make reference to how many power hookups had been made available to farmers in 

the Province of Saskatchewan during that period of time - 137 - Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — From 1944 to 1964 virtually every farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan was 

serviced with power under the CCF Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Bogus speech! 

 

MR. MESSER: — He made reference, yes bogus speech, bogus budget, bogus, bogus. He says in 1913 

the Telephone Corporation was formed under the Liberal Party and the Liberal Government. Right, but 

not a very admirable record because  

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . in 1944 virtually every farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan were without 

telephone hookups. Again by 1964, under the massive program of the former CCF Government we had 

extended telephones to every area in the province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — He makes references to industries that the former government had promised to bring 

into the province during that 20-year period, but he did not make reference to the industries that his 

Government has promised since 1964 and did not come. 

 

How about the heavy water plant that we heard so much about? I find that industry non-existent yet it 

made headlines in the papers of Saskatchewan when it was announced. What about the automobile 

industry that we heard rumors about being established in the .Province of Saskatchewan? What about 

automobile industry? What about the iron ore mines near my constituency that were promised to be 

developed, were going to open up the northern portion of Saskatchewan? Where are they? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if anyone has been passing phony bills it has been the Liberal Government of 

the day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Those are the people who have been passing phony bills. He makes reference to the 

fact that Socialists look alike. They do look alike and they act alike, Mr. Minister (Mr. MacDonald). 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Honest and clean cut: 

 

MR. MESSER: — Yes, honest and clean cut. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
763 

Progressive people . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . who aren't afraid to come forward with a policy that meets the demands of the 

day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — We can look to the Province of Manitoba, and we do with great deal of pride and so 

do a lot of other Canadians, not only Saskatchewanians  

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . and see the progress that is being made in that province today. See the guts that 

this Government is showing in regard to correcting the Churchill Forest Industry operations in that area. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — If he, Mr. MacDonald, wants to criticize Manitoba I suggest he wait and see what 

the people of Manitoba have to say when they have the opportunity to exercise their rights in the two 

by-elections that are coming up in the next two weeks. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — That will be the acid test of what the people of Manitoba really are thinking. 

 

He mentions pulp mills. Certainly we have been critical of a pulp mill because we have good reason to 

be critical of a pulp mill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Not too long ago, as the Members on this side of the House have pointed out in 

several speeches, we were subjected to massive advertisements in the newspapers of Saskatchewan 

saying that the pulp mill at Prince Albert does not contribute any pollution to the Saskatchewan River, 

half of the advertisement paid for by the Government opposite, the Government of the day. Several days 

ago we find that Minister in charge of pollution in the Province of Saskatchewan saying that they are 

going to build a treatment plant for pollution to the tune in excess of $1 million. They expect us to 

believe that there is no pollution coming from the effluent of the Prince Albert pulp mill. Yet a scientist 

at the Saskatoon University has independently taken a test and found out that pollution coliform bacteria 

count is 85 million at the discharge of that mill. Several miles down river at Cecil Ferry we find out that 

it is still 4 million. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Shame; 

 

MR. MESSER: — Shame is right: The truth 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
764 

is what the people of Saskatchewan want, and they have not been getting it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Among all the Government speakers who have taken part in this Budget Debate 

none of them have commented in depth in regard to the agricultural problem in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — None of them. Nothing about the Task Force, but lots of reference to our land 

proposal, the land bank. Let me remind the Members what they did in regard to the Task Force in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. In order to have a scapegoat the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

arranged for 40 meetings which my colleague from Riversdale, the Deputy Leader (Mr. Romanow) 

made reference to, at these meetings the farmers were able to participate but by no means to make any 

suggestions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — What did the Minister do with the Task Force report of some 467 pages of 

recommendations - 132 in total - 116 of them affecting Saskatchewan directly? What did he do at these 

40 meetings with that mammoth report? He compressed it into seven pages. Seven pages, capitalized 

type, triple space. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, oh! 

 

MR. MESSER: — A genius to be able to do something like that. Then the Minister of Agriculture went 

on to the Agricultural Congress in Ottawa and spent a grand total of 10 minutes - 10 minutes - voicing 

the problems of Saskatchewan people in regard to the Task Force on Agriculture in general. That's how 

concerned the Liberal Party of the Province of Saskatchewan is about agriculture and the economic 

problems of this Province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — He made lots of mention – and the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) is yelling 

again, "Socialize land" - in regard to the land bank proposal. Let me bring to his attention that one of the 

most important organizations for agriculture in the Province of Saskatchewan which has spokesmen 

virtually from every level of farming in this province, comes forth with a proposal that is almost the 

same as ours. 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — That's different! Who runs it? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Their resolution states, Mr. Minister of Welfare, that the government inaugurate a 

policy that will purchase land that will be made available by lease or sale so that the farmer may be able 

to maintain his farm as a viable enterprise. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
765 

MR. MESSER: — That speaking voice for agriculture is the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture 

and the Canadian Federation of Agriculture. 

 

I think it should also be brought to their attention that the Province of Ontario four years ago launched a 

plan that bought up land so that it could be distributed with more equality to farmers in that province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — I think it should also be brought to their attention that one of the Maritime Provinces 

- a province that has a Liberal Government - has a policy that does exactly the same thing. The Liberal 

Government in the Province of Saskatchewan has built a wall so high, has disassociated themselves so 

totally from the need for progress and the demands of society today that they are ignorant of what 

society is asking for. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Consequently the new deal for people that the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan is providing for them is one that is not acceptable to them. But let me tell you that if you 

get around to calling an election this spring - which all present indications show - you will find out that 

people will be electing a New Democratic Party to govern this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — From these comments, I will not be supporting the main motion but will support the 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — You know when the bright hope, the great white 

knight stood up, I thought, boy, we are going to get something. We are really going to get a nugget about 

the Budget because here is the white hope-to-be the first commissar of the Socialist land bank. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — But you know he avoided the Budget just like all the 

rest of them. All of the rest of the NDP who have stood up here for the last week - oh, some of them 

didn't avoid it, by mistake they tripped over it on the way past. They all avoided it because they were 

afraid, just like he was, to talk about it. They were afraid to face it because it is the best Budget that has 

ever been presented in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — You know, the Hon. Member from Kelsey (Mr. 

Messer) made one good speech. It was about two years ago. I remember one night, it was an evening 

sitting, maybe it was three years ago. No, I think it was two. Everybody got excited. They said 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
766 

there is the new white hope of the NDP Party off the farm; he rode out of the west like Lochinvar; made 

one good speech – what is that - like the fish fly that flies up, breathes and goes 'Doinngg' and dies and 

is never heard from again. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — That is he was never heard from again until tonight 

when we got up and snatched five minutes of the time that was allocated to one of our people. But since 

it is probably his farewell speech, well, we'll sort of forgive him for that. 

 

You know he mentioned the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and their great farm program but what he 

forgot to mention was that when they put rural electrification in all those farms they took $35 million 

from the sweat of the farmers. They never did give the farmers credit for that program. It was the 

farmers of Saskatchewan who paid for the program. 

 

MR. MESSER: — You've changed the program! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — No, we haven't changed the program. We don't go 

around claiming that we electrified the farmers, that we put the electricity on the farms. We give the 

credit where it belongs to the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) before he sat down - in his usual 

sanctimonious way - made a statement that the Government of Saskatchewan confiscates people's 

estates. I challenge him right now to stand up in his place and name one farm or one home of a spouse, a 

wife or a husband, that we have confiscated through the mental illness bill. The truth is . . . 

 

MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, I think you can check the records there and you will find that I said that 

they made provisions, provisions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — Check the records! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that there was far more 

money taken from the relatives and the victims of mental illness in this province by the NDP Socialists 

in any one year than has ever been taken since we became the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, in this Budget Debate the NDP 

Opposition have achieved a new record - another Socialist first for Saskatchewan. Their criticism of the 

1971-72 Budget has been the weakest, stupidest and the most inane ever produced in this House. 

 

MR. F. A. DEWHURST: (Wadena): — You ought to know you . . . 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — And you led the pack I might say: Never before in 

our history have so few displayed their ignorance to so many as have the 12 or 15 NDP MLAs who have 

spoken in this Budget Debate. 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
767 

Most of the time they steered clear of the actual Budget. When, by mistake, they stumbled on to an item 

or two, they either misunderstood the facts or they twisted them to fit their own warped philosophy. 

 

To clear up the most blatant misrepresentations and half- truths put forward by the Socialists in regard to 

the Budget, I shall start with their so-called financial critic, Mr. Romanow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Junior Member from Saskatoon Riversdale is a lawyer who obviously yearns to be a 

big money corporation lawyer. He talks about it every day - in fact it is becoming an obsession with 

him. His jealousy of the three successful and respected lawyers on this side of the House shows up every 

time he opens his mouth, which is most of the time. It is ironic that the same lack of depth and real 

conviction that caused the Wafflers to reject him will also cause thoughtful corporations to do likewise. 

But, Mr. Speaker, all is not lost. The slightly-soiled and the almost fearless grey, young knight from 

Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) with his fantastic ability to twist and turn the truth, his gift of 

saying nothing and make it sound important, should make him a winner in the mainstream of the legal 

profession. You know, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP got to the final ballot in their local leadership race, 

they were faced with a great choice, little Allan, city slicker labor lawyer, or young Roy, also a city 

slicker labor lawyer. It looked like a case of ―tweedle dee or tweedle dum.‖ After listening to Mr. 

Romanow mess up his Budget speech, it looks more like ―tweedle dee or tweedle dum.‖ First he called 

the Budget a bogus Budget. Now, Mr. Speaker, bogus means sham or fictitious, so let's see if sham or 

fiction really is in the Budget or in his criticism. To begin with he looked at pages 66 and 67, where the 

construction estimates of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Telephones were recorded. Now I 

pointed out to him in our television debate that the only thing contained in our Budget was the total 

amount of money the Government will loan to these corporations in the coming year and that it had 

nothing to do with the level of their construction. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Didn't understand it. 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Oh, no. In spite of this simple explanation, he 

repeated the same distortion on Monday in this Legislature. I'll explain it to him again, and if he's still 

confused, Mr. Speaker, I suggest he consult a good lawyer. Under . . . Oh: I see where he gets his 

advice. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — In the Estimates, under Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications, under Loans and Advances, it shows that we loaned the Telephone Corporation 

$11 million last year, and will only loan them $6.8 million in the coming year. Mr. Romanow says their 

construction program will be down by $5 million. So this makes this make work Budget phony and a 

bogus Budget. Mr. Speaker, what are the facts? And you know, I tried to warn him that he was out of his 

depth. No one can tell clever Roy anything. Saskatchewan Telephone Corporation spent $22,360,000 on 

their capital program last year. They plan to spend $22,366,000 this 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
768 

year on capital projects. Not down $5 million as the bogus financial critic of the Opposition claims, but 

an actual increase of $6,000. How can they spend more money and borrow less? The major reason is 

they make more money and they retained half of it for expansion. 

 

Let's examine some more of his false, sham, fictitious criticism. Mr. Romanow made a big issue of the 

fact that our estimates of revenue from lands, forests, game, fur fisheries is down about $1 million in this 

Budget over last year. This proves, he cried, that the Government revenue from our forests is down and 

is proof positive of the Government selling our timber resources to their American friends at cut-rate 

prices. Again, Mr. Speaker, what are the facts? Our revenue from forests is up because we will not force 

farmers who lease Government land to pay their full rent, if they put that land into summer fallow, and 

because land sales are off we estimate these revenues will be up soon. Mr. Romanow and his Socialist 

cohorts are opposed to us giving help to the farmers or is this just another example of bogus criticism in 

an effort to gain some cheap political advantage? 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we turn to the Federal equalization payments of $70.6 million - we take all they 

hand out – they implied the Federal Liberal Government had just bailed us out by some financial 

hanky-panky. Mr. Speaker, no one but a callow youth blown up with his own importance would have 

made such a stupid blunder. The principle of national equalization payments established in this nation by 

a Liberal Government in 1948 are the envy of every other federal state in the world. The United States 

of America right now are trying to achieve a similar program and to attempt to smear or ridicule this 

plan is to show an unbelievable ignorance of Government financing. As the Hon. Mr. MacDonald 

pointed out, in 1963-64, the former Socialist Government received $51.4 million from Ottawa in 

equalization grants which were actually 28 per cent of their budget. This year, we shall receive $70.1 

million - only 15 per cent of our Budget. 

 

Now I remember when we re-negotiated these grants a few years ago, Mr. Blakeney was very sarcastic. 

He said we had a poor team of negotiators. I remember him saying we just didn't have the horses to 

bargain with Ottawa. Well, Mr. Speaker, our horses got $70.1 million. I wonder what the NDP sent to 

Ottawa when it only got $51 million. Then he said that he and the other business experts screamed 

bogus budgeting when we are able to take $16 million from Crown corporations and return it to all the 

people as a dividend to build schools, hospitals, recreational facilities, parks, it really showed itself up. 

He also claimed that this was something new and had never been done by the Socialists when they were 

in power. Then he came up with a dandy. Why, Mr. Romanow shouted that if it weren't for the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the Saskatchewan Telephones, two Crown corporations started by the 

old CCF Government, these Liberals would never balance its Budget. Talk about phony, fictitious 

statements. Let's look at the truth. 

 

To begin with the CCF Government began taking Crown Corporation profits into Government revenue 

away back in 1946. It actually took 70 or 80 per cent of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation profits. 

Later it took 100 per cent of the Telephone profits for years. Now we all know it could never take very 

much money from the Crown corporations because the way the Socialists ran the enterprises they 

usually lost money. But whenever a little profit reared its beautiful head they grabbed 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
769 

it with both hands. That deals with phony story number one. 

 

Let's look at Mr. Romanow's next bogus charge, that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was a CCF 

creation. It was actually begun back in the thirties or in the twenties. I think it might even have been by a 

Conservative Government and was carried on by the Liberals. The Telephone Corporation was started 

by a Liberal Government in the twenties or even earlier. Both of these Crown corporation enterprises 

were in operation long before anyone had ever heard of the CCF or the NDP and they will be going long 

after the same Socialists are a bad memory. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — And then Mr. Romanow turned his attention to 

education. He read one report, then he looked at the Budget, then he got them both mixed up and he 

proudly announced that a mill increase was inevitable. Now I don't know if it's possible, Roy, to explain 

in financial terms simply enough for you to understand, but I will try it again and I want you to pay 

attention. The operating costs of our school system will go up according to approved local budgets by 

about $8 million. Now remember that. We, the Government - that's us not you, us. It never will be you - 

we shall increase our grants by $8.3 million. That's more than $8 million, isn't it Roy? Check with that 

fellow in the back. He used to be a school teacher. I'll wait while he takes his shoes off, but $8.3 is more 

than 8, see, so that means they could hold the line or they could actually reduce the mill rate. That's what 

it says in the Budget, that's where you missed the point. 

 

But, oh no, it was when Mr. Romanow turned to agriculture that he really showed what the Member 

from Kelsey (Mr. Messer) meant when he said that neither of these slick, city, labor lawyers in the NDP 

leadership race knew anything about agriculture. I understand this actually happened, that after his 

speech, Jack said to Roy, ―Roy, in of all that's holy, why did you open your mouth about agriculture?‖ 

And Roy answered Jack. He said, ―Jack, if I had kept my mouth shut, the people would think I didn't 

know anything about farming.‖ He says, ―Roy, buddy, when you opened it, they were sure of it.‖ 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Well, Jack isn't saying anything. He's ashamed to 

look the other way because he knows that's what happened. But then we heard from another great 

financial critic. It's one we hear from every year. The old former mayor and we are going to miss him as 

the years go by. Well, the headlines in this morning's Leader-Post proclaimed, "Largest Deficit Budget, 

Baker." Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Baker's record as" financial wizard is well known in Regina. And it 

shouldn't take the new city council more than five or ten years to clean up the mess. But just for fun, I 

added up Henry's 1971 proposals and I must say he is becoming more conservative and I wonder if this 

is an indicator of things to come. But here is a list and I think it's a complete list of the Henry Baker 

Budget 1971-72 version. 

 

Interest free loans for farmers $11 million; two-price system $120 million; 200 million bushels of wheat 

for Welfare foreign aid $300 million; home owner to renter $4.2 million; 



March 5, 1971 

 

 
770 

75 per cent of the cost of education $41 million; nursing home care $8.5 million. Then there's a whole 

bunch more like chiropractic service, dental care, optical plan, they add up to about $14 million. 

Abolition of premiums $18.5 million; deferred fees $7 million; University tuition fees $9 million. $542 

million and that doesn't even count one sack of flour he is going to give away. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, oh. 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — $542 million: $100 million more than we are 

spending on the whole Budget this year. I really think you fellows missed a great bet when you passed 

up Henry. He makes the rest of you look like pikers when it comes to spending. Mind you, Mr. Speaker, 

he's slowed down a bit. Last year, his program came to $800 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Well, then we were subjected to another treat, and 

it's becoming an annual treat. It's known as the "Walter Smishek Socialist Arithmetic Hour in the 

Legislative Assembly." It is known as the new mathematics. It is so new that no one else even teaches it 

and it only comes out once in a while, usually about this time in Regina. Now you just listen Walter. I 

don't think you'll understand it but Bill might be able to explain it to you, that's if he is talking to any of 

the rest of you fellows at this time of the year. But, first he attacks our student summer job program and 

claims that by sheer arithmetic he figured out we were only going to pay the summer students $1 per 

hour. I don't know how he did it and I don't know what he divided into what but I presume that he 

divided all the 2,000 students into the $1.5 million. What I clearly stated was that we would give at least 

1,000 students summer jobs with the Government, then, we would take $1.5 million and use it to pay 

about half the wages for another 1,000 students. So if we used all the $1.5 million it would generate 

another $1.5 million and that would make $3 million. These are about five month jobs and that comes to 

about $3,000 a job, about five months work, about $500 of six months work, $500 per month or about 

$2.50 an hour. 

 

Now let's look at another example of his arithmetic. He said the Saskatchewan pulp wood run by the 

Liberals had lost $629,000. And he is right. He also said that it lost more money than all the losses 

incurred by the Socialist enterprises in 20 years. Well I'll refresh the memory of those opposite because 

the total loss for the box factory and the brick factory and the tannery and the woollen mill amounted to 

$2.1 million and that didn't even count interest. Actually, it was over $2.5 million. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, shame! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — We admit we lost $600,000 in 1968-69 in 

Saskatchewan Pulp Wood Limited, but we also paid interest of over $1.8 million. If we had used this 

Socialist arithmetic, we would have gone in here and said it cost us 22 bucks a cord to cut the wood, we 

sold it for $20 but we made a Socialist profit. We tell the truth. We account for the money and we paid 

interest. The truth is that they covered up the full story about their Crown corporations and it was never 

really exposed until Ross Thatcher exposed it 



March 5, 1971 

 

 

 
771 

when he trimmed the daylights out of Tommy in the Crown corporation debate in Mossbank. 

 

And all the way through, they kept smearing the pulp mill. I have a clipping here from the Financial 

Post, which states ―Saskatchewan Pulp Mill Grant Issue Explosive.‖ It goes on to point out that some of 

the big business interests in Canada are going to oppose this. I want to point out to the people of 

Saskatchewan, these big interests who are opposing this for their own selfish interests, are joined by the 

NDP (Saskatchewan). This is a great combination. The NDP are playing right along with these tycoons 

from eastern Canada and they are sabotaging the pulp mill, and I hope that the unemployed and the 

youth take careful note of the combination of self-centered paper executives and sour grape Socialists 

who are working hand in hand to kill this great development. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, when I introduced this Budget, I said it 

would do four things. Find jobs, speed up industrial development, ease local taxes and put more muscle 

into our fight against pollution. I haven't heard one of those people stand up and talk to one of those 

issues. I haven't heard one of them with the guts to stand up and say where they stand on the 

Homeowner's Grants or the grants to education or the pollution control. They've wiffled and they've 

waffled and they've talked all around that. And I tell you today, Mr. Speaker, this Budget will do all of 

these things and more. It is a sound, optimistic, forward looking Budget and only the bitter and the 

partisan will vote against it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment negatived on the following Recorded Division: 

YEAS (Messieurs) - 21 
 

Blakeney    Meakes    Brockelbank 

Kramer    Berezowsky    Baker 

Messer     Smishek    Pepper 

Romanow    Thibault    Matsalla 

Lloyd     Whelan    Wooff 

Davies     Snyder     Kowalchuk 

Dewhurst    Michayluk    Byers 

 

NAYS (Messieurs) - 27 
 

Thatcher    Grant     Radloff 

Howes     Coderre    Weatherald 

Boldt     MacDonald    Mitchell 

Steuart     Estey     Gardner 

Heald     MacLennan    Coupland 

McIsaac    Gallagher    McPherson 

Barrie     Hooker    Charlebois 

Loken     Heggie     McIvor 

MacDougall    Leith     Schmeiser 

 

Motion agreed to on Division. 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o'clock p.m. 


