



















































Hansard: August 09, 1971


479 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

7th Day 

 

Monday, August 9, 1971 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Bertha Army Worm Outbreak In Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, there are many people who are very concerned and 

raising questions about the seriousness of the army worm outbreak in Saskatchewan. I'm sure that all 

Members in the House are interested in the progress being made on the salvation of the very important crop 

of rapeseed in this Province. Possibly the Minister could inform us as to what progress the Government is 

making in that direction. 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Member's question for further 

information pertaining to the army worm outbreak, might I say that it indeed has become a very serious 

problem for our rape-producing farmers in Saskatchewan. We have to date brought in three aircraft of 

Lannate, the chemical to control army worm, a total of 90,000 pounds has been brought in by those aircraft. 

There is another aircraft enroute now from Houston, Texas with another 30,000 pounds of chemical to 

control this worm. We have found the problem arising since last Friday in regard to aircraft to apply the 

chemical. We have therefore sought south of the border for crop-spraying aircraft. We have brought in to 

date, I believe, ten aircraft to help encounter this problem. We are seeking further aircraft now. We still don't 

at this time know how major an outbreak it is. The Department has contacted all rapeseed growing areas in 

the province and we are getting reports that there is evidence that in most of these, army worms are 

beginning to show their presence. It is unfortunate that the time from when they were first noticed is very 

short until they are a major concern, in fact, they can destroy a crop in several days. However, we at this time 

have enough chemical to control the problem. We have all the aircraft possible to apply the chemical so that 

we can curb or defeat this problem as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Are there any crops that are actually past the 

point of salvation or over 50 per cent destroyed? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Well, there may well be because of wind conditions and rainy showery conditions that 

prevailed over the weekend and where perhaps aircraft are not available because you can understand we just 

simply can't cover 2.5 million acres of crop all at once. In such areas we have told farmers, even though there 

may be some loss to the crop, to try and mount their sprayer in a way so that they can get it up above the 

heights of the rapeseed and spray the crop by means of mechanical spraying apparatus that they already have 

available so that they 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

480 

 

don't suffer a complete crop loss. But we do not know of an extensive area or of any extensive acreage where 

there has been complete crop loss. However, there no doubt will be some fields that will fall into that 

category. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Address-In-Reply 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. B. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park) 

for an Address-in-Reply. 

 

Mr. R. Gross (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, before I make my remarks on the Speech from the Throne, I 

should like to congratulate you on your elevation to Speaker of this Assembly. I am one of the last results of 

the June 23rd mandate, my late arrival being due to a judicial re-count which took place in Gravelbourg. To 

my satisfaction there was no change in the count. 

 

My remarks to day will concern four main issues that I feel most concern for my constituents and this 

Province as a whole. This past weekend I have spent travelling in my constituency and attending several 

social functions. During my travels I took note of a new feeling throughout the district — a happy, satisfied 

feeling which arises from what has taken place so far in the new Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — It is the farmer presently and throughout the past who has been receiving a bad deal. While 

the cost of his machinery and operations are constantly rising, the value he receives for his product has been 

dropping along with the sales to a near or completely uneconomic state. Several farmers in my area are at a 

point where the cost of operation, land payments and numerous taxes have become equal to or greater than 

their income. These are good, honest, hard-working people who do not deserve this and it would be a shame 

if we were to allow creditors to seize land and machinery because payments cannot be met. The Act will 

allow a one-year breathing space to give them time to get straightened out and an opportunity to operate next 

year. It is only fair due to the farming dilemma that the creditors carry the load for the farmers for a year so 

he can catch up and make needed adjustments. This is the kind of immediate relief that the people of this 

Province were looking forward to during the election. Many people in my area expressed congratulations to 

the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) for the good program he has formulated in such a short time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — They continue to urge that the Government keep up its responsive action so that in the near 

future the land bank will become a reality. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

481 

 

Some Hon. Members:  — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — In my constituency the removal of the deterrent fees is another issue which has sparked 

enthusiastic response from the people everywhere I go. The tax was an unjustified tax on the aged, sick and 

the injured. This is certainly a step in the right direction that is back to the original design of the medicare 

program. 

 

Education, Mr. Speaker, is one of today's highest priorities. We have seen in the past few years our 

educational program cut back in every direction. The pupil-teacher ratio was a program that was taking the 

teacher from the student, the result being a degradation of the quality of our educational system. The 

Government must take an active role in the future to guarantee that the children of our province receive their 

required attention needed to provide every chance for a full education. We must, as Government authorize a 

close look at where our education program is headed. The present system is obsolete. It is based on the 

competitive structure that surrounds us today. It offers little or no solutions to what confronts society today. 

It is a highly competitive era we live in with interest directed mainly to ourselves and very little concern 

shown for our fellow man. This attitude must be changed and the place to change it is in the educational 

program and at an early age. Thus, we shall have people growing up who realize the wrong that is going on 

and who will be educated in a way that will help reshape society into a new and far better form. Right now 

there are very few educational centres with programs designed to create understanding of society and its 

problems and I feel that we should undertake to change this. More study of racial problems, pollution and 

any number of social struggles should be carried out in depth and solutions sought out. Constructive rather 

than destructive attitudes should be taught to the people. The immediate step we should take is: (1) the 

removal of the ratio; (2) the setting up of responsible teams to start laying ground rules for this new 

education program. I would suggest that we use personnel who are highly aware of society's ills and are 

capable and are willing to offer constructive solutions. These people in turn would set up the new curriculum 

and start educating the people who will be going out into the education field. 

 

My final topic, Mr. Speaker, is pollution. The word "pollution" has become as common as any in society 

today and everyone has heard it more than once, I'm sure. Let us hope that it doesn't become so common that 

people will forget about it and start talking about something else. Let us further hope that the causes will be 

understood by more people and the needed solutions will be worked out. All over the world the biosphere is 

being upset either mildly or severely and the thing that is upsetting it is a menace which seems incapable of 

controlling itself. Yes, man is the cause of most pollution and unless he limits himself and his activities there 

will be little than can be done to halt havoc being created in the world. To me again a counterpart in this 

situation would be to name another villain, called technology. Together they make a formidable foe for 

nature to battle. Think of it, 3.5 billion in the world and at present trends, an increase of 7 billion in 29 years. 

I can only see a large increase in present problems coupled with a few problems nobody but a few far-sighted 

people have even thought of, if this is allowed to happen. The present rate of 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

482 

 

usage of water, oxygen and other essentials is outstripping the natural and man-made regenerating systems. 

Countries like United States are wasting so many resources that now they want to start wasting everyone 

else's as well. I think it is high time a totally new concept was brought forward and an example set to the rest 

of this country and to the world by Saskatchewan by controlling pollution. An active stand must be taken in 

industrial expansion, urban regrowth and foreign ownership so we can preserve our beautiful province and 

country. If people are the cause of pollution, it is our job to control people in charge of it. I feel a great relief, 

Mr. Speaker, now that the under the capable leadership of our Premier, Allan Blakeney, dealings with Karl 

F. Landegger and Company have been cut off and our province saved from further exploitation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — I am overjoyed that this deal was recognized for what it was: (1) it was a financial fiasco; (2) 

it was a certain polluter of the Churchill River system; (3) a forest-destroying rape of our northland. If this 

kind of protection for our beautiful province can be continued in the future, our children and grandchildren 

will bless us for it. Now that this program has stopped we must find new means to make proper use of our 

north. Tourism should be considered as an alternative and will be a definite boom to the economy. It is 

natural for people to want to enjoy the outdoors but safeguards against misuse by tourists, hunters, fishermen 

must also be assured. One trip to an overcrowded resort or a place such as Yellowstone National Park will 

soon point out that tourism can be as detrimental to the environment as industry. Rows of money-grabbing 

hot dog stands, crowds of pushing people fishing in fished-out lakes will soon show you that this is not what 

we want in Saskatchewan. Our Government realizes the long-term effects such policies can have and will 

continue to take a tough stand against them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a New Member of the Legislative Assembly I'm looking forward to the next four years in 

office and hope that I shall be able to offer constructive suggestions and criticisms to the debates. I will also 

use my energies to ensure that my constituents receive the necessary representation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to say that I speak against the amendment and favor the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with all the other Members of this House in 

congratulating you on your appointment to your important office. I, with all the others, am confident that you 

will deal fairly and honorably with all matters coming within your jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had not originally intended to participate in the Throne Speech Debate. Being a hard-nosed 

farmer I should like to see things done with dispatch. I had anticipated that we could, with a few pertinent 

presentations from each side of the House, have proceeded with the business at hand. I guess I was naive to 

think that Government could act so quickly. No doubt I shall learn to be patient in the next few years. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

483 

 

I should like to congratulate the Premier and his Cabinet for preparing legislation to deal with some of the 

priority items on which the people of this Province had a right to expect early action. The removal of 

deterrent fees and the extension of the Act to exempt our senior citizens from the payment of hospital and 

medical care premiums were certainly in the forefront of priorities demanded by the people. I'm happy to see 

that even the Members opposite are willing to agree that they should never have been applied in the first 

place. 

 

During the election campaign just past, farmers of Saskatchewan spoke out loud and clear in their opposition 

to the kinds of programs being brought forth by the Federal Liberal Government and concurred in, for the 

most part, by their Provincial counterparts. There can be little doubt in the minds of the tattered remnants of 

that Party opposite or in the minds of the Federal Liberals or the people of Canada, that the farmers of 

Western Canada are not ready to accept bribes in the form of $100 million payment to which they are 

entitled in return for a stabilization plan which in its present form does little but guarantee stabilized poverty. 

Our farmers have a right to expect more than that and are prepared to say so. In a world where all other 

segments of society are demanding and receiving increases in salary and allowances in order to meet the 

increasing cost of living, it seems strange that the agricultural industry should be expected to be satisfied 

with a stabilization plan of this kind, a plan which not only does not take into account increasing costs, but 

which, in fact, because of the drastically reduced income in the last few years will start on a downward plane 

because of the five-year average on which it is based. 

 

Farmers do not accept the proposal as laid down in the Task Force Report and apparently concurred in by 

Mr. Lang and his associates that the best way to increase farm income is to reduce the number of farmers in 

Canada. Because the Task Force was composed of economists and lawyers who know little of the value of 

the way of life in our rural communities they failed completely to comprehend the extreme importance of 

maintaining a viable agricultural population on the Prairies, in order to guarantee a sufficiently large 

population base in our rural communities to provide the many services in the fields of health, education, 

recreation and so on, which we need. The same farmers and their supporting communities rejected out of 

hand the assumption that small towns and villages have outlived their usefulness and should be allowed to 

wither and die. It is of the utmost importance that some real long-range planning be done to establish a real 

income stabilization plan for Western Canada. It is just as important that when such a plan is established it 

must be done in full consultation with our farm organizations and community groups. There can be no 

question that the survival of the entire rural community hinges on the maintenance of a viable agriculture. It 

will be the task of this Government to see that machinery is set in motion to ensure that proper programs are 

initiated quickly. 

 

Last winter on a CBC free-time telecast, the Hon. Mr. Andras, Minister of Housing in Ottawa, spoke of the 

housing crisis in Canada. He spoke of the billions of dollars which Canada will have to spend in the next few 

years on housing and related services. He stated that within the next five years, 75 per cent of the people of 

Canada could be living in the ten major cities and that 50 per cent would be concentrated in the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

484 

 

four major metropolitan areas. He went on to tell of the huge expenditures which would be required to meet 

the needs of housing, sewer and water facilities, social services, police protection and pollution control. He 

even questioned whether it was possible to meet these demands. Now it seems to me that there is something 

very wrong with a society which dictates that we should uproot thousands of people from our farms and rural 

communities where they live in a clean unadulterated environment and demand that they be transferred to 

overcrowded, polluted and crime infested cities all to satisfy some god called efficiency. It doesn't make 

sense to me or the people of Western Canada and yet this is exactly the kind of solution being proposed by 

the Hon. Mr. Lang in his farm legislation. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if we are committed to spend these huge sums of money on some kind of 

program to help people, we have to take a long hard look at where the dollars go. I suggest that a very first 

priority should be to use it for programs which would discourage the influx of people to the large 

metropolitan areas rather than encourage it. What better way than to use it on an Income Stabilization 

Program which will make it possible for large numbers of farmers to remain on their farms. A stable farm 

population means a stable rural community where people want to stay in the first place. 

 

Now, I know that some will be saying that this is a Federal matter and I agree that it is. However, the 

extreme urgency of some really new and radical approach to the agricultural problem is so great that it must 

be faced now or it will be too late. Make no mistake, one of the reasons why the benches across the way are 

so sparsely occupied is that that Government and their Ottawa counterparts failed to cope with this very 

urgent problem in a meaningful way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — The same fate will await any other government which fails to act. Certainly in the 

provincial jurisdiction, we can implement programs which can be of assistance to farmers in the line of 

credit programs, loan protection, extension service, etc., and we have started in this Session with The Family 

Farm Protection Act. We shall be proposing many other programs such as the Land Bank Commission and 

others in the near future, but the real problem lies in the need for more real income in the hands of farmers. 

A real effort will have to be made by our Government in co-operation with all western agricultural groups to 

impress this on our Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have dealt at some length with some of our agricultural problems, as I must, because I present 

a rural constituency. However, the constituency of Saltcoats, which I have the honor to represent, is not only 

an agricultural area but contains within its boundaries the largest potash mining complex in the word. The 

International Mineral and Chemical Company plant, which is known to most of us as K-1 and K-2, are 

located only a few miles from my farm and are capable of producing approximately 3-1/2 million tons of 

refined potash per year. The impact of the development of this industry has been tremendous on our rural 

communities such as Esterhazy, Churchbridge, and Langenburg and others. 

 

But there is also trouble in the potash industry. Because 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

485 

 

of uncontrolled development an acute overcapacity for production has occurred in Saskatchewan. This 

resulted, a couple of years ago, in very competitive pricing of refined potash on world markets and created a 

very severe problem for parent companies in the United States. Because we have a very high grade of potash 

in Saskatchewan and our recovery rate is probably the highest in the world, we can produce at prices which 

are impossible to meet in the depleted areas. As a result, a great deal of pressure was brought to bear on the 

previous Government to set up prorationing to cut down Canadian production. At the same time the 

companies were guaranteed a minimum price for their produce which was some $6 per ton higher than the 

going rate at that time, to compensate for the loss of production. In actual fact, a worldwide potash cartel 

came into being. As a result we have guaranteed the survival of some very inefficient mines in New Mexico 

and elsewhere in the world at the expense of the loss of from 400 to 500 jobs in our own mines. Many of the 

miners had just purchased new homes in our communities and have been forced to abandon them and to 

move to other areas. Because of age or other personal reasons, some have remained and some are now on our 

welfare rolls. Population loss in our area totalled almost 1,000 people from the time the mine started until 

now. Layoffs are still continuing and are, in my opinion, totally unjustified in the light of reported profits 

being made by this plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not nor do I pretend to be an economist or a specialist on potash or potash marketing, and 

I do not have a solution to offer to this problem at the present time. I urge this Government to make a very 

thorough and comprehensive study of the entire potash industry in the province at the earliest possible date 

so that proposals can come forward for the expansion of markets in order that full production can be 

restored. 

 

The potential for additional employment in this industry is tremendous and I believe it should be exploited to 

its fullest extent. 

 

Before closing, I should like to take this opportunity to tell you of another matter which gives me some 

reason for pride in our area. 

 

My home town of Churchbridge which has for many years been known for its outstanding baseball teams has 

done it again. This year three of our minor ball teams are presently in the Provincial playdowns, with our 

senior sandlots now in the Provincial finals. I should like to congratulate both the players and their dedicated 

coaches who have brought them this far. Certainly they have helped to bring a measure of fame to our 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — In summing up then, Mr. Speaker, you will have no doubt that I have confidence in this 

Government to meet the pressing needs of our people and that I will be supporting the programs as outlined 

in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

486 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, seeing this is the first time I've had the opportunity to 

speak in this first formal debate, I, too, want to join with other Members of the Assembly in extending to you 

the usual congratulations. You have certainly demonstrated in the very short time that the House has been in 

Session your capabilities in that regard. 

 

I also want to say a word to congratulate the new Members who have participated in this debate for the first 

time. Certainly they, too, have indicated the next four years should be a lively and interesting period on both 

sides of the House, particularly by the contribution that will be made by these new Members. 

 

I also want to say a word of congratulations to the new Members of the Cabinet or the front benches 

opposite. Certainly to be a Member of the Treasury bench is indeed a challenging one and I'm sure that they 

too will look forward to four years with interest. However, I am a little concerned about those fellows who 

sit in the second row — the fellows who are not in the Cabinet — I find it very difficult to try and analyze 

the reason why some of the Members in the second row were overlooked. I think, for example, of Russ 

Brown, the Member for Estevan who for so many years made an important contribution; I think of Ed 

Whelan, the Member for Regina North West, who certainly seemed to indicate that he aspired to that lofty 

position but the only conclusion that I can come to is that he put his money on the wrong horse in the last 

leadership convention, and it would now look and appear as if the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) doesn't 

have quite as much influence as he thought he was going to have. I think about the young Member form 

Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) and I find that he had his money on the wrong horse as well. 

 

But the one who really bothers me most is the former mayor of the City of Regina (Mr. Baker). You know, 

the NDP certainly haven't been very kind to poor Henry. First of all, because he lived in Regina North East, 

he decided that he should run in that constituency, and of course what happened? They whistled him right 

out of that constituency. Then he decided that he had the qualifications to be the new leader and, of course, 

he got a rather rude awakening on that score. And then we found that the next thing that happened was that 

he got defeated as mayor after ten years in the City of Regina. And now we find that not only was he 

overlooked for the Cabinet but here he is unemployed and he still was overlooked, too, s a Member in the 

appointment of Legislative Secretaries, one of those individuals who are not going to travel around the 

province on behalf of the NDP, and I'm going to have a few words to say about that a little later on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want just to take a few minutes this morning and talk about two factors that have concerned me about the 

direction of the Government in the first five weeks of office. I want to take a moment, first of all, to analyze 

the Throne Speech — what are its priorities, what will be its effect on the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this Session will go down in the history of the Province as the Session that 

declared war on investment and business in Saskatchewan and in Canada. Industrial businessmen, investors, 

will avoid Saskatchewan 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

487 

 

like the plague. Never, Mr. Speaker, has a government in Canada taken a more vicious stand against 

industrial development and job creation. You know, on June 23rd when this Government was elected, most 

of the people in Saskatchewan said that with Allan Blakeney and Roy Romanow at the helm, that there 

would be a moderate left wing Government. But in the five weeks since the election we have found that it 

isn't a moderate left wing Government. Look at what happened since this Sessions started. When you strip it 

of its tinsel, when you remove the theatrics, when you look behind the showboat, it is nothing more than 

propaganda for the NDP at the taxpayers' expense. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) has pointed out that the majority of this legislation could have 

been implemented without a Session. Removal of utilization fees, medicare for the aged, Bill 2 could have 

been suspended until the spring session, with no use — instead it has turned into a Session that has put the 

fear of the Lord in the business and investment community. 

 

During the campaign and in the previous session, the NDP continually harped on two basic problems. One, 

the high rate of unemployment and the need to provide jobs for our young people. Second, the need 

drastically to improve the farm income to protect the family farm. Instead of attacking these two problems, 

they have acted to generate fear, suspicion and hostility among those people whose help Saskatchewan needs 

if we are going to solve these two basic problems. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . 20 years! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Unemployment — Oh, No, it's going to be brought up to date here. Canada, from the 

Atlantic to the Pacific, has experienced serious unemployment problems. Saskatchewan was no exception, 

except under the Liberal Government it had the lowest unemployment in Canada. In fact, in the June report, 

in the statistics it was 2.7. 

 

The NDP have continually wept crocodile tears on behalf of the unemployed but since taking office a little 

over one month ago, they have done more to destroy employment opportunities than at any time in our 

history. They have declared open war on the business community. They have threatened the entire business 

community. They have created an atmosphere of suspicion and fear for any investor interested in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me document this record. Firstly, the Premier of this Province and the Minister of Industry, stood on an 

election platform and publicly stated that he and his Party would not honor an agreement signed by the legal 

Government of Saskatchewan. He also stated that if the company proceeded, they would do so at their own 

risk. This agreement was signed after one year of strenuous negotiations. The Act was passed in this 

Assembly authorizing the capital requirements for this Bill. The agreements were tabled and made public 

property. There was nothing illegal or immoral in the agreements signed. Surely no Premier in Canada's 

history ever started his term of office with such a threat to a company developing their province. Even his 

Socialist cohort, Ed Schreyer of Manitoba, went out of his way to assure the business community that his 

Government would respect and honor agreements made by his predecessors. Let me quote something from 

the United States of America, and the date is May 24, 1971, not two years ago but two months ago; 

"Manitoba woos industry": 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

488 

 

A welcome mat it out for United States investors in Manitoba, the Canadian Prairie Province 

with the only Socialist Government in North America. Premier Edward R. Schreyer is the first 

member of the New Democratic Party, NDP, to head the Government in Winnipeg. He wants a 

bigger American stake in the economy plus a United States market for his goods. 

 

And it goes on to explain what has happened and why he wants the United States to be investing in the 

Province of Manitoba. Not Allan Blakeney. Private enterprise has received better treatment in South 

America, Africa, and other areas of the world under dictatorship or other governments. 

 

Number two, next he cancelled the Choiceland Iron Mine project. This was done without even consulting the 

principal developer, Denison Mines. Surely common courtesy, if not the good of Saskatchewan, would have 

demanded that he contact Steve Roman, President of Denison Mines. 

 

For over a decade both a CCF Government and a succeeding Liberal Government had tried to interest a 

major mining company in the Choiceland project. What was his reason? The margin of profit was too 

narrow. Since when has the NDP started to worry about the profit of a corporation? I wonder how the young 

Member for Nipawin (Mr. Comer) will explain this to his constituents. This project, Mr. Speaker, was not 

just an iron mine and pelleting plant. It was the basis for making Saskatchewan the centre of the steel 

industry in Western Canada. Every corporation in Canada will soon learn of the treatment of these two 

companies. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It's all down the drain! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Saskatchewan will once again become the never, never land in exploration and 

development. 

 

Three, they have threatened to seize the Prince Albert pulp mill and place it under public ownership. The 

entire country is aware of the deplorable record of the Socialists when it comes to the development of our 

timber resources. They know the record of the Saskatchewan Timber Board. They know the record of 

Wisewood Limited of Hudson Bay in which they were partners. Here, a Government that couldn't run a shoe 

factory, a box factory, are going to run a multi-million dollar business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — With the problems of marketing our products, particularly our pulp, this would be the 

biggest disaster ever to face Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Surely Mr. Blakeney does not expect that this threat will have no effect on investment 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Fourth, the NDP Wafflers have demanded that Premier Blakeney "cancel without compensation" the 

Athabasca mill and public ownership of the Prince Albert mill. Here the left wing extreme element of his 

Party, led by one of his own MLAs is telling him 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

489 

 

and the rest of Canada what he must do. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, they had another meeting in Fort Qu'Appelle last weekend. Let me review the news 

report. This, by a new Legislative Secretary to the Cabinet, the Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. 

Richards). 

 

Among the demands that the Wafflers will be making are that the party take a pro-labor 

stand, that it bring about changes proposed by the 1970 convention with respect to 

agriculture and resource development and return it to a firm Socialist program. 

 

I wonder what the investment community thinks of that. 

 

There was an uncertainty as to what the NDP victory means. Does it mean that there is just 

going to be a continuation of what was happening from 1960 to 1964 or is this going to be a 

return to a very enthusiastic Socialist response to the problems of the province and there was 

that feeling of uncertainty as to what was going to be the direction of the Government and 

realization that "we must not allow a honeymoon period" in which we allow the Caucus and 

Cabinet to make all their own independent way. 

 

Well, Boy, he's made it very, very clear and Allan Blakeney has made it very clear. He said: 

 

The Waffle is going to have a right now to be actively participating in making sure that the 

Government does in fact pursue the NDP policy in a firm, Socialist manner. 

 

I wonder what the investment community thinks of those statements? If ever a newspaper article would 

make an investor interested in Saskatchewan freeze, it would be this report. Surely, he does not suspect this 

will have no impact on investment in this Province. 

 

Five, one of his own Ministers stands up in this House and refers to Karl Landegger, a partner of their now 

Government, as a 'Robber Baron', in the middle of what the Premier tells us were continuing negotiations 

with Parsons and Whittemore of New York. Surely, he does not suspect that this will have no impact on 

investment in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Six, his party has continually stated that they will tax the rich to help the poor. The favorite target of the 

NDP has always been the corporations. They are everybody's whipping boy. Nobody wants to defend them. I 

just want to warn Mr. Blakeney and his Socialist colleagues, and particularly the starry-eyed boys over there. 

The greatest single factor in the discouragement of new investment and increased production is corporate 

taxes and personal income taxes that soar above their competitive neighbors. No one questions that 

corporations must pay taxes. They themselves readily admit that this is their responsibility. Yet, Mr. Speaker, 

they are the key productive element on which the nation's income, wealth and economic growth depend. 

 

The Socialist have run all over this Province telling people that they are going to pay for their promises by 

taxing 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

490 

 

the corporations. Why don't they quit lying? Why don't they quit this hypocrisy? 

 

One point on the corporation tax brings less than $2 million to the Province of Saskatchewan. Do you young 

fellows realize this? Less than one point, less than $2 million. If they raised the corporation tax so that it was 

the highest in Canada, it wouldn't pay 50 per cent of the increased cost of the existing education system in 

one year. Not one program, just the existing escalating costs. And if they did this, they couldn't attract a 

peanut stand to this Province and they know it. 

 

The real revenue from corporations comes in wages, in production costs, in equipment, in purchase of 

material, transportation costs, capital investments. That's where the real profit and the real revenue comes 

from a corporation, not in taxes. This is a warning the NDP must heed. It is obvious that if we tax them out 

of Saskatchewan we shall drastically reduce the incentive to new investment and the consequent increase in 

jobs, good wages and economic growth that everybody is calling for. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, number seven, the Premier's dramatic announcement Monday stating that they would not 

proceed with the Athabasca mill. I shall not repeat the discussions of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart) and the Members on this side of the House regarding pollution and forest management. They have 

been adequately covered. I just want to say now, they are the Government and they have control of setting 

the terms of reference of forest management and pollution. Because they have been polluting the South 

Saskatchewan River in Saskatoon for 50 years, you don't burn down the City of Saskatoon, you pass laws to 

control the pollution and that's what you have to do with the mill. 

 

However, I do want to refer to two arguments used by the Premier. He stated that the native people of the 

North did not want this mill and then he brought in the resolution from the Montreal Band signed by Chief 

Bird and Chief Link. But, Mr. Speaker, I do have some figures that turn that resolution into a fantasy. Let me 

quote the electoral results of the native communities that would be most directly affected by the mill, 

Beauval and Ile-a-La-Crosse. In 1967, during the last election campaign the Liberals got 129 in Beauval and 

the NDP 178, almost 50 per cent or 45 per cent majority for the NDP. In Ile-a-La-Crosse the Liberals got 88, 

the NDP got 95. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Tell us the whole story. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — What is the story? I'm telling the whole story. The Liberal Member lost both those 

polls convincingly in 1967. But in 1971, where the pulp mill was the one over-riding issue in these 

communities, look at the results. In Beauval the Liberals got 154 and the NDP 31. 154 to 31 and he says that 

the natives of Northern Saskatchewan don't want this mill. Ile-a-La-Crosse 205 for the Liberals and 143 for 

the NDP. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Now tell the rest. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — That is the rest. All the garbage you peddled and all the untruths and half-truths, these 

astonishing results indicate 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

491 

 

the complete hypocrisy of the Premier's statement. The native people of this area not only wanted the mill 

but wanted it in a convincing fashion. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I am sure the House would like the rest. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — You know, I would like to see you get up after I'm finished and make a speech. You 

haven't said anything since you came in this House but surely as a Member of the Cabinet you should have 

enough courage to get up and express it. If you've got a story to tell about Northern Saskatchewan we want to 

hear it and I know that the native people of this Province want to hear what you have to say. 

 

Second, the Premier threatened the partners in this project that if the areas of compensation could not be 

satisfactorily solved between the two partners by means of negotiation he would then bring an act before this 

House which would solve it once and for all. He did not state that if they were unable to solve these matters 

by mutual negotiations he would then follow the due process of law. I want to quote from his statement and I 

think this is one that every industrialist in the Dominion of Canada and every potential investor in Canada 

will read: 

 

Finally (the letter states that) unless this issue can be satisfactorily settled at a reasonably 

early date it would be the Government's intention to introduce legislation to deal with this 

matter. 

 

To turn around and threaten the company that if they don't come to terms that they will bring in a law and 

pass it, instead of taking it through the usual process of law, is a threat that no government in the Dominion 

of Canada, to my knowledge, has ever made against a potential investor. So he threatened them with an 

agreement or else. Come to our terms or else. You will take what we give you or we will give you no choice. 

We will pass a law in the Legislature of Saskatchewan, where we have a majority of 45 Members. I charge, 

Mr. Speaker, that never in the history of this Province, in this country, has a greater threat been made to a 

corporation than that made by Allan Blakeney, NDP Premier of Saskatchewan. How will this be taken by the 

business community of North America? Never has a more disgusting irresponsible threat been made by a 

premier of any province. 

 

For 20 years while the NDP were the Government of Saskatchewan their greatest weakness was their 

inability to develop Saskatchewan. They frightened businessmen from coming to our Province. 

Saskatchewan cannot exist without jobs. Our young people will be continually forced to look elsewhere. 

This is the major failure of this Session. The most astonishing aspect is that the new Minister of Industry, the 

Premier, has made no statement, announced no new jobs, and expressed no concern about our economic 

growth. All I want to say is, get off your backsides and generate some jobs. 

 

I also want to suggest that some of those glassy-eyed Members over there had better wake up. Government 

and Socialist enterprises will never solve the economic future of Canada. We don't have the required capital. 

In 1955 the Socialists said they would solve the unemployment problems by building Socialist enterprises 

and despite what the Member from Saskatoon Nutana 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

492 

 

Centre (Mr. Robbins) said the other day, you know he talked about the great, great contribution of the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, but he forgot to mention the Guarantee Fidelity Company. He 

forgot to mention that these were all monopolistic. He forgot to say, for example, that the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation ten years ago was making just a little over $1 million for all the total investment. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What does the Guarantee Fidelity do now? 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Certainly we got rid of it and we had to protect the people that had the premiums. But I 

want to tell you something that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation after seven years of Liberal 

management is now making $20 million. The only Power Corporation in the North American continent that 

hasn't raised rates. Remember those 22 corporations, well, I'll not take the time to tell you the fiasco that 

resulted. By the time we became the Government in 1964, 12 or these Crown corporations had gone 

bankrupt and been disposed of. Others were kept operating by repeated government grants. Without 

exception those that had to compete with private enterprise on equal terms lost huge sums of money 

regularly and consistently. Even those that had a monopoly displayed business inefficiency, their profits for 

the total investment was unbelievably low. These experiments cost the taxpayers millions of dollars. All you 

starry-eyed Members over there who have never invested 25 cents in your own business, wake up and come 

back to reality. 

 

I just want to mention a word on the Task Force on Public Works. The line in the Throne Speech pointing 

out the formation of a task force to evaluate the needed public works is more window dressing. Public works 

have several features; first, they must be needed and not a waste of the taxpayers' money; second, they do 

supply some continuing employment for the construction industry but rarely generate new jobs; third, they 

have no long-term benefits in job opportunities. In fact the majority of public works' projects are very small 

and short-termed. If great care is not taken in the selection of priorities in public works, they drain much 

needed funds and operating costs for years to come. This is perhaps a worthwhile venture but it will not fill 

the gap in job creation in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I wager the NDP Public Works' Program will 

not contribute to the solution of this problem one iota. It is a deliberate attempt to hide their unconcern and 

their absolute negligence in this particular debate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about one more thing very briefly and that's the welfare state. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, I have always had a continuing interest in the field of welfare and health in the Province of 

Saskatchewan but I am concerned about the direction taken by the present Government. The Province of 

Saskatchewan, under the hand of Allan Blakeney, is rapidly steering a course to become the complete 

welfare state. On June 23rd the NDP were elected to become the Government of Saskatchewan. Their 

program was designed to bribe the people of Saskatchewan with the philosophy of something for nothing, 

for young, for old, for rich or poor, employed or unemployed. The principle of selectivity according to need 

was thrown out the window for the principle of universality, even the very rich, even those who did not need 

government aid. This Session has been called to demonstrate that the welfare state is on its 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

493 

 

way. The removal of utilization fees, free medicare for those over 65 are the first steps down this road. The 

Socialists have chosen to ignore the realities of their policies and what is more frightening, they have chosen 

to hide them from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What are the consequences of their policies on the people of Saskatchewan? Government welfarism with its 

ever increasing army of beneficiaries is fatally easy to launch, and fatally easy to extend but it is almost 

impossible to bring to a halt. It is also almost impossible politically to reverse no matter how obvious and 

catastrophic its consequences become. It leads to inflation, state bankruptcy, political disintegration and ever 

increasing government control. Why do I suggest that Saskatchewan is racing down the road to a complete 

welfare state? The removal of utilization fees and free medicare to the aged are programs with major 

implications, but would not necessarily destroy the economic stability of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, 

this is only the first step. Examine their program called the New Deal for People. It is, without question, the 

biggest give-away program in the history of Canada. It is a blatant attempt to buy peoples' votes by using 

their own money. It is the most unrealistic, uneconomic, deceitful program ever offered by a political party in 

Canada. 

 

In addition to these Bills before us here is a further list of a few promises related to the field of health and 

welfare. Prescription drug program, hearing aids, eye glasses, braces, wheel chairs, reduced costs, insured 

dental care service for those under 12, free nursing care service to Level III patients in special care homes, 

increased government support of public and non-profit nursing homes and geriatric centres, expand and 

improve ambulance and emergency service in both rural and urban Saskatchewan, chiropractic services 

under the Medical Care Insurance programs. And you could go on. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart) indicated there were 50 promises we haven't even started to catalogue. These, Mr. Speaker, are only 

a few of their wild irrational promises. If even these in their totality were implemented, no state on the North 

American continent, perhaps in the world, would have travelled down the road of the welfare state like the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Referring to these two specific Bills, Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat my personal position and that of my 

colleagues. The people of Saskatchewan have spoken, we will abide by their decision. However, I want to 

emphasize that though we approve of these amendments at this time we insist that the NDP provide some 

very important answers. How are these wild promises to be paid for — not only this year when they have 

been left a healthy surplus, but five years hence? I want to repeat another promise made by the new Santa 

Claus, the Premier of Saskatchewan. Speaking in Assiniboia during the campaign, the Premier promised, and 

I quote: 

 

An NDP Government would at least hold the line on the present medicare premiums of $72 

per family and perhaps eventually reduce it to the 1964 level of $52 per family. 

 

We intend to see that you keep that promise. If what you say is true, then how do you pay for these costs and 

all the other wild promises? 

 

Saskatchewan is not the only state that has attempted to 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

494 

 

look after people from the cradle to the grave. Sweden, Britain, France, and many other countries soon 

learned that to extend social services indefinitely, it is essential to develop their economic base. This is the 

tragedy of this particular Throne Speech and this is the tragedy of the start of the first five weeks of NDP 

Government in Saskatchewan. Get off your high horse, get off the Marxist garbage and come to reality. We 

need investment, development, economic growth, we must provide jobs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about one more thing. I was very disappointed the other day when the 

Premier came into the House and refused to permit the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) to sit in the 

House after his re-count. I just want to read and put in the records of the House a statement made by Mr. 

Dalby. This is in the Prince Albert Herald of July 10th: 

 

The NDP Candidate Dalby said he was naturally disappointed at the re-count results, 'but I 

will continue to work for the North in any capacity that the public wants me to. It's my home 

and intend that it always will be. There are other elections.' Mr. Dalby declined comment on 

future plans saying that the decision on whether to appeal the re-count outcome is in the 

hands of a solicitor. 'I think the re-count could not possibly have been fair.' 

 

All I am saying is I don't think that Mr. Dalby would have objected to have the Member for Athabasca sit 

here, it certainly in no way would have prevented a controverted election or whatever other steps he wants to 

pursue with. It is unfortunate that the Member for Athabasca is not here to make his contribution to the 

House, particularly, Mr. Speaker, because so many of the things that have happened in the first five weeks of 

this Government are related to the North. The cancellation of the Athabasca mill, the threat to take over the 

Prince Albert mill, cancellation of the Choiceland iron mine. It is no wonder that they didn't want the Hon. 

Allan Guy, the Member for Athabasca sitting in this House. 

 

I have one more little point, Mr. Speaker, that I wanted to talk about and that's this business of legislative 

secretaries. If there is anything that the NDP have always said, you know, they turn and they always project 

an image of sanctimony and hypocrisy. You know, they always say, Oh, it's important to have integrity, 

principles always come first with the NDP. Well, I want to quote here a little bit about what the Premier said 

away back in 1965. Here is what he said — I suppose he knows, that's why he's leaving. 

 

There is further reason why parliamentary secretaries are necessary and legislative secretaries 

are not. It is the custom of the Parliament of Canada for the House to sit and for the 

committees of the House to sit at the same time . . . 

 

We, in Saskatchewan, have not found it necessary to schedule our committees to sit while the 

House was in Session so this reason for having a legislative secretary is not valid. Indeed 

none of the reasons which are ordinarily advanced for having parliamentary secretaries at 

Ottawa are valid in a provincial government such as Saskatchewan, which has a short 

legislative session. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

495 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, that was the Premier, now let's listen to what the Member from Regina North 

West (Mr. Whelan) said: 

 

One of the things about this bill that worries me is that there are no duties listed. I was 

thinking of some duties that might be listed or might be explained to us. They might have 

one of these assistants file wastepaper basket letters. 
 
I wonder if that's what he's going to do. 
 

One candidate is extremely good at this. Perhaps one of the other duties might be to fan the 

Cabinet Ministers in warm weather. 
 
I wonder if he is going to do that. 
 

We might have one of them set aside to polish their automobiles. 
 
My automobile is pretty dirty! 
 

Another might chauffeur the Cabinet Ministers around the province. Another one might light 

their cigars. 
 
I am not sure if any of you smoke cigars over there but I know that some of them smoke and maybe he could 

do that. I wonder if the Member for Regina North West is really going to perform all those duties as a 

Legislative Secretary. You know their great integrity. Principles first. Then . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we should not try and kid one another here in this House. The real 

duties of these people will be that of paid organizers . . . Just a wonderful set-up for six 

organizers to roam around the province. 
 
Too bad Roy didn't have those during his campaign. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is a bad precedent, as my colleague from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) 

just said — a bad precedent for every legislature in Canada. We can only conclude that this is 

another first for Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, its' a second. 
 

It is the first time that Saskatchewan citizens have paid for political organizers under a thin 

disguise. 

 

I wonder what section of the province the Member for Regina North West has as a political organizer. 

 

Now I want to talk about the Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Robbins), he made a speech and he 

even quoted a poem. I'm going to quote a couple of stanzas from his poem. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nutana Centre! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Oh, Nutana Centre, is it? Well, this is Mr. Robbins: 

 

So you see a lot depends on the interpretation that is placed on things. I think it should be 

remembered 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

496 

 

that this Liberal party in the election campaign promised that it would have a Cabinet of 12. I 

heard this quotation from many platforms. The Premier did not promise a bakers' dozen. 

Now it's true, he lost one of them, but nevertheless, the anticipation is that this appointment 

will later be filled, and we would have a Cabinet of 13 and six legislative secretaries, 

presumably. 

 

Now what does the bill say? The bill says that the appointments shall terminate on the 31st 

day of December each year. Well perhaps, this is one way of keeping the Guys and Gals in 

line. It also says that they shall be paid a salary of $2,000 a year and shall be paid in monthly 

installments, $166.66 a month . . . 
 
(Have you got your first cheque yet, fellows?) 
 

. . . presumably $166.74 on the last day of the year to bring it into line at $2,000. 
 
He even calculated that! 
 

Other members have commented on the expenses. It says reasonable expenses. But again, 

this is subject to interpretation. Now, Mr. Speaker, I realize that this is an extremely onerous 

task for the Premier, in terms of selecting legislative secretaries, and if I may, I would like to 

present to him and to Members on the Government side, a little bit of assistance from the 

Opposition side. We are concerned of course that he makes the best possible selections. 
 
He went on to talk about — 

 

Ottawa has its Guy Favreau, 

Montreal has its Guy Rouleau, 

Also Guy Lord and Guy Masson, 

The Federal Liberals are rolling along 

From enquiry A to enquiry B 

Furniture, extradition and fiddle-dee-dee. 

 

(They should have changed it to fuddle-dee-dud!) 

 

I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, here is what it says. I want to tell you what one of the Cabinet 

Minister's says, this is Mr. Snyder: 

 

Delegate your responsibility in the normal, logical fashion and for Heaven's sake, do not run 

around appointing these people to act on a temporary basis, to be political hacks . . . 

 

I wonder if the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) feels like a political hack? I wonder if the 

Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) and the Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) feel like 

political hacks? Or the Member from Arm River (Mr. Faris). Oh, is he a political hack! Well, I'll tell you that 

if that was the last speech, listen to him. Quoting Mr. Snyder again: 

 

. . . to run around the province doing your political work. 

 

Well, of course, the Member from Arm River, that's all he did anyway! 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

497 

 

Pay your organizers and stand up and be counted. Appoint them as political organizers. Call 

them as such. Let us not have this back-door method. Appoint Cabinet Ministers for doing 

Cabinet Ministers' jobs — political organizers for doing political organizers jobs. 

 

Now, the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) he said: 
 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would say that I do not believe the public of Saskatchewan 

should be required to pay field men for the Liberal Party. 

 

I wonder if he still feels that the Government of Saskatchewan should be required to pay for the field men of 

the NDP. 

 

Here is another Cabinet Minister (Mr. Smishek) that has a Legislative Secretary: 
 

I support the proposition that if there is need for more ministers, then the government should 

proceed to appoint them, but not bring in Legislative Assistants who at this stage appear to be 

nothing else but ribbon-cutters and possibly political organizers. 

 

Another point (Mr. Wood): 
 

Another point that comes to mind is the matter as has been indicated in the House, that these 

assistants would be changed off from year to year. That you would have one man in one 

position one year and another year you would have another man in the same position. This is 

very good insofar as spreading around the experience and the knowledge that might be 

obtained, but it would not be very efficient insofar as the department is concerned. Just about 

the time that the man is getting to learn something and be of some use to the Minister, he will 

be changed and another person brought in. This idea of having temporary staff that is 

changed from year to year, I don't think would be a good one. 

 

And then we hear from the man that didn't make it, Mr. Baker: 

 

I wasn't going to say anything on this question but seeing that everybody gets into the 

discussion, it isn't fair that I sit by and listen all the time. 

 

I think that's right, Henry! 

 

I think this money can be better used by paying the country MLAs more money. 

 

He had a real soft spot for the rural Member. 

 

These people must maintain two homes. I mean that sincerely. It's not quite the same thing 

for those of us living in the cities, but the country Members come here, they have to leave 

their farms and hire people to take their place and all they are allowed is $4,000 with $2,000 

expenses. I think this is where the Government should have directed its attention to see to it 

that our MLAs got a decent pay. 

 

Henry always did have a concern for the MLA. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

498 

 

As far as I am concerned, if there was a division marking the receipts for city or town or 

urban MLAs to country, I would certainly like to see them get much more than what is being 

offered here to these Legislative Secretaries. These people are not going to make any money 

by getting this $2,000. They'll probably have to pad their expenses in order to come out on 

the right side of the ledger. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't think I need to say more. I just think it is another indication of this particular 

Government over there. They are all for principle when it's somebody else's principle but they don't have 

much integrity when it comes to their own principles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can gather I am particularly disappointed in this particular Throne Speech because it 

does absolutely nothing for the farmers of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the small farmer under the 

only proposed legislation is threatened. It does absolutely nothing for the crisis in agriculture. Mr. Speaker, it 

does nothing to solve the unemployment problems in this Province, and most important of all, it has 

jeopardized the future potential of the Province of Saskatchewan to obtain investment and job creation 

enterprises. 

 

I will not support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to participate in the 

Throne Speech Debate this morning. I think it is the eighth or ninth time that I have had the privilege of 

doing so over the past years. I have tried very hard in listening to the former speaker from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) to get something worthwhile out of his remarks and I have had much difficulty in doing so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — I notice in the records of the House over the years, they used to refer to Herman Danielson 

and Minty Loptson as the "gold dust twins" — I should now like to classify the Member from Milestone 

with the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) as the featherweight twins in this House. I notice wilful Wilf 

was here a few moments ago, I see he's gone and I presume he is keeping a watchful eye on his children and 

keeps the records up to date so that he has them when he takes over the leadership of that party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — It is most heartening, Mr. Speaker, to be here again. When you think of the hatchet job they 

did on my seat, my constituency not too many months ago. I want to express appreciation to the voters of 

Wascana for the confidence they once again placed in me. 

 

I congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your appointment. No one could fill that post better in this House than 

yourself, even that 13th century hat, I must say, suits you. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

499 

 

I congratulate all those who were re-elected and those newly elected Members who grace this Chamber for 

the first time. I wish the Hon. Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) well in his new role as Leader of 

the Opposition. Premier Blakeney deserves great commendation on his marked success. It is up to us on this 

side of the House to help him become one of the best. 

 

I said in this House during the last session that the main issues of the forthcoming election would be 

agriculture, unemployment and humane policies in taking care of our people. The results of these warnings 

are now evident as to what we see across the way. It seems to me that the Member for Regina Whitmore 

Park (Mr. Grant) must be feeling very uncomfortable these days. Three of his cherished achievements have 

been rejected by this Government and by Members of the Opposition. Surely there must be a flicker of 

remorse or a tiny twinge in the heart of the former Minister of Health. It is not likely that anywhere in any 

legislature or assembly in the world that within a few days three pieces of legislation which were touted as 

useful and necessary by one government had been rejected by a new government with the support of the 

former defenders of the legislation. The former Minister of Health has been repudiated by this Assembly, the 

Members of the Government, and by his own colleagues. Is it now time for him to speed up his retirement 

plans. It is well known that he is just keeping his seat warm for someone close to him. 

 

The people of Whitmore Park would be very interested in the philosophy expressed by the Member for 

Whitmore Park in this debate. By his statements he has said that he has no trust in the people. He has 

charged that they will abuse the medicare and hospitalization plan now that they don't have to pay deterrent 

fees. It was amazing to hear him advance the argument that he was able to get an appointment with the 

doctor very easily in July because citizens were waiting for the removal of deterrent fees. It is likely that the 

Member for Whitmore Park could get an appointment very easily at any time and he would not have to 

worry about where he was going to get the money for deterrent fees. 

 

The former Minister of Health referred to a deficit at the Regina General Hospital which the city council of 

that day would not accept. Why? Because first he requested additional services be given, then when it came 

time to pay for it, he reneged. Every move he played politics. Why did he really turn his wrath upon the 

Regina General? Because I got city council to remove the $25 deposit deterrent fee to be paid upon 

admittance and permit patients to pay this cursed tax on their own time. In every way he tried to make 

deterrent fees stick so he held back sufficient grants to give hospital care necessary for our people. He was 

one of the ring-leaders for bringing in deterrent fees. 

 

His policies closed hospitals needed in many areas for the sick and for a good health plan. He ridiculed the 

CCF Government from 1944 to 1964 saying, I believe, the care for patients was a disgrace in our mental 

institutions. I strongly challenge that statement and I think that I have a right to do so. 

 

My work took me to where our civil servants worked there. I was shown how patients were cared for prior to 

1944 under a Liberal Government. I saw how the care for these people was completely changed by our CCF 

Government. For once in their lives all patients were put in a bed, a clean bed in which to rest. They were put 

in rooms where they had the freedom of 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

500 

 

movement. I saw how they were given full care by trained psychiatric nurses and aides, how they were given 

a bath in modern bath facilities, how they were trained to use washroom facilities, how they were trained to 

dress neatly and participate in many recreational and social functions. The most shocking thing of all was 

when I was shown how many of them had lived and were treated before 1944. I saw cell-like rooms where 

some of those who now had beds and decent quarters were placed. They were kept in these cell-like rooms 

like caged animals, not dressed and served at tables. When it came to have a bath the hoses were turned on 

them, not with warm water but with ice cold water. The inhumanity to man practised by a modern society by 

a so-called sophisticated administration and government before 1944. I could go on and tell more but I 

believe I have got my points across as to the merits of the former CCF Government carrying out good mental 

health care. The same kind of story, Mr. Speaker, will no doubt be told to the voters in Saskatchewan four 

years hence about our increased care. 

 

What else did they do? They turned out the patients to fend for themselves by the hundreds after 1964. 

Regina got more than her share in numbers. Mental health executive officials came to me pleading to get the 

Government to change its ways. We cannot cope with the large number of patients sent here and put in 

2-by-4 rooms. Many of them passed away and the death notice read "by natural causes". Oh, what many of 

us thought of the possible unknowns in those death certificates. 

 

Our citizens, the pioneers of this great land, will welcome a free health card January 1st as a gift from 

younger generations. You and I here must look upon it as a small fee of appreciation to them for services 

rendered. We cannot do enough for our parents and grandparents in providing them the necessities and the 

comforts of life during their twilight years. Let's eliminate their sufferings and wants and fears that seem to 

engulf the minds of our people in this world of frustration and insecurity. I thank my grandparents who 

brought my mother and father over as a young boy and girl in the years 1893 and 1894. While they are not 

living today, what a joy it was for me to stand up this past week to provide these measures for those still with 

us. Complete health care should always be considered a right for all, and not a privilege for the few. 

 

I understand the Member for Regina Whitmore Park referred to a plank in my program in the relocation of 

our city power plant taken by the Government a few years ago. He stated it would cost $15 million to $16 

million to relocate. Wrong again. It will cost a whole lot more than that, probably double that. Because I, too, 

want to see a good electrical generating plant adjacent to our city. We need it for Regina and the surrounding 

areas. Your Government was to have moved it by now under the terms of the agreement when it was taken 

over some six years ago. But again nothing done by the former Government or recommended by him. They 

are not concerned about the noise or air pollution caused by the plant. I can tell him this we on city council 

were considering plans at that time for relocation when it was taken over by them. 

 

All he did was get the Saskatchewan Base Hospital started after much prodding from this side. A hospital 

that should have been completed at least three years ago. And what kind of a hospital did he get underway, 

spending I believe, around $14 million. He talked about an $18 million or $20 million 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

501 

 

hospital when he started. Inflation has crept in since so we are probably getting a $10 million building as of a 

few years ago. A hospital twice the size should have been built here to take care of Southern Saskatchewan. 

 

It has been repeated time and time again across the way that the deterrent and utilization fee episode is dead. 

We don't ever want to concern ourselves with it again. Imagine this sort of repentance. I want to tell my 

friends opposite the removal of deterrent fees, utilization fees and the whole medicare plan will be kept alive 

and more alive then ever in every election that New Democrats will be participating in. Our health programs 

in the years ahead will call for complete health and medicare plans for all of our people. I am looking 

forward to the inclusion of an insured free chiropractic treatment which I hope will be negotiated and 

brought into force in not too many months. The Bill was passed unanimously in this House in 1966 to 

include chiropractic treatment under medicare. Nothing was done. I knew then nothing would be done until 

we took office. 

 

Priority must be given as well to a dental program for our children, at least under the age of 12, because of 

spiralling costs proper care must be given to the health needs of our youngsters. This will be a godsend to 

our younger families who have a difficult time to make a living in this inflationary, high-cost living 

economy. This is another plan we can do cheaper by pooling our resources and help keep a better health and 

living standard for many. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this Session has been a real revelation to me while observing the Opposition these 

past seven days. I see a victorious party of 1964 and 1967 completely in disarray, completely bewildered and 

broken. Why do I say it? They, by their own admission are saying we were wrong in putting on deterrent 

fees, we were wrong in not providing free care for our aged. We were wrong in taxing our helpless mental 

patients and their families. We are voting with you to throw these cruel measures out. In other words, we 

admit that over the past seven years what we did as a Government was absolutely wrong. Please forgive us, 

Saskatchewan voters. Please forgive us for not having a program then and we frankly admit we haven't one 

now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — We are now faced with extinction or less representation than what we had over 25 years ago, 

which I believe was something like five in number. Yes, it is too late now the damage is done, and we are 

seriously worried that we might be replaced by another group. It is no wonder their supporters are completely 

bewildered. To them it is now clear that they supported a party that had no policy and that they, over the 

years, were playacting and did all the window dressing. The only kind of thinking left over there is revealed 

by the Member from Regina Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant), because that man at any time did not want a health 

or medicare plan, and still doesn't want one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — And if he could have done away with it entirely he 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

502 

 

would have done so. Thank goodness the Federal Government was forced into the program a few years ago 

or else many more of the good health measures would have been eradicated. Yes, we were the ones in 

Canada who brought health insurance of one form or another to all of our fellow Canadians. Three cheers for 

the Democratic Socialists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — Yes, by them voting with us against deterrent fees and other health changes this Session, it 

can also be termed a conscience vote. When you think of the sufferings of the sick, the sufferings of the 

aged, and particularly the unnatural ills of our mental patients, the pains of wrongdoings must be cutting 

pretty deep. No one wants to be self-righteous about these things. At all times we must show some human 

kindness to those less fortunate that we are. 

 

Yes, out of this could emerge a new group who will take over the Opposition. Policies and programs help to 

make or break a political party. But sometimes the most disastrous effects that can happen to leaders and 

political parties is by the insurgency and discontent from within. I believe the decadence within your Party 

started several years ago. You could feel the growing uneasiness towards some in the Party and it came to 

the force by a former Member of the Cabinet. 

 

I think that we can honestly say parties and governments are defeated by their actions and sometimes, 

mainly, from within. 

 

I am really surprised that the Opposition would oppose a protective bill for the family farm, in declaring a 

year's moratorium from seizure and foreclosure of assets in which they may have substantial equities. 

 

All these problems have been caused by poor marketing conditions, and policies of the Federal and 

Provincial Governments. Had my plan of wheat marketing which I advocated in 1965 in this House been 

applied, such as selling the first 2,000 bushels at a top price of $2.95 or $3.00 a bushel, bills like this would 

not be necessary to introduce today. The plan would have maintained the family farm over the years with a 

good measure of security and in essence would have brought back many farmers to their homesteads. With 

wheat quotas of only seven or eight bushels, how well this plan would have worked. We are all saying, do 

something for the farmer. We know that as long as the agricultural industry is buoyant, cities, towns and 

villages flourish. We know that we must put more money into the pockets of the farmer. We know, too, that 

farmers should have the right to enjoy our recreational areas, our resorts as well. Many cannot afford it. We 

see that workers have good hours of work and we continually better their working conditions. 

 

The farmers' working conditions have been advanced only due to modern equipment and scientific methods 

of farming. We all agree that the farmer is not getting his fair share of the national income. Subsidization, 

over the next few years, will be necessary to save the agricultural industry here, and in Canada. A good 

portion of monies received and spent by the farmers usually ends up in the government coffers anyway. This 

Bill to protect farmers temporarily from going under is a necessity if we want to stop the erosion and exodus 

of many small farmers. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

503 

 

I am concerned, however, that this Bill might work a hardship on some farmers who will be unable to meet 

litigation costs. May I suggest to the Minister that the Government assume these costs in extreme cases, and 

that we also take a look at accepting legal costs for the implement dealer, where he may be faced with 

contract implications with his parent company. 

 

As far as industry is concerned, I want to make my stand on policies clear in this regard. We must welcome 

honest capital to this Province. We must see that there is public, private, co-operative and joint private and 

government capital available for our industrial growth. We must welcome investment, whether it comes 

from Germany, United States, China or Japan, but not capital that will exploit our people or our resources, 

but investment that will help build our mixed economy. Investment must be encouraged as well from our 

own people. 

 

One area of our economy, namely that of agricultural lands, must always be owned by Canadians or by those 

who move, and live here. 

 

Let's say welcome to investors, we shall give you an honest and fair return. We must provide a sound, 

buoyant and economic base in establishing sound industrial projects to create work. Saskatchewan industry 

has far too long played the role as wholesalers of our raw products. We should assume the position of being 

manufacturers and retailers of these, too. Refine and manufacture the raw products that we produce and this 

will create real employment. 

 

What about our laborers today? The unions will never forget how the former Government tried to destroy 

collective bargaining over the past seven years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — Their dictatorial approach to place the workers back to peasant and feudal conditions was 

rejected with a strong voice and will never be forgotten. 

 

The changes requested in The Labour Standards Act should be supported. A 40-hour week is fast becoming 

the order of the day. The application of this amendment to cities is long overdue. There may be some 

instances where temporary hardship will be encountered, but the answer to this is to create a base for a 

proper economy, bring in a plan to stabilize and expand present business, and create new small business as 

well. Substantial funds must be provided for this very soon. We were the first of the provinces establishing 

the 44-hour work week and we should be proud of being first again, just as we were first in pioneering 

hospitalization and medicare; just as we were first in starting a government car insurance scheme with other 

government insurance plans; just as we were first in setting up a completely publicly-owned power and grid 

system in this Province, the envy of others in Canada; just as we were first, and still are, in bringing in The 

Homestead Act to protect farms and farmers and city dwellers; just as we were first in building new and 

super highways. We were the first to complete the Trans-Canada Highway in all of Canada; just as we were 

first in getting old age pensions through Ottawa, with the help of the famous J. S. Woodsworth, just as we 

were first to propose unemployment insurance for the workers in the Federal House. We took the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

504 

 

lead in bringing in holidays with pay for our workers. We took the lead in bringing in shorter hours of work 

and set up a Workmen's Compensation Board, outdoing any plan of its kind; just as were first in establishing 

new and better parks and recreational areas; we were first in opening up the North to provide a standard of 

living for our natives there; just as were first in establishing an air ambulance service, know as Flights of 

Mercy, the first of its kind in the world. A plan must be worked out for overseeing ground ambulance 

services throughout Saskatchewan. We were first in developing our potash industry and sodium sulphate 

deposits. We were first in developing an oil and gas industry, where today we have over 6,000 oil and gas 

wells able to produce. We took over a dying telephone system and turned it into the best in Canada. 

 

I could go on and on telling you about the accomplishments of our Government from 1944 to 1964 and the 

building of a just and human society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in reducing the hours of work to 40 hours a week for cities, I understand that, as mentioned 

earlier, many follow and work under that rule now. How many of us would like to work in this day and age 

44 to 48 hours per week and live on an income of $1.45 to $1.50 per hour, and in most cases raise a large 

family? This is the area in which we as a Government must move swiftly in some way to help these people 

have a minimum guaranteed income and do our best in creating a good business plan, so that they will be in 

a position to pay wages to help raise their standard of living. 

 

It is not asking too much in this Bill because from every direction throughout this continent, a three to four 

day work week is being pressed for. Anywhere from a 30 to 40 hour work week is now on the negotiating 

tables. You and I will see it come more rapidly than we think. It will come by necessity because of a 

cybernated society. 

 

Shorter hours are here for the laborer so let's be first in approving the 40-hour week as the Federal 

Government did some time ago. Farmers, through mechanization have been able to cut down their hours of 

work over longer periods, except in the case of dairying and diversified farming. First, we must press for 

proper prices for the goods he produces, not only for Saskatchewan, but for Canada and the world. We speak 

of holidays with pay for workers and farmers who are workers — and darn hard workers — are not 

compensated, so that they can take time off and enjoy the many sights in Saskatchewan and in Canada too. 

 

I have a clipping which reads like this: "Farmers of Norway" 

 

Norway will soon become the first country in the world to introduce paid vacations for 

farmers. Under proposals to be submitted to Parliament, farmers and their wives will receive 

four weeks vacation each year and about $280 in cash. The plan begins May 1st for a 

four-year trial period. 

 

What would be wrong with a cost-sharing plan of this type between Ottawa and Saskatchewan? If Ottawa 

objects to it, let's go it alone. It isn't a great deal when you realize agriculture is our primary industry, the life 

blood of our economy here and for Canada. I recommend this to my colleagues on this side of the House and 

I ask the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) to take this under advisement and do some research and bring 

it in for 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

505 

 

action. I say it would be a small gift for services rendered. 

 

So in conclusion, let me say, let us be the first province to bring in the 40-hour work week. Mr. Speaker, I 

support the motion. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs and Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, on an 

earlier occasion I congratulated you on your election to the high office that you hold. Today I should like to 

give my congratulations to those who have been elected to this Assembly in the last election, especially those 

who have been elected for the first time. They have been chosen by the people of their constituencies to 

represent them in this Legislature to debate and make the laws that govern the province and to sit in this, the 

highest governing authority in the Provincial scheme of things. There may be defects, Mr. Speaker, in our 

electoral process by a democratic process and I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that it is miles ahead of any other 

form of government. It is true that many of our ways of doing things are strange to many of the new 

Members and some of these things may seem to be outright stupid, maybe some of them are. Basically our 

procedures are based on hundreds of years of parliamentary history and are well proven ways of ensuring 

that within reason each has his right to speak. I ask the new Members to bear with us for a time and they may 

come to agree that the old parliamentary system is not so bad. 

 

Also, I'd like to say, Mr. Speaker, that some of the new Members may find some very valid points of 

criticism that we should be prepared to listen to. I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the proportion of the 

Members on your right as compared to those on your left and the fact that their positions were reversed from 

what they were at the last Session, would lead one to believe that the people of Saskatchewan have roundly 

rejected the former Liberal Government. I think this should impress some things upon us in this House, upon 

both sides of the House. I maybe don't need to pound this point home to the Members opposite, I think that 

they have been having some rather agonizing appraisals themselves as to why they lost this election and lost 

it by such a wide margin. But I think that there are points that we on this side of the House should consider 

when looking at the results of the last election which should not be missed by us. I cannot escape the feeling, 

Mr. Speaker, that a win of such magnitude places an even added responsibility upon us on this side. The 

people of Saskatchewan are not satisfied with the way things have been and they are not satisfied with the 

way things have been going for some time. This is very apparent. It is up to us, this new Government, to 

come up with the answers. The best that we can do, Mr. Speaker, the best that any government can do, is not 

too good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that there are undoubtedly several reasons that the Members opposite can find as to why they lost the 

election. I think that such a resounding defeat did not come about because of only one mistake on the part of 

the former Government. We might even go so far as to surmise that part of the reason for the upset was due 

to Federal Liberal policies as well as Provincial. But I think that one of the main reasons was because of the 

proposed Dore Lake pulp mill. Before, during and after the election, I found that many people, some of 

whom I have reason to believe were not voting for us, were opposed to the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

506 

 

building of the mill. One lady who didn't even live in the province but had been listening to some of our 

programs in Medicine Hat said she thought that that television program which won the election for us was 

the one that showed the hands stacking two piles of money on the table and the words that said, "It's a bad 

deal." Now I think it was, I think it was a bad deal. I shall not reiterate the details of the proposed 

negotiations as they have been discussed in this House many times before, but I think that financially it was a 

bad deal and I think that in terms of pollution of our northern rivers and wanton destruction of our forests, it 

was still a worse deal. I firmly believe that the Government did the right thing in rejecting the proposal to go 

on and build this mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — I think that Premier Blakeney was right when, as Leader of the Opposition, he said that 

Parsons and Whittemore were more interested in building the mill than in operating it because their profits 

lay in the building. I believe that the people of Saskatchewan are satisfied that we have done the right thing 

in not going ahead with the mill under the proposals put forth by Parsons and Whittemore at this time. We 

may be stuck with some costs which we may have to pay in regard to costs incurred by their Company in 

their progress in building the mill up until that time when they were told to stop all steps towards 

construction. But who is responsible for that, Mr. Speaker? Is the New Democratic Government which 

served notice when we were still in Opposition that we would not be prepared to proceed with the mill under 

the proposed terms if we were elected to form the next Government? Or is it the former Liberal Government 

when they well knew that we had thus declared ourselves, and who knew that we might well defeat them in 

the election, went ahead and signed the contracts and they did not have to, Mr. Speaker. This is the part that 

hurts. They weren't forced at all to sign this contract. They had plenty of options and, in fact, they went ahead 

of what they were supposed to do in signing this contract, thus enabling Parsons and Whittemore to go ahead 

with construction only days before the former Liberal Government was turned out of office. I'm not going to 

attribute motives, Mr. Speaker, but I do maintain that this action by the former Liberal Government makes it 

the one that was responsible if it costs the people of Saskatchewan any considerable sum of money to get out 

of this deal. 

 

Now I should like to turn to the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. I notice that there is a clause in the 

Speech that reads as follows: 

 

My Ministers have already moved to increase the number of jobs by setting up a task force 

on job creation which is undertaking a crash review of government projects to identify those 

which can be accelerated or set in motion before winter. 

 

This, indeed, we have done. The Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek), my seatmate, and the Hon. 

Minister of Welfare (Mr. Snyder), and myself have formed a committee to sit down and see what could be 

done about implementing the possibility of putting up a crash program in construction that would provide 

employment at this time. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

507 

 

The first thing that we found, Mr. Speaker, was that the Public Works' budget that was brought down in this 

House last year was a farce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — We have here a Public Works' capital budget, Item 28 in the Estimates of Expenditures for 

the year ending March 31, 1972. It says the total for capital expenditures was $15,775,000. Well, when we 

started looking at the situation as it is, we found that only $7 million, $7,080,000 was actually committed at 

this time. The rest of the budget, over $8 million, of it was frozen, Mr. Speaker. It was not intended to be 

used. This was purely a budget that had been drawn up for election purposes to try to fool the people of 

Saskatchewan, and this budget was frozen to such an extent that the Department was instructed not to go 

ahead and at present finds itself unprepared to go ahead with much that was indicated in this budget. 

 

The Members opposite talk about unemployment. But what did they do when they were the Government of 

this Province? The Hon. Member from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank), with whom the Deputy 

Speaker undoubtedly is acquainted, in the last session of the House presented us with some figures in regard 

to what was being done by the Government at that time. As you will recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

Government in the fall of 1970 came forward with what they claimed was a crash program to assist in 

unemployment at that time. This was bruited about as a great thing that they were doing for the people of the 

province and they were going to provide the answer to unemployment by the setting up of winter work for 

the people of the province. I believe that the total figure that was given was some $17,966,000. The Hon. 

Member from Saskatoon Mayfair, I may add, found that the item of $2,108,000 of low-rental housing from 

the Department of Municipal Affairs had been added in twice. But this brought the total value to some 

$15,509,000. But this, in itself, sounded like a pretty credible figure that was being spent to provide 

employment for the people of Saskatchewan who are unable to find employment elsewhere, and who were 

leaving the province in such large numbers. 

 

But the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Mayfair made some inquiries and came up with some rather startling 

figures. He found, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as of March 21st, which is the day the sun crosses the equator 

on its way north and is technically the end of winter, that at that time the only money that had been expended 

out of the some $15 million was $883,812, that was all that had been spent, all that had been spent out of 

that $15 million. There had been some $6,952,000 worth of projects which had been indicated would be 

started and on which nothing had been spent. And there was over $5 million which hadn't even been started. 

There hadn't been any move made to get them started by March 21st, and this was the big program which 

was supposed to provide employment for the people of Saskatchewan last winter. 

 

The Hon. Member who had been speaking this morning about unemployment and what should be done on 

this thing himself was one of those whose actions last winter were far from being very successful. And I 

think that again they used large figures, but were able to come forward with very little in regard to the results 

that the people of Saskatchewan could really know that they had got their teeth into. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

508 

 

Now, to go back again to this capital budget of $15,775,000, over half of which was frozen by orders of the 

Treasury. I should like to say that a case in point in regard to this is the provincial office building to be built 

in Regina. You'll find it here on Page 51 of the Estimates. It shows it here — provincial office building, 

Regina, Subvote 19 — $2,230,000. Well, I wonder if you can find anywhere in the City of Regina where 

there are any signs of a $2 million expenditure on an office building. It's needed well enough. Departments 

are scattered all over town and they're paying hundreds of thousands of dollars a year in rent. The savings 

would pay for the interest charges on the building, at least, and this would be much better accommodation 

for the departments and would cost the taxpayers of the province very little more than what they are paying 

now. Look at the employment opportunities it would have provided. It would have kept our artisans in the 

province instead of them having to tear up their roots and move elsewhere. And it may not be so easy to get 

them back again. 

 

This $2,230,000 project was frozen and the Department of Public Works told to forget about it. It was just 

window dressing for a budget in an election year. Now there are not even designs ready to go ahead with it. 

At the very best, construction could not begin on this building until it was late in the spring of next year and 

this is what was put in the budget last year, $2,230,000 for construction in the City of Regina. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the heat was turned on the Liberal Party on June 23rd and we are going to do our best to 

get this budget that was in the deep freeze, we're going to do our best to get it thawed out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — This committee on job creation, composed of the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), the 

Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek), and myself, has examined the needs of all departments of Government, 

and these have been assessed by the people in my Department as to what they honestly feel can be gone 

ahead with this year. Now, our figures may not be as spectacular as those put forward by the former 

Government but these, to the best of my knowledge and from the people of my Department, say this is what 

they feel that they can definitely go ahead with this year. The Government has approved an accelerated 

Public Works' program of some $8 million, $8,050,000, and I can say, Mr. Speaker, that instructions were 

issued on July 30th to the Department of Public Works to proceed immediately to get these projects under 

construction, with the expectation that at least $3-1/3 million could be spent in the present fiscal year. I didn't 

wait for the announcement to be made publicly on this. I told my Department that as soon as this was 

approved by Cabinet to go ahead and get going on this. And this they have done and instructions have gone 

out from the Deputy to the different branches of the Department to proceed as quickly as possible in regard 

to these projects which have been approved. 

 

Now I have only a few of them listed here but I thought the House might be interested in some of them. I've 

just listed a few of some of the larger ones. The first one the list I have here is an item which was in the 

budget last year but which was frozen and had not been moved forward for use. It was renovation of the first 

floor of the south wing and the third floor of the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

509 

 

north wing and site development for the School for the Deaf in Saskatoon, an item of $190,000 which we 

feel that we can get started in August of this year and spend some $180,000 before the end of the fiscal year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — We have renovations of the third floor of the School for the Deaf in Saskatoon, an item of 

some $220,000. This is one that had been approved earlier, Mr. Speaker, but had just not been proceeded 

with. But we find that now even though it had been approved earlier, we don't — the people in my 

Department — feel they can get started with it until February of next year, and only $38,000 can be spent on 

this. 

 

Another one is the construction of an equipment repair depot in Prince Albert for the use of both the 

Highways and the Natural Resources Departments. Construction of $1,261,000 — this was something that 

was in the budget last year but it was frozen. Now the extent is that now they feel they can get going on it, 

possibly by December of this year and spend some $250,000 before the end of the current year. 

 

We have renovations to the Swift Current Court House. I was just talking to Judge Moore about this last 

night. He happened to stop by my house and there is $168,000 approved but for one reason or another has 

not been gone forward with. We're hoping that we'll be able to get some of the wrinkles ironed out and 

proceed with this in October and spend the full sum of $168,000 this year. 

 

The renovations of the south wing of the first floor of the Legislative Building was in the budget last year but 

was one of these items that was frozen — $225,000 for the project. We're hoping to get going on this in 

December of this year and expend $49,000. 

 

This list becomes rather boring to the Members of this House, I realize, Mr. Speaker, even though it contains 

only the larger items in what we are proposing. I think I shall cut it short and I say that one item of $706,000 

which we are proposing for construction of equipment and storage building and materials research laboratory 

for the Department of Highways in Regina, an item of $706,000, this is one item that was approved earlier 

but was frozen. We think we can get going on it February of next year. Another item was construction of an 

equipment and repair depot for Highways in Swift Current. This was approved earlier but there had been 

some difficulties in regard to site and such, but I think these are pretty well out of the way now and we can 

get going on this and trust that we can spend some $240,000 on this. 

 

Another one of the larger ones is the renovation of the Psychiatric Centre, Saskatchewan Hospital at 

Weyburn, some $322,000 which had been approved earlier but had not been proceeded with. We hope 

$150,000 can be spent on this in the present fiscal year. 

 

A new item, Mr. Speaker, is the renovation of the Souris Valley Extended Care Hospital at Weyburn, Stage 

III, in regard to administration and dietary facilities. Its facilities for the administration offices, central 

kitchen and dining areas, 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

510 

 

an item of $420,000 of which we hope we can get started on in December of this year. 

 

Another large one is $455,000 for the construction of Stage II in a small motors repair shop at the Provincial 

Correctional Centre in Prince Albert. We hope to spend some $35,000 on this this year and get started in 

January. 

 

I shall close my discussions of these items with these few words because I don't wish to bore the House by 

giving the full details of even the larger items. 

 

These that I have quoted, Mr. Speaker, have been approved by the present Government and directions have 

been given to proceed with them, as I said earlier. It's expected that these projects will give real impetus to 

construction trades this fall and throughout the winter months. These are not inflated figures but rather 

conservative estimates of my Department as to what they believe they can actually start construction on in 

the near future. And this is another of our election promises which we are proceeding to keep at the earliest 

possible time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — We said that we would provide a Public Works' program and this we are proceeding to do as 

the best that the Department says that they are able to do at this time. 

 

These figures are in regard to projects which are the concern of the Department of Public Works. There are 

many other projects, Mr. Speaker, which departments carry on or are associated with but which do not 

concern our Department. There is also construction carried on by Crown corporations, such as the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, SaskTel and others. I do not have full particulars on these at present but 

preliminary estimates would indicate that proposed acceleration of some of these projects would add another 

$6 million to our total Public Work's program and some $2.5 million to the amount which we could be 

expending in this current fiscal year. And besides these there are such things as house construction. I shall 

give credit to the former Government in their provision of $500 housing construction grants for houses 

which were constructed and occupied before September 1st of this year. As you know, Mr. Speaker, our 

Department has extended this to the end of the year on condition that these houses are occupied by the end of 

the year and the projects were started before September 30th. 

 

There is also the low-rental housing program. There are now some 224 units under construction in the 

province at a value of $2,394,000. There have been 265 units which have been approved but are awaiting 

Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation finalization and these are valued at $3,012,000. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, I have written to the Hon. Robert Andras, Minister-in-Charge of the Central Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation asking his co-operation in endeavoring to expedite these projects in view of providing 

employment this fall and winter and as soon as possible. 

 

If these steps which I have spoken of, Mr. Speaker, are carried out in total they will provide a real impetus to 

the construction trades and employment in this Province. I am glad to be able to report on this item in the 

Speech from the Throne and what is in progress at this time and I will support the motion. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

511 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, at the very outset, I should like to extend my 

congratulations to you on having been elected to be the Speaker of this Assembly. I want to add my voice to 

those already in expression of confidence in the job that I know you will do for all the Members of the 

House, although, personally speaking, I find it sometimes difficult to add to the decorum of the House during 

the course of the debate. I want to assure you, Sir, that I will endeavor to respect your rulings at all time. 

 

I'd like also to congratulate the new Members on both sides of the House to their election to the Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan. This is certainly a very high honor which all too few people in 

this Province are fortunate enough to have. It's a terrific duty, I'm sure, that is on all of us, a terrific trust that 

is imposed by the electorate to carry out our duties and to speak our minds the way we see issues and 

problems ought to be resolved in the Province of Saskatchewan. And so I congratulate all of the new 

Members. I was elected three and one-half, almost four years ago, as a first time Member. After a couple of 

days in the Session you will get acquainted with the procedure and it becomes almost — although it may be 

misinterpreted by those listening — like a club within the Legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this debate on the Speech from the Throne has been a very interesting and enlightening 

debate for not only myself but Members and the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. I regret very much 

that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition Party won't be here to listen to the few remarks that I have to make 

respecting him but I'll come around to that in just a minute. It has been a very interesting and enlightening 

debate for a number of reasons. I find it interesting and enlightening because of the total and complete 

reversal taken by the Members opposite now that they are in Opposition, now that they suffered a defeat at 

the hands of the electorate with respect to so many issues which were integral and fundamental and basic to 

the philosophy and the concept of the Liberal Party in the Province of Saskatchewan. A lot of the new 

Members and I myself heard this morning a very fine speech by the former Minister of Welfare, the Member 

for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), who talked about principles and politics, who admonished the Government 

for allegedly going back on certain principles, he brought out the example of legislative secretaries. I want to 

say that if there is any Member or any political party which has turned its back on its own principles and 

philosophies, Mr. Speaker, it is the band of Members opposite who occupy the benches of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I'm not going to spend time now to relate the various reversals in deterrent fees with 

respect to the amount of legislation introduced by this Government, legislation, as in the Speech from the 

Throne, legislation which the former Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) fought every inch of the way 

to preserve — at every hustings that he took part in in the last election — fought to preserve in every speech 

that I heard him take part in in the Saskatchewan Legislature, tried to tell the Members of the House and the 

people of Saskatchewan that this was integral to a responsible fiscal policy when it comes to 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

512 

 

health programs. And now in this Session we witness the spectacle — that is I suppose about the only word 

that one can readily think of — of the Liberal Party turning tail and reversing its principles and voting for the 

very legislation that it endeavored to prevent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I recall once the quotation from another very famous Liberal who now happens to be the 

Prime Minister of this Country, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, and I suppose that if the freshmen Members really 

consider what the Liberal Party opposite has done in voting for all this legislation, they will find that it 

doesn't vary too greatly from the principles and philosophies as enunciated by Liberals since time in the 

morning that I've understood them. The principles and the only principle that the Liberal Party in Canada has 

ever believed in was enunciated by the present Prime Minister, Mr. Pierre Elliott Trudeau, back in 1963 

when he said: 

 

Thus, the only principle and philosophy of the Liberal Party is say nothing, do nothing, think 

nothing, but keep in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And that is precisely the attitude of the Leader of the Opposition, precisely the attitude of 

the Members opposite. I think a very eloquent speech was given this morning by the Member for Regina 

Wascana (Mr. Baker) who talked of the question of the need of a political party putting forward a philosophy 

of programs and policies as alternate solutions to the people of Saskatchewan. He said, and I concur heartily 

with his point of view, that the moment a political party stops generating new ideas and stops advocating 

solutions and resorts only to name calling, to actions of divisiveness, to actions of dividing the farming 

people and the laboring people, then it is doomed to sickness and opposition and that's what will happen to 

the people opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I don't go for any of the speeches, Mr. Speaker, by the Members opposite who tell us 

about their great chastisement at the hands of the electorate. I don't think that we can dismiss the types of 

vitriolic and bitter, I say downright offensive public policies of the former Administration which were 

intended, not to unite our people, but to divide our people. I recall in the election, Member after Member on 

the opposite side, young people, not seeking to give them a step in the ladder of life, No, but bringing them 

down by name calling them as kooks, hippies, weirdoes and beardoes, used by the Members opposite. I 

recall during this last election, we hold various philosophies and political point of views, but when we are in 

Government we represent all the people of Saskatchewan, I would say it is one of the functions of a 

government, any government, to seek to unite our people, not seek to create divisions amongst our people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

513 

 

Mr. Romanow: — So what did we have, the spectacle of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart), the 

Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), and the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) getting up during this 

campaign in every town, village, and city, name calling our working people, trying to bring them to heel with 

legislation such as Bill 2, using pamphlets about labor courts, using every bitter and mean speech about our 

working people, not because they really believed that was a solution to the labor problem, although some of 

them may have, not because they really believed in that, but because they hoped that it would get them some 

cheap political advantage in the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And the seeds of mistrust and misunderstanding were planted. In 1944 to 1964, Mr. 

Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan had one of the best records, if not the best records, in terms of hours 

lost due to strikes of any province in the Dominion of Canada. Whenever we did have strikes, the 

Government and the employers of the trade unions were able to explain the differences to the farming 

people, explain the purposes and rationale behind the strikes, try to get the two parties around the whole 

table, and to negotiate a final and complete settlement. And it could be done, Mr. Speaker, because the 

climate in Saskatchewan was ripe. We didn't have divisiveness. I want to tell the people of this Province and 

the Members of this House, labor courts, Bill 2 and all of the anti-labor legislation that was concocted by the 

Members opposite was not presented with a view to having labor peace, it was presented to divide our 

people; it was presented to inflame the passions of our people; it was designed to be unfair; and the best 

thing that happened for all of the Province of Saskatchewan and the unity of the people was the defeat of the 

Liberal Government and the boys opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now this morning the former Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) talked about the 

regret that he had about the Government not seating the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). I recall the 

Member for Milestone in his speech early this morning saying that he was very sorry that Athabasca was 

now denied a voice in the Legislature. He said he was now sorry to hear that their views weren't represented. 

Well I find that pretty strange coming from a former Minister of the Crown who I presume was party to 

decisions taken by the then Government, a decision I have to remind the Members of this House, a decision 

that effectively barred representation in this House for a Member from Melfort-Tisdale — the old riding — 

and then the constituency of Melfort-Kinistino after the gerrymander, for a period of well over one year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now the Hon. Member five weeks after his demise from the trusted position of Minister 

of the Crown has the audacity to come to the House and plead the case of a need for a voice in the 

Saskatchewan Legislature when he and the Government opposite were the main perpetrators to basic 

anti-democratic law 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

514 

 

such as the gerrymander bill of 1971. When he and the Leader of the Opposition were privy to the decision 

that was made to keep out of this House the legitimate voices of the people from Melfort-Kinistino and 

Melfort-Tisdale. 

 

I was also very interested in the Member from Milestone's comments that the program of the New 

Democratic Party with respect to welfare was deceitful — I think that is the way the words were used. Oh, 

I'm sure that the Member for Milestone will live to regret the use of the word "deceitful" four years from 

now when a legislative program of this Government with respect to the promises is up before the public 

scrutiny. I am sure that the Member for Milestone will live to regret it personally when it comes up for his 

own election or re-election in Milestone. The thing about that comment and about all the speeches made by 

the Members opposite is that it was the same old tired speech of the same old tired defeated Liberal Party 

that we have been hearing now for the last seven or eight years, the same anti-labor rhetoric, the same social 

welfare legislation rhetoric, the same bogey man about scare of investment. I should have thought they 

would have learned. After all, they fought a campaign, Mr. Speaker, on that very point up until June 23rd. 

MacLaren Advertising told them that this was a good political issue. All their professional public opinion 

pollsters thought that they would wipe out the NDP on that issue and they went into the election and they 

were wiped out and yet the proposed Leader of the Liberal Party when the convention is called sticks to the 

same old tune. I knew that Liberals were slow learners but I didn't think they were that slow. I think that this 

calls for an elimination of the Member for Milestone as a contender for the Liberal Party. In my respectful 

submission we have to get a man who at least brings his thinking up to about 1967, if not earlier, and I think 

this may be very difficult for the Liberal Party but perhaps maybe the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) can 

get us into 1969 or thereabouts. Maybe the freshman Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. D. MacDonald) 

around 1969 or thereabouts and I'm sure yet the Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) really hasn't 

given us the pearls of wisdom as to his political thinking and his political philosophy, although I am frankly 

fearful about him because I heard his speech — or saw a report of his speech respecting Bill 2 — and I'm not 

sure whether to say it is 1971 or 1871, but in any event we shall keep it in abeyance until he makes more 

contribution to the Saskatchewan Legislature. 

 

Now I was very interested, and I'm very sorry that the former Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) has left his 

seat. He is a man in my view who makes an interesting, if not very deep contribution to the Saskatchewan 

Legislature. He is the former Minister of Highways who I want to tell some of the Members in this House — 

the new Members — the Member who got up and said that we are trying to penalize our civil servants, we 

are trying to bludgeon them, we are not men to call them in, we are not men because we don't give them six 

months. "We treated our civil servants like men" was the argument that he advanced. It is too bad that he 

didn't look around him to see who was sitting behind the rail because I could tell this House, Mr. Speaker, 

from 1964 under the Liberal Government the Province of Saskatchewan saw a scale of firings of civil 

servants, unprecedented ever in the history of the province and likely never ever to be seen by the 

Government opposite. The Member from Regina Albert Park says, "Oh, boy, they talk about political 

freedom." I recall a Power worker, who as I 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

515 

 

recall wasn't even in a position of policy in the Government, who took part in some political activity on his 

own time and right after 1964 within a matter of weeks, the General Manager and various officials of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation were summoned to the office of the then Premier and told directly from 

the Premier's office that that man had to go down the road and down the road he went and it was the subject 

of a long protracted arbitration proceedings. And the Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) knows 

of this and you can multiply that particular case literally by the tens and tens and dozens and dozens of the 

Liberal Party. They did it as late as 1971 when they coldly and bluntly fired one of their own people who was 

the head of Homecoming '71, Mr. Wilf Gardiner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You know what kind of men they were, Mr. Member for Moose Jaw North and Mr. 

Member for Regina Albert Park, you know what kind of men, those who occupied the Treasury benches 

then, they told Mr. Gardiner that he was through and Mr. Gardiner read about it in the Regina Leader-Post. 

You know what kind of men they are about severance pay? Ask them about the severance pay and what they 

have given to Mr. Gardiner in severance pay. Do you know what they did with the Labour Relations Board, 

as my colleague said in 1964, fired them summarily when they heard it on the radio. Don't let any Member of 

the Liberal Party come to this Legislature and pretend to lecture this Government about political firings 

because the political indecency and immorality exhibited by the Government opposite will be unparalleled in 

the history of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And there was nobody more flagrant in his abuse of authority than the former Minister of 

Highways, the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt), nobody. He would get up in this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

during the course of Estimates, and if anyone of us dared to enquire as to the reasons behind a particular 

expenditure, if anyone of us even pretended that we had any authority or any privilege to question some 

aspect of the Department of Highways' spending, what he would do was cut off, virtually the allocation of 

spending in the questioning Member's riding. I have a whole series of clippings here which I want to direct to 

the more junior Members over on the opposite side. It is a result of certain questions asked by my colleague, 

the Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk). I recall the former Minister of Highways, not even in a Cabinet 

meeting, getting up in his place and simply saying, "Okay, you are questioning the expenditures, I'm telling 

you — just like the headline says — no highways at Redberry, says Boldt." Not even a cent to be spent on 

repairs, not a cent even to spend with respect to construction. Talk about autocratic rule, talk about decisions 

being made without any consultation, talk about abuse of political power and political process. Mr. Speaker, 

and Members of this Legislature I say that you will have to go a long way to match the actions of the 

Minister of Highways in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I'm glad to say, if I may use a rather poor pun, I'm glad and the people of 

Saskatchewan are glad that he is 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

516 

 

down the road as Minister of Highways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just spend a few minutes about this myth that is attempted to be 

propagated by the Liberal Party about investment and the investment climate in Saskatchewan. I've heard 

this speech since 1957, 1958, at least, I'm sure in the Liberal Party it has even gone back further than that. 

This myth that somehow the province becomes industrialized under the free enterprise Liberal Party. 

Somehow it doesn't become industrialized under the so-called Socialist CCF then, now NDP Government. 

Those facts simply are not true. The greatest period of industrialization and economic activity according to a 

political scientist and economist and others, but I'm just going to quote one, from the University of 

Saskatchewan, Dr. Norman Ward, happened between 1944 and 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And there was a bit of industrialization under the Liberal Government right after the 

change of government in 1964 because of an ongoing potash program that to a large extent was initiated and 

started by the then CCF Government, and you had the continuation of the boom for a period of a year or two. 

 

And then around 1965-67-68 after the construction came in, after the indecent haste of the Liberal Party to 

glut, to create a glut on the potash market just so that they could go back before the television cameras and 

announce another new industry. After that Cinderella period which was an offshoot and a continuation of the 

CCF, after that period ended, what were we left with? I'll tell you what we were left with. The highest 

population exodus, thanks to the Liberals since the Dirty Thirties. I'll tell you what we were left with. More 

bankruptcies in more towns, villages and cities since the Dirty Thirties. I'll tell you what we were left with. 

Less younger people in Saskatchewan, more having left the Province of Saskatchewan than since the Dirty 

Thirties. I'll tell you what we were left with, Mr. Speaker. The lowest retail sales recorded since the Dirty 

Thirties in the last period in the period of the election. 

 

And they have the gall and audacity, as I say, to come to the people of Saskatchewan and now say that their 

Party is instrumental in solid economic achievement and growth. I say they will never be instrumental, they 

will never make a solid contribution to a stable economic growth of Saskatchewan as long as any one of 

them remain adherents to the private enterprise system which is based on a catch-as-catch-can philosophy, a 

private enterprise system that "herks" and jerks along, that reacts to crisis, does not act to meet those crises, a 

private enterprise and philosophy that the Members opposite adhere to, one that is concerned with giving 

thousands, millions of dollars away to corporations, be they foreign or Canadian, one doesn't care, in order to 

provide relatively few jobs for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that when the Liberal Party tells us about industrialization, ask any small 

businessman in Saskatchewan and he'll tell you that that is a big political lie and if the Liberals . . . 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

517 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . don't believe what I have to say, then I shall invite the Members opposite to just go 

back and read the June 24th newspaper of either the Star-Phoenix or the Leader-Post about the election 

results and analyze whether or not the people of Saskatchewan agree with them that we had a great period of 

economic growth in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend just a few brief minutes on a very important topic respecting the recent 

decision made by the Government with Athabasca. I want to get it very clearly on the record before this 

House and the people of Saskatchewan about the actions of those who are now in Opposition, those who 

occupied the Treasury benches when it came to the Athabasca deal. 

 

I think it's important for the people of our Province and all Members of this House, especially the younger 

ones of the Liberal Party opposite, to fully know the sordid facts of how the negotiations were carried on by 

these efficient free enterprisers opposite, and what kind of a legacy those negotiations have left the people of 

our Province. It's true as I'm standing here that every political party leaves a legacy behind for future 

generations, it's either a legacy which is of benefit to all of us; or if a government makes an error, it's a 

legacy which all the people of the Province of Saskatchewan, a cross that they have to bear. I'm going to ask 

the people of Saskatchewan and the Members of this House to judge what kind of a legacy the Liberals left 

behind as a result of Athabasca in a minute or two. It's a legacy, I want to tell the Members of this House and 

the people of Saskatchewan, that I am happy and proud not to be a part of . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I'm going to now just very briefly document this legacy. The Hon. Premier during 

the course of this debate told the House about certain facts respecting the signing of various agreements 

relating to Athabasca. May I, in order to tell the people the factual situation, very briefly set out the facts as 

follows: 

 

For the purposes of my comments this morning we're talking about essentially three agreements, three 

agreements that are matters of concern in assessing the signature of the then Government on June 14, 1971 

of a so-called General Amending Agreement No. 1. I'm going to ask Members of this House and the people 

of Saskatchewan to assess the effects of that Government signing on June 14th the General Amending 

Agreement No. 1. Now, in order to do so, I want all Members to keep in mind these facts. 

 

There are, as I've said to you, Mr. Speaker, three agreements. The first agreement is an agreement called the 

Infrastructure Agreement which bore the date of March 15, 1971. The second agreement is an agreement 

between the Canadian Pacific Railway Company and Athabasca Forest Industries Limited dated April 30, 

1971 — about a month and a half after the first agreement. And then there is a third agreement, the 

agreement that I am going to make a comment or two on, the agreement known as a General Amending 

Agreement No. 1 made between the Government of Saskatchewan and Parsons and Whittemore which was, 

as the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

518 

 

Premier has told the people, dated June 14, 1971. If Members opposite will bear with me as I repeat again 

three agreements — Infrastructure Agreement dated March 15, 1971, agreement between the Canadian 

Pacific Railway and Athabasca dated April 30, 1971, and a General Amending Agreement dated June 14, 

1971. 

 

Now, I'm talking about the first agreement, the Infrastructure Agreement, March 15, 1971. It says a lot of 

things but what it says for the purpose of my discussion is as follows. It says, and I'm quoting directly from 

paragraph 2.4: 

 

Athabasca and the Minister shall ascertain from the Government of Canada the amount 

Athabasca will receive by way of a Federal capital incentive grant and will in 30 days 

following the receipt of confirmation of the Federal grant, deem whether the amount in terms 

of said grant on the assurances received are satisfactory. In the event that the said amounts, 

terms and assurances are unsatisfactory then . . . 
 
(And I want Members to keep this in mind) 
 

. . . this agreement may be terminated by either Athabasca or the Minister upon written notice 

to all parties and the parties in this agreement shall from the date of such termination be 

released from their obligations hereunder. 

 

What does Section 2.4 in effect say? What it says is that the Athabasca and the Minister shall determine from 

Ottawa the Federal capital incentive grant, they'll then determine whether the amount is satisfactory, the 

terms and the amount are satisfactory, and if they are unsatisfactory — that is the Federal incentive grant 

from the Department of Regional Economic Expansion, then the agreement may be terminated by either 

Athabasca or the Minister upon written notice to all parties. It was, as the Hon. Premier says, an escape 

clause for the Government if they felt that the grants given from Ottawa in terms or conditions were 

unsatisfactory, then they could back out. That's what the first agreement, the Infrastructure Agreement said. 

 

Now I refer to the General Amending Agreement. This is the one signed June 14th. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — By whom? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Signed by the Deputy Minister of Treasury instructed and on your authority, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And you can't escape any liability . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . never tried to! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . Oh, sure, you're going to try. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, no . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — If I were in your position I should try to escape the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

519 

 

legacy that you left behind for the people of Saskatchewan too . . . except that I don't think that you will be 

able to escape. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Except I think that when the people of Saskatchewan know what kind of a deal you 

yourself, and the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac), and the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) made 

for them, you won't be able to escape no matter how hard you try and you'll be lucky to come back to this 

House next time round. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . picking your little brain . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, what does this General Amending Agreement No. 1 provide for the Leader of the 

Opposition, because obviously he hasn't read the agreement so I'm going to read for his edification the 

paragraph 1.1. One June 14th this agreement was signed of which the following paragraph is contained 

therein: 
 

Athabasca and the Minister hereby waive any right of termination as provided in Section 2.4 

of the Infrastructure Agreement . . . 
 
(As I have just read to you). 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Right! We . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Right, you bet you did! Now, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition, now we have 

a Federal incentive grant, we're dealing about a number of things, amount and terms and conditions of it and 

I want to tell the House and the people of Saskatchewan that the only written, the only written record which 

we have been able to find relating to this Federal capital incentive grant is an exchange of correspondence 

between Mr. Tom Kent, Deputy Minister of Regional Economic Expansion for the Federal Government, and 

the former Provincial Treasurer and now Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart). The initial relevant letter 

was dated May 17th and noted, simply noted, to have been received by the Provincial Treasurer and now 

Leader of the Opposition on May 25th. The letter indicated that the Federal Cabinet — the Federal Cabinet, 

Ottawa — had agreed to undertake negotiations for the grant, agreed to undertake negotiations — May 25th, 

May 17th — and asked for a meeting of the officials to discuss it. That's what Mr. Kent asked for. 

 

The then Provincial Treasurer and now Leader of the Opposition replied to that letter and he named the 

Deputy Provincial Treasurer as the Province's representative in those negotiations. Mr. Speaker, the General 

Amending Agreement was signed on June 14th waiving our right to pass judgment on the Department of 

Regional Economic Expansion grant, the terms and conditions. The first meeting of the officials wasn't held 

until June 16th, two days after we'd given up our right to assess whether or not the grant is a good grant or 

not. 

 

What the Leader of the Opposition, and I don't put it only on him . . . 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

520 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, I hope you . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . the Member from Wilkie, the Member from Milestone, Members of the Treasury 

Board, what they did by signing that agreement was to waive any obligations, to waive the right of the 

Province of Saskatchewan to get out with respect to that grant. They waived it not having held any meetings 

with anybody in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Ah-h-h! . . . ? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — They waived it — no meetings on the record of the Government. Oh, well, the Leader of 

the Opposition talks about informal discussions and the like. I've heard this always bandied around about a 

discussion but isn't it strange that we're looking at millions of dollars and not one word down in writing 

about it. Not one word that we know of, so what the people of Saskatchewan have here — and I'm sure the 

Member for Milestone isn't here — the great negotiator of the private enterprise system, we have a situation 

where the people of Saskatchewan have a right to take a look at the grant, had a right to get out if the grant 

wasn't according with the needs of the Province of Saskatchewan, we would have had that right. We had that 

right waived by the Leader of the Opposition, waived two days before they even have a first meeting to 

negotiate what the terms and conditions of that grant are. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, this June 14th General Amending Agreement No. 1 waived the right of the 

Province of Saskatchewan to terminate its obligations under conditions where the provisions of Paragraph 

2.4 of the Infrastructure Agreement applied. And I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Read the whole thing! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . that in the judgment of the Government that action was a legacy of which I'll explain 

further after the noon-hour break, a legacy which all of us will be paying for dearly, a legacy of the Liberals 

who sit now to your left. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I call it 12:30. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed at 12:30 p.m. until 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this morning when I called it 12:30 I was in the process of delineating for 

this House some facts concerning the proposed Athabasca pulp mill operation, some facts concerning the 

effect of the signing of the so-called General Amending Agreement No. 1 between the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Company on June 14, 1971. I was endeavoring to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

what those effects were going to be to them, or might be to them, as a result of the actions taken by the now 

Leader of the Opposition and by his Cabinet colleagues. I don't mean to put this on his shoulder by any 

means, he, of course, was acting on behalf of the Government. And I was telling the Members of the House 

that the Infrastructure Agreement, March 15, 1971 gave the Government a condition 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

521 

 

whereby the agreement could be terminated if the Government wasn't satisfied with amounts, terms and 

assurances respecting the Federal grant. I was telling the House this morning that under the June 14th 

agreement, Clause 1.1, that escape clause — If I may call it that — was waived, the right of termination was 

waived. And then two days later, the first meeting by the officials to discuss the grant, two days after giving 

up the Province's right to look at the terms and conditions of the grant, we sit down for what appears to be, at 

any rate, our first meeting to determine whether or not the grant is coming through in the terms and 

conditions of the grant. And I was making the point before lunch that that action by the former Liberal 

Government coming as it did, June 14th just before the June 23rd vote, put the Province of Saskatchewan in 

a very difficult situation, in a difficult situation which may cause undue hardship for the people of our 

Province. And I want to continue on to tell the people of this Province in the House one other aspect 

respecting this agreement. 

 

There was a further provision of the Infrastructure Agreement, that's the first agreement that I've told you 

about dated March 15, 1971, that provision was contained in Paragraph 2.6 whereby by that paragraph it was 

mandatory that negotiations for long-term financing not proceed until the Government and Athabasca were 

satisfied on three counts. Firstly, that the cutting rights on the Air Weapons Range — which is under Federal 

control — had been arranged. Secondly, that the Government and Athabasca were satisfied with the amount 

and terms of the Federal capital incentive grant; and thirdly, that the Government and Athabasca were 

satisfied with the arrangements made for construction of a connecting rail-line to the proposed mill site. 

 

To summarize so that it is in relatively easy language. This Infrastructure Agreement said that long-term 

financing, the long-term financing mustn't proceed until the Government and the Company were satisfied on 

three counts — firstly, the cutting rights of the Air Weapons Range had been arranged; secondly, 

Government and Athabasca satisfied with the amount and terms of the Federal incentive grant; and thirdly, 

that the Government and Athabasca are satisfied with respect to the arrangements for the construction of a 

connecting rail-line to the mill site. 

 

That's the way the agreement was on March 15, 1971. Along comes this famous agreement of June 14th, a 

few days before the vote on June 23rd. This agreement that I called the General Amending Agreement, one 

aspect of which I have already told you about, Mr. Speaker, where the Government waived its right to object 

with respect to the terms and conditions. Along comes June 14th and lo and behold in addition to the 

paragraph I've told you about, 1.1 in the General Amending Agreement of June 14th, we now have a new 

paragraph, 1.2 of the General Amending Agreement stating that Athabasca and the Government of 

Saskatchewan "are deemed to have been satisfied" with respect to all of these requirements, the rail-line 

construction, the Air Weapons Range, the Federal capital incentive grant. 

 

Now, I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, and to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) to our knowledge on 

June 14th when that General Amending Agreement was signed by the Government opposite when it was the 

Government then, to our knowledge there was not on June 14th any agreement in effect with respect to the 

cutting rights of the Air Weapons Range. Yet the Government sees 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

522 

 

fit to sign a provision that says they are now satisfied with respect to this. I've already told the House with 

respect to the Federal capital incentive grant. They sign away their right to get away from the obligations of 

the agreement on June 14th and then two days later decide to sit down to talk to the Government for the first 

time about the capital incentive grant. 

 

Now I want to make the point with respect to the connecting rail-line which is the third condition according 

to that agreement, the Infrastructure Agreement of March 15th. Mr. Speaker, with respect to this connecting 

rail-line we must refer to the third relevant agreement, that one between the Canadian Pacific Railway and 

Athabasca Forest Industries that I told the House about this morning. The agreement is a very long 

agreement but there is this relevant section, Paragraph 2.1. Paragraph 2.1 of that agreement says as follows, 

and I'm quoting: 

 

The Company (that is the CPR) shall seek such authorities and approvals as are required 

before construction of the branch line can be commenced. Should all such authorities or 

approvals not be secured on or before June 30, 1971, this agreement shall be void. 

 

Further on in that agreement, Paragraph 10.3 of the agreement, stipulates that time shall be in all respects of 

the essence of the agreement. In other words, time is of the essence, June 30th is the operative date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that's the agreement between the CPR and Athabasca, the key authority which the 

Company had to obtain in order to proceed with the rail-line. Everybody surely must have known this, even 

the Hon. The then Treasurer, now Leader of the Opposition that the key authority was an act of Parliament 

from Ottawa and it was surely obvious to anyone, absolutely anyone, viewing the parliamentary schedule in 

Ottawa as at June 14th, the day that they signed this General Amending Agreement that I've told you about. 

It must have been evident to anyone that the possibility of such legislation for a rail-line being completed 

with royal assent by June 30th was extremely remote if not totally impossible. But yet the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart), the former Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald), the former Minister of 

Education (Mr. McIsaac), Ministers of the Crown, sit down and they sign and agreement on June 14th which 

says that they were satisfied that the condition had been fulfilled. 

 

Now if there is any doubt in anyone's mind that the agreement between Athabasca and the CPR did in fact 

terminate on June 30th, let me call to your attention a copy of a letter which is in my possession, directed to 

two Saskatchewan construction firms, on CPR letterhead, dated June 30, 1971, seven days after the election. 

Let me quote just one paragraph of that letter to the construction firms: 

 

This is to advise you that construction of the Dore Lake branch line must now be abandoned. 

Accordingly Canadian Pacific is unable to accept said proposal for contract or having 

accepted same hereby terminates the said contract forthwith. 

 

This letter was directed from the Regional Engineer of Canadian Pacific to two firms which had entered into 

subcontracts with the Canadian Pacific in connection with the building of the Dore 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

523 

 

Lake branch line. The date June 30, 1971. And the very question the Leader of the Opposition asks, I ask all 

people to note, June 30, 1971, the date of the photocopy of the letter that I have and I shall be pleased to 

table it if Hon. Members of this House so request. Now that's the situation that we have. I'll table it at the 

conclusion of my address. 

 

So here's the situation. Reviewing all of the conditions of the Infrastructure Agreement which I have already 

cited, one condition being the Air Weapons Firing Range, a second condition being the Federal capital 

incentive grant, the third condition being the agreement to construct the connecting rail-line, I say, Mr. 

Speaker, to the people of this Province it seems perfectly clear to me the Government of the day acted with 

extreme haste, "deeming to have been satisfied" with respect to the conditions set out in the Infrastructure 

Agreement. It is also clear to me that had the June 14th agreement, the Amending Agreement, not been 

executed, the effect would have been to provide a method by which the new Government could terminate its 

obligations under the whole series of agreements without incurring obligation to pay compensation to the 

pulp mill developers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — But that alternative is now not open to us as a result of the actions of the Government on 

June 14th just a few days before the vote on June 23rd. Everybody knew throughout Saskatchewan and 

throughout Canada and throughout the business community because we were straightforward in our 

approach what the position of the New Democratic Party was with respect to this deal, everyone knew it. The 

now Leader of the Opposition must have known that he was in a tough political fight. A few days before 

that, or around that time, he had just finishing telling the people in Saskatoon that they were going to lose if 

they didn't get out and work. He knew that the campaign, especially in Saskatchewan in this last election, 

was going to be close, that there was every prospect of an NDP victory as, in fact, it turned out. But having 

known that he gave up our rights and tied the hands of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan by that 

agreement of June 14th. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He did so without knowing anything about the rail-line; he did so without knowing 

anything constructive or concrete about the Federal incentive grant; he did that without knowing anything 

about the Air Weapons Range; he did all of those things so that he could get into the hustings and try to say 

what obviously was a losing effort on behalf of the Liberal Government of the day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Once the Leader of the Opposition said he was in need of a good lawyer. It is too late 

now. I could have recommended him to have got a good lawyer. I'm sorry that he didn't have a good lawyer 

at the time. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, what is the end result of this series of actions? The end result is this, if, and I 

emphasize and use the word if, advisedly, if our Saskatchewan 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

524 

 

people, our farmers and our laborers have to pay millions more in money as a result of this Government's 

unnecessary action respecting this contract and this deal, then the persons who are directly at fault in my 

opinion and responsible for those millions of dollars, are nobody else by the Leader of the Opposition, the 

Member for Wilkie, the Member for Milestone, and all those who sat on the then Treasury benches. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I said, Mr. Speaker, in opening this section of my remarks that every political party 

leaves a legacy for our future generations. Fortunately many of the legacies that the Liberal Administration 

from 1964 to 1971 tried to leave behind we've done away with in this Session. But it may very well be that 

one legacy the people of Saskatchewan will be penalized and suffering for a good many years from those 

who have occupied the Treasury benches and for that we can thank the free enterprise mentality of the 

Liberal Party in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this was supposed to be a fighting Session. Liberals are coming out 

fighting. Frankly, I've been watching the Session now for several days and the contributions of the Members 

opposite, I think the only fight is in the minds of the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix who are trying to 

buoy up the spirits of a shattered and tattered Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I tell you it certainly isn't the Leader of the Opposition, I wouldn't be in the mood to fight 

either if I had the type of electoral results put on him as a result of his fiscal policies. I wouldn't be in the 

mood for a fight either if I was the former Minister of Welfare, the Member for Milestone, if I'd had a record 

of a tight-fisted, cruel, inhuman Welfare Department as he had, I wouldn't be very much in the mood for a 

fight, like the former Minister of Education, the Member for Wilkie, if I had been Minister of the 

Department of Education which created division and mistrust and fight among our trustees and teachers 

rather than union, rather than a good education program, I would not be in a mood for a fight so I can 

understand, Mr. Speaker, why they are not coming out . . . 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald (Milestone): — What are you saying? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What am I saying? I'm saying that your fight in this Session has been the weakest in the 

last four years that I have been in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Not only am I saying that it has been the weakest, not only am I saying that it is the 

weakest but I'm saying when the facts of what went on behind the Athabasca deal came out to the people of 

Saskatchewan, those who were in Government of that 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

525 

 

day won't be back in the House come the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I'm saying, Mr. former Minister, that you were a direct party to making those deals 

and all the other aspects that I have talked about in consent with your colleagues to the right and to the left of 

you. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That's what I'm saying. I don't think the Leader of the Opposition fully understands, as I 

said, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, when you were away this morning, as I said this morning, you people are 

awfully slow learners, you don't realize what the situation is electorally yet, it may take another election to 

clarify the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that I must be getting a positive response in my speech from 

the Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you for making the speech. Well, we are in the middle of a leadership race for the 

Liberal Party obviously. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Don't you tell us how to win! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I certainly won't. I agree readily there, I'm not an expert. 

 

But I am going to say one or two things about the leadership race. I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition 

that in the light of this type of dealing with respect to Athabasca, who over there can get the support of the 

rank and file Members of the Liberal Party? Can we expect to get support for the Leader of the Opposition 

who was Treasurer, who was instrumental in this deal that I've just talked about, can the rank and file of the 

Liberals be expected to support the Member from Wilkie, the former Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac), 

can they be expected to support the former Minister of Welfare from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), can the 

average Liberal in the Province of Saskatchewan now support any of them with a clear conscience? If they 

do give their confidence to the Leader of the Opposition or the Member for Milestone, or the Member for 

Wilkie, will they ever, ever be satisfied that these Members can truly negotiate the type of natural resources 

deal which is in the best interests of all the people of Saskatchewan? Will they ever give them another 

chance, any one of these three to negotiate a deal like they negotiated that I've told you about? Well, that's 

for the Liberal Party to decide. Who knows there might even be a Waffle party starting within the Liberals. 

Frankly, I can tell the Leader of the Opposition it would be a good thing if he did have the Waffle because I 

think you need a new deal with new faces and new ideas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

526 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Certainly you need a new approach with respect to the leadership. 

 

Now, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, I want to tell this House what this vote on the Speech from the Throne 

will mean. If you vote against the Speech it will mean for the Liberals, as they undoubtedly will vote against 

it, it will mean a vote in support of their policy of unemployment; the highest in the history of this Province; 

it will mean a vote in support of your give-away resource deals; it will mean a vote against health legislation. 

But if you are not going to vote against the Speech from the Throne, if you vote for the rest of Saskatchewan, 

it will mean for them a vote for our farming people to give them a break in their family farm legislation, 

you'll vote for the family farmer, you won't vote for the financial institutions that virtually own lock, stock 

and barrel the Liberals in this Province; it will mean a vote for our laboring people; it will mean a vote for 

unity of all our people again; it will mean a vote for our health care programs. In short, Mr. Speaker, it will 

be a vote for a New Deal for the People of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I am proud to say that that's what I'll be doing when I vote for it, this Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 39 

Messieurs 

Blakeney Pepper Dyck 

Brockelbank Michayluk Cowley 

Byers Meakes Cody 

Wood Whelan Gross 

Smishek Brown Feduniak 

Romanow Carlson Mostoway 

Snyder Engel Comer 

Bowerman Tchorzewski Rolfes 

Kowalchuk Richards Lange 

Baker Owens Oliver 

Thibault Larson Feschuk 

Matsalla Taylor Kaeding 

Robbins Faris Flasch 

 

NAYS — 12 

Messieurs 

 

Steuart MacDonald MacLeod 

Gardner    (Milestone) McPherson 

Grant McIsaac Lane 

Boldt  Loken MacDonald 

 Weatherald   (Moose Jaw North) 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

527 

 

NOTICE OF MOTION 

 

Alcoholic Beverages In Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I propose to move that we establish a Special Committee 

consisting of 12 Members, to be named at a later date, to conduct an inquiry into all aspects relating to the 

sale, advertising and distribution of alcoholic beverages in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be remembered by those few of us who were in the House last March and who are now 

still here that there was at that time a proposal by the then Premier (Mr. Thatcher) that we establish such a 

committee; it was a proposal which was concurred in by all Members of the House and was passed without 

dissent. 

 

At that time the argument offered in favor of the resolution which found favor with all Members of the 

House was that there had been a growing number of comments on the inadequacy of the present liquor 

legislation. There had been a general review of liquor legislation some 13 years ago in the late 1950s and out 

of that general review had come the system of licensing which we now have in Saskatchewan with licensed 

premises — there are still one or two of those left, I believe — and beverage rooms and licensed dining 

rooms, licensed cocktail lounges and licensed clubs. 

 

There have, however, in the last few years been a growing number of comments directed to the alleged 

inadequacy of this type of licensing, directed to the fact that there was either too little liquor or too much 

liquor advertising and directed to the need for more flexibility with respect to permits for special occasions. 

We have had a large number of those during Homecoming '71 year. Generally speaking, a number of 

comments directed to the Government, the previous Government, now being directed to the present 

Government, and I am sure directed to all Hon. Members are to the effect that there should be changes. 

 

There is, however, I think no general consensus that there should be change, or if there is a general 

consensus that there should be change, there is no general consensus as to what the changes should be. I 

think that most Members feel that the basic structure of our liquor laws is adequate. Some members of the 

hotel industry feel otherwise, they are observing the experiment which is now in operation in Manitoba, 

where spirits are served in beverage rooms. They have noted changes in other provinces in Canada, for 

example, those permitting the serving of alcoholic beverages with meals on Sunday, or those which prohibit 

the advertising of alcoholic beverages at all, as in British Columbia. 

 

I think that when there is an area such as the sale and advertising and distribution of liquor, a matter which 

does not concern our Party, as such, a matter where I don't think either the Party which is now in power or 

the Party which is now in Opposition, has any particular platform covering the area; a subject where 

differences are much more likely to be personal than they are to be political, we find a subject which is 

particularly well suited to consideration by a legislative committee. 

 

The then Premier, on April 8, 1971, referred to a number of the matters at issue. He referred, in addition to 

the ones which 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

528 

 

I have referred to, the question of the appointment of liquor vendors in smaller centres in Saskatchewan, 

should there be more liquor vendors; should the vendors only be in drug stores or should they be in hardware 

stores, or in the premises of general merchants, should liquor vendors be in hotels. There have been many 

arguments in favor of that proposition. 

 

I think from what I have said it will be clear that there are a number of differences of view. I, in speaking in 

the House on April 8th, pointed out that there was one other area which I felt ought to be covered and that 

was whether or not licensees have sufficient protection from the arbitrary decisions of Liquor Licensing 

Commissions. I am not alleging that there have been arbitrary decisions in the past, I am saying that 

licensees have come to me and said that they have been the victims of what they termed arbitrary decisions. I 

was not able to refer them to anything in the Act which offered them much protection, if in fact the decisions 

were arbitrary. 

 

In speaking in the House last April, I said that in general I felt that there wasn't very much wrong with the 

basic structure of our liquor licensing, that I was not convinced that we need any widespread or wholesale 

change, but that in view of the substantial number of areas of difference of view which had been arising, I 

felt the idea of a legislative committee was a good one. I have not changed my views. I believe that a 

committee consisting of 12 Members — and I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there be eight Government 

Members and four Opposition Members — I would suggest that such a committee would do a thorough job 

of considering the various representations made by the several interested groups who will undoubtedly make 

representations and offer some recommendations to this House so that we might consider the next question 

of liquor licensing with the assistance of the report of the committee which will have had an opportunity to 

give detailed consideration to the representations addressed to it. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That a Special Committee consisting of 12 members, to be named at a later date, be 

appointed to conduct an enquiry into all aspects relating to the sale, advertising and 

distribution of alcoholic beverages in Saskatchewan; 

 

And that such Committee will have power to sit during the inter-Sessional period and during 

any Legislative Session, except when the Assembly is sitting; 

 

And that such Committee will have power to send for persons, papers and records, and to 

examine witnesses under oath; to receive representations from interested parties and from 

members of the general public; and for this purpose to hold meetings away from the seat of 

Government in order that the fullest representations may be received without unduly 

inconveniencing those desiring to be heard; 

 

And that this Special Committee be further instructed to submit its final report to the 

Assembly with all convenient speed. 

 

I move this motion, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow). 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

529 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a word on behalf of the Opposition. 

 

I want to say that the Opposition unanimously supports this motion. As you know, it was originally moved in 

the previous session by the Liberal Government and was one of the important motions of that session. I want 

to say that there is another reason that we support this motion and it is because it is the only proposal to solve 

the unemployment problem that has been put forth in this entire Session. By moving and increasing the 

members from seven to twelve, of course the tragedy is the only unemployment that they are looking after is 

for the Members of the Legislature and they are not looking after any of the unemployment problems that 

might exist among the students or other people that need work in the Province of Saskatchewan. However, 

aside from that, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that we do think that a committee of 12 is a little unwieldy, 

that's why we originally settled at seven because we felt that there was a certain amount of transportation 

required and moving around, in order to do an exhaustive and a complete review, the smaller the committee 

was the more effective it would be. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is changing and changing very rapidly and, it has been 13 years, as the 

Premier has indicated, since the last review of the liquor laws of this Province occurred and since that time 

transportation facilities have changed, highways have improved, there has been a rural-urban shift, and we 

now find that many of the small operators, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, are in serious difficulty. And 

whether we realize it or not, if our laws prohibit a small operator from rural Saskatchewan from making a 

profit, and do not permit his establishment to be on an economic basis, then it is absolutely impossible for 

him to provide good service and quality service. This is one of the reasons why we felt that this was so 

important, that now many of the small rural hotel operators in rural Saskatchewan are experiencing 

economic difficulty in the last five or ten years, particularly with the expansion of the cocktail lounge and the 

expansion of the mixed beverage room and so forth, in some of the newer hotels which have provided very 

up-to-date facilities in their establishments, because of the liquor laws in existence the small rural operators 

are unable to provide. We are concerned that these small operators get an opportunity to review their 

position. 

 

We think that the entire gamut of liquor laws in Saskatchewan do need review. We are thinking of Sunday 

drinking, we are thinking of the attitude of clubs on Sunday, we are thinking of liquor on Sunday with meals, 

we are thinking of the entire licensing procedure and the permit procedure. I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that we 

do support this motion unanimously. We do hope that it will be a complete and exhaustive review. We very 

firmly believe we cannot legislate the morals of the drinking public in the Province of Saskatchewan. What 

is required are reasonable laws that will encourage a rational consumption of alcoholic beverages for the 

protection of people on the highways, and to provide good quality service in all areas of the province, not 

only in the urban centres but in the rural centres as well. We certainly support this motion. 

 

Mr. K. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a brief word or two in support of 

this motion. I don't wish to comment on the makeup of the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

530 

 

committee, nor the size, nor to interfere with any particular arrangements that have been made. This is, 

however, rather an important committee, and I should like to suggest that in future important committees be 

structured along a formula that, of course, gives the Government a majority, but a formula half plus one. I 

think some serious consideration should be given to this as being a reasonable formula. The group over here, 

now I understand the last committee was either seven, in which case the Government had four and the 

Opposition had three; or alternatively, I thought it was eight, in which case the Government had five and the 

Opposition had three. In any event, it would have followed the formula that the Government has half plus 

one. I think future important committees should be structured along this way. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION 

 

Address To Be Presented To Lieutenant Governor 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by the Attorney General 

(Mr. Romanow) that it would have been better had I moved it before the last motion, and this has reference 

to the Speech from the Throne: 

 

Ordered, That the said Address be engrossed and presented to His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor by such Members of the Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of 

Labour) that Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act, 1969, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. K. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister ranged rather widely in dealing 

with this Bill. I should like to content myself, however, with a look at the scene a little closer to home. 

 

We speak of the industrial revolution as if it occurred over night but, of course, it did not. It was a gradual 

change from an agricultural economy to an industrial economy. Canada, about 100 years ago, was 75 per 

cent or more rural. The figures today have been reversed and, if anything, Canada is 75 per cent, closer to 80 

per cent, urban. 

 

I want to examine what happened to Saskatchewan during the period of this transition. In population terms, 

in 1944 Saskatchewan was the fourth largest province in Canada, behind Ontario, Quebec and British 

Columbia. By 1948 it had dropped to fifth, behind the Province of Alberta, and by 1964 it had dropped to 

sixth. What happened during that period was that the people went to the jobs and jobs were where the 

industry was. So from 1948 to 1964 Saskatchewan had dropped sixth and was slipping in population. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

531 

 

The rural face of Saskatchewan had changed, the provinces with industry were those provinces that were 

growing. There was a man in Saskatchewan who saw this pretty clearly. He tried desperately to get industry. 

His name was Thomas Clement Douglas. I won't recount the reasons why he failed to attract industry, some 

of these reasons were his fault and some were not. Some of it was bad luck. Some of it, Mr. Speaker, was 

pure bad management. Mr. Douglas, then Premier Douglas, did see the need and personally I take my hat off 

to him. I don't know if he was ahead of his time or whether he was behind the time but unfortunately he was 

not right on time. 

 

One thing he could control and did not control, Mr. Speaker, was the political climate of this Province. He 

made it sound bad for industry. In the post war years when the great rural-urban shift was on, Saskatchewan 

actually lost out. Saskatchewan failed to attract industry during that critical period of transition. 

 

I should like to give two reasons only. I won't range through all the reasons why we lost out during that 

period but I think there are two that are worthy of note. The first reason is that this Province under the CCF 

was basically unwilling to make the appropriate concessions necessary to get badly needed industry. Some of 

you may well remember the rubber plant, which is the rubber industry now located in Medicine Hat, which 

looked first at Saskatchewan. It required water and it required power and our Government was unwilling to 

make the appropriate commitments. That industry is now located in Medicine Hat, it provides work and it 

provides jobs. It provides a ripple of benefit to the entire community of Medicine Hat. 

 

Once you have lost an industry, you don't get it back again. It's gone for quite a long time. 

 

The second reason for the failure of Saskatchewan during the years from 1944 to 1964, was that the 

Government did not understand the competitive nature of attracting industry. Instead of telling industry that 

labor and power and water were cheaper in Saskatchewan, our Government of the day told them everything 

was a little more expensive in Saskatchewan. The Government told the working man that everything was 

better in Saskatchewan. We told him that Saskatchewan was the leader in labor legislation; and the working 

man said, 'thank you' and promptly moved to British Columbia. 

 

With provinces all across Canada trying to attract industries, Saskatchewan tried to go it alone. With every 

other province wining and dining and sweet-talking and romancing industry, Saskatchewan sounded very 

much like the wrong place to be, the wrong place to go, unless you want to be expropriated. 

 

Well, now was it as bad as it sounded? Well, of course not, except that in other places it didn't sound bad at 

all, and it sounded better to go to British Columbia or Alberta or almost any other place. So Saskatchewan 

with enough natural disadvantages found itself with a considerable political disadvantage. And so 

Saskatchewan plummeted, Mr. Speaker, from fourth place to sixth place in terms of population in this 

nation. 

 

Now today we find very little significant differences in the labor laws across Canada. Labor laws actually 

vary very little from province to province. Some provinces have some 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

532 

 

benefits, others have other benefits, and by and large, every other province in Canada has everything we've 

got — and something else, they've got the people and they've got the industry and they've got the jobs — 

something that we don't have. So they can match us in labor legislation and they've got the labor to deal with 

that legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you want to make a sale to somebody, the best way is to have a little better service or a 

little better price or do a little better job of selling. If your neighbor is selling something at 69 cents a pound, 

maybe you should try to sell it at 68 cents a pound. If your neighboring province has a minimum wage of 

$1.50, you're not going to attract industry if you offer a minimum wage of $1.75. 

 

Saskatchewan's natural birthrate should have been providing a doubling of our population in 50 years. The 

fact is that the number of people equivalent to Saskatchewan's natural increase has moved elsewhere. It's 

pretty shallow to talk about helping our workers when in fact our workers are now being helped by 

somebody else in some other province. I have not looked into the conditions in the Atlantic Provinces but 

dealing with Quebec and Ontario and the four Western Provinces, Saskatchewan alone during that period 

had a huge exodus of population. Every other province gained ground. The other provinces not only had 

enough industry to absorb their own natural increase, they had enough industry to absorb our surplus, the 

surplus that moved out of Saskatchewan to these other places. 

 

The net result is that of the six largest provinces, Saskatchewan and Manitoba have, at the present time, the 

lowest average wage. In January of 1971 the Canadian average was $130.82 a week. Saskatchewan was 10 

per cent below that at $116.27. Having destroyed the Athabasca pulp mill, having threatened the Choiceland 

iron mines, it's a mockery to pretend to bring in a Bill that pretends to improve the lot of the workers. 

 

So when we hear the Minister say he'll restore Saskatchewan to its leading place in the labor field, you have 

to wince a little bit. Saskatchewan is going to get another punch in its economic belly. We may win the battle 

and lose the war. 

 

A man listens to the Government talk about opportunities and jobs and pollution. He hears the promise to 

eliminate the Choiceland iron mine and the Athabasca pulp mill, because these are not good deals for the 

people, he then votes for the Government Party and promptly moves to British Columbia to the iron mines 

and to the pulp mills. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that such salesmanship be regulated. 

 

I am quite sure that the following is the kind of typical letter that might well be sent by a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan to the Minister. It could go like this: 

 

Dear Minister: 

 

I am very pleased with the tremendous improvement that you have made in my working 

conditions and in the hours of work. Now if you could only get me a job, I would feel very 

comforted indeed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

533 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I recently talked with two brothers who had left Saskatchewan to work in 

Burnaby, British Columbia. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Did they leave before June 23rd or after? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Oh, a long time ago — four or five years ago. Both indicated they had previously 

supported the NDP but having observed the conditions in British Columbia and the opportunities that exist 

in British Columbia, they said they would never vote for our present Government again or that Party 

anywhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — If every person who formerly resided in Saskatchewan was given a vote in the last 

Provincial Election, the Members of the Party opposite would have been lucky to save one single seat. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You talk about they left — because your philosophy . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — It was during 1944-64 that the destruction occurred. 

 

I think we should strive for two objectives, Mr. Speaker,. Firstly, more employment; and secondly, a higher 

average pay. Our minimum wages and labor standards must not be so high that people will be driven out of 

our Province or that industry will be chased away. On the other hand, clearly industry is of little benefit 

unless the workers and society as a whole benefit from that industry. Government and unions as well as 

employers must make sure that the workmen get a fair shake. 

 

But manipulation of our labor laws requires a delicate hand. In its control of the economy many factors must 

be weighed carefully and judged with a level eye. Bad judgments result from action founded on political bias 

or politico-religious fervour. 

 

It is clear to me that the proposed amendments are of little benefit to the people, if any, whom they are 

intended to help. The Minister says, "It is difficult to quantify the effect of the change." What he means is 

that he doesn't know what's going to happen or what effect it is going to have. 

 

He acknowledges that he will have to proceed very carefully. He desires to reconstitute the Minimum Wage 

Board and have it undertake a study. He says the amendments will not be proclaimed until the Minimum 

Wage Board has completed its review. He hasn't constituted the Board yet. We don't know when it will be 

starting. We don't know when it will commence its review or complete it. It is very possible that this review 

could not be completed and reported to the Minister, giving him enough time to study it, before the next 

sittings of the House in February. In the meantime, it'll be sitting on our Statutes as a deterrent to industry 

and you know what we think of deterrents. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Why would it be a deterrent to industry? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — You know why, Roy! It would be great to tell everybody 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

534 

 

that we've got a 40-hour week in Saskatchewan. You can tell everybody else that we've got a 40-hour week. 

It's bound to chase people away and yet the people that it is intended to help won't have the 40-hour week. 

 

The Minister said also that a more competitive position would result from this change. Does he mean that 

new equipment or more efficient ways would result? Does he mean that perhaps staffs would be reduced, 

people would be let go? 

 

One of the speakers in support of this Bill, from the Government side, said that the shorter work time 

resulted in less absenteeism and fewer accidents. Now I fully agree and realize that this is true at the 60-hour 

a week level and at lower levels, but where does the curve level out? Can a man or woman make a living in 

an ordinary work week? Would you say that a man shouldn't be allowed to work 44-hour work week because 

of absenteeism or accidents, and yet say you don't mind if he works 44 hours if he works the extra time? 

Apparently the man doesn't get sick or hurt if he gets time and a half but he does get sick or hurt if he works 

at regular rates. That's the logic, I believe, presented us by a Saskatoon member. 

 

The Minister hasn't proposed changes for the workers in towns and villages. What's to happen to them? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Discrimination! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Is this Act to be extended to all workers in Saskatchewan? If so, when? Have you 

consulted anybody? What will the effect of this legislation be? Will it increase prices? Will it put people out 

of jobs? If so, how many will be put out of jobs? 

 

The Minister said that in service industries it was difficult to improve productivity. Well, are they to be 

exempt then? 

 

I make this offer to the Minister — if you get your work done, Mr. Minister, and if you make your study and 

if you can tell us the effect of this legislation, that is, whom it will help, if any, whom it will hurt, if any, 

what it will cost — (give us the good and the bad, don't hold back) — give us the total picture and your 

overall judgment of the pros and cons, show us that this is good legislation — and I don't mean hazy 

generalities — show us the real benefit to the working man . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You'll need a lawyer, probably! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now, if you can show us that, you know what you're doing and why, we'll support the 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Until then it's premature. We suggest that you withdraw this Bill, complete your study, 

see us next February. 

 

This may be very good legislation or it may be very bad. From what we've been told by the Government 

benches, it is totally impossible to tell. We, therefore, suggest that this 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

535 

 

Bill be withdrawn, the study completed, and if you like it in February, bring it along then. Until then, it is 

premature and ought not to have been brought to this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Cowley (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise and speak in this debate on the Act to amend 

The Labour Standards Act. I was quite interested in listening to the Member for Regina Albert Park's (Mr. 

MacLeod) condemnation of the past Government's record, the CCF Government record in Saskatchewan. I 

think he need only examine his own constituency to have some idea of the Liberal Government's record. It 

was supposed to be the fastest growing area in Saskatchewan. It was to double in size in one year. 

Unfortunately when the election was called and they had enumerated the constituency, most of the new 

people that were supposed to move in had not shown up. 

 

Being a history teacher, I appreciated the history lesson although I can't exactly agree with the Member's 

facts or his interpretation of those facts as he presented them. He made a statement something to the effect 

that the previous CCF Government had been unwilling to make appropriate concessions to attract industry. 

Well if the Athabasca pulp mill was an example of the kind of appropriate concessions that he thinks a 

government should make, I think Saskatchewan can well do without them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — He also suggested something to the effect that Saskatchewan had done a bad job of selling 

our Province to industry and I really hope that he wasn't trying to suggest that we hire MacLaren's, because 

we've seen what kind of a job of selling they do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to spend a few minutes on the Bill. I don't propose to take very long. I 

think there are three parts to the Bill that to me are important. The first one is the reduction of the hours of 

work to 40. This is long overdue. It's something which throughout North America is almost totally accepted 

by the population and by industry. It is important that it be proclaimed as legislation so that all of the 

workers in Saskatchewan industries can be brought under this. I'm pleased that it will do away with the 48 

and the 44-hour differential so that it is a single Act rather than a double standard such as we've had before. 

 

I'm also very pleased that the Minister has seen fit to write into the legislation the permission for a 10-hour 

day. I think that in some cases this will be attractive not only to workers but also to industry and this is the 

kind of thing that we have to look at and I think it will please the Member from Regina Albert Park also, 

because it may assist in attracting some industries. 

 

I also like the part of the legislation which deals with the maintenance of earning because the last thing that 

we, in this Government, and I'm sure those in the Opposition, want to 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

536 

 

do, is to reduce the earnings of someone who is on a minimum wage by reducing the hours of work, and so 

that this piece of legislation was necessary. It was necessary to write in the maintenance of earnings clause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spent the past weekend in my constituency talking with people working in the towns, talking 

with farmers, and talking with small businessmen. And nowhere did I come across any opposition to this 

Bill. Indeed, in the case of farmers and businessmen, in most cases I had to bring it up before any one 

commented on it and in no case did I get any adverse reaction to it. I think that this simply proves that the old 

ploy of the previous Government of playing one group against another, and of saying that this Bill is bad 

legislation because it's going to affect the farmers adversely or it's going to affect small businessmen 

adversely; that now, with the new climate in Saskatchewan, people are looking towards a co-operative effort 

to build a better Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I think this legislation is a step in that direction and I am sure that the people 

in my constituency will fully support my intention, and my vote, which will be in favor of this Bill. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) introduced this legislation 

the other day and he prefaced it with a few remarks which painted a very glowing picture of the goodness of 

trade unions in this Province. He intimated, Mr. Speaker, that there would not be a dispute involving unions 

in essential services in this Province, but, Mr. Speaker, I submit that the people of this Province know that 

this glowing picture does not exist. 

 

I personally have worked with unions in this Province where the members spend the first hour of every day 

walking back and forth in the roundhouse, doing absolutely nothing but walking back and forth, and they are 

paid to do this. 

 

I've worked with a union in this Province that has gone on strike for wages knowing full well that the 

employees would get no increase after a strike. We struck for three weeks, we ended up settling for an extra 

quarter of a cent over what management had offered in the first place, and the union knew full well in that 

situation that the management had a great surplus of the product that was being manufactured. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Did you have a say in determining whether there would be a strike or not? 

 

Mr. Lane: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Right! The majority disagreed with you? 

 

Mr. Lane: — No, what happened was that the union bosses controlled 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

537 

 

that, and we did not — we were told to shut up and we tried to get our word across and nothing happened 

because of it. 

 

And there are unions in this Province, Mr. Attorney General, who couldn't care less about their members. 

And don't forget that! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Hon. Member would accept a question? 

 

Mr. Lane: — I thought that I had the floor, Mr. Speaker. No, I won't entertain a question, Mr. Attorney 

General. I'm making a speech at this time and I should like to finish it if I possibly can. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Will you at the end of the speech — a question? 

 

Mr. Lane: — Well, we'll see! 

 

We've all seen the effects, Mr. Speaker, of the Montreal police strike, and we've all seen the effects of the 

Ontario and Quebec hydro strikes, but this legislation before this House and all the labor legislation 

presented by this Government ignores these facts, and I include in that the statement saying that the 

legislation repealing the Essential Services Emergency legislation ignores many of these facts. The labor 

legislation proposed in this House, Mr. Speaker, indicates that the Government opposite intends to shirk its 

responsibilities to the general public and the people of this Province and especially to the workers of this 

Province. It tends to ignore its responsibilities to the people of this Province by repealing Bill 2 and it will 

ignore its responsibilities to the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think the Member is speaking more on Bill 6 than he is on Bill 7. We are 

debating Bill 7. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Yes, I'm going right into that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The legislation before this House is another example of this Government's window dressing and I'm referring 

to the hours of work legislation, The Labour Standards Act. The Hon. Member for Saskatoon University 

(Mr. Richards) made reference in some phrases in his speech on the Throne Speech Debate, such phrases as, 

"not mere tinkering" in referring to legislation, such phrases as, "be relevant" referring to the actions of the 

Members of this House. Well, Mr. Hon. Member for Saskatoon University, you are off to a very poor start in 

this House in that regard and I submit that this legislation is merely a . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I would just remind the Member . . . I realize that some new Members 

wouldn't know this, but you cannot refer in the debate here to statements that have been made in another 

debate in this Session. The Throne Speech Debate, Budget Debates take precedence but on debating a bill 

you can't refer to statements made by Members in the Throne Speech Debate. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

538 

 

Mr. Lane: — I refer to an article in the Leader-Post of July 9, 1971, Mr. Speaker, which quotes from a 

research monograph by Dr. N.H. Lethwick of Carlton University and in it he states: 

 

Raising minimum wages and creating more jobs would do little to help the majority of the 

poor people in Canada's major urban areas. 

 

The research paper says that higher minimum wages would also be of relatively little help since few paid 

workers are classed as poor. Unemployables make up the largest part of the poor. Again these facts are 

ignored by this legislation. The legislation does nothing to solve the basic problems, I submit, Mr. Speaker. 

The unemployable is not helped by this legislation. He sees a new wage figure which he knows is 

unattainable by himself and this is no new deal for the unemployable. The Government has failed to relieve 

the basic labor problems; it has done nothing to enable the worker to attain pride in his work; it has done 

nothing to ensure that the unions become democratic, it has done nothing to enable the worker to function as 

a human being in his environment. The Government by its inaction and its failure to deal with the basic 

problem is continuing to treat the laborers of this Province as mere wage slaves. The Government has 

perpetrated the biggest hoax on the laborers of this Province that this Province has ever seen. We don't 

expect the Government to have answers to these basic problems in five weeks, but if you don't have the 

answers, don't add to the problem by bringing legislation like this before the House. I'm surprised that the 

Member for Saskatoon University puts up with this legislation. The legislation merely adds to the problem 

which was ignored by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) and again this is typical of the window-dressing 

legislation of this Government. The only criterion for the working man's success under the Government 

opposite will continue to be how much money he makes, or how big a car he drives and not how happy or 

satisfied he is in his work. This legislation solves no problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour in introducing this legislation stated what a great principle this 

legislation was. Then he went on and said, "We will continue the present exemptions, we will keep the 

power to exempt persons in industries, we will not implement the legislation until the Minimum Wage 

Board brings in its recommendations." I ask the Minister, what if the Board says that this legislation is not 

feasible? Proposing legislation in this form is a waste of the time of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I really hadn't intended to take part in this debate until the 

Hon. Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) rose and spoke. I was rather glad that I had made the decision 

to rise when I listened to my hon. friend from Lumsden (Mr. Lane). I'm also glad to support this Bill. I 

believe that it should encourage more employment. I think of many industries and many businesses which 

have been on the 44-hour week and incidentally as far as I know in my community there aren't very many of 

them on the 48-hour week. Most urban centres in my constituency are already on the 44-hour week or less 

even though they may have been allowed to have the 48-hour week. And I think the time is 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

539 

 

coming and not too far off when we shall not be looking at a 44-hour week but at a 32-hour week. 

 

This new great technological era that we are in, if we are going to give people jobs and meaningful jobs, the 

hours of work are going to have to be cut down. Twenty years ago Walter Reuther, the great labor leader of 

the United States, talked of the 32-hour week and he was laughed at. Certainly this is coming. I'm sorry my 

hon. friend from Regina Albert Park has left. He went on and he talked about the population loss of 

Saskatchewan under the CCF Government. Well, actually if my hon. friend, the Member for Regina Albert 

Park (Mr. MacLeod) will look at the records he will find that the population of Saskatchewan grew and I'll 

admit not fast, there was a loss through decrease in births but it did grow from 1947 to 1964 and if you look 

at the figures of the census you will find this is right. There was a growth. But also from 1967 to 1971 the 

population of this Province dropped. It not only lost all its birthrate growth, but it also lost more than that. So 

I suggest that really his arguments were very facetious. 

 

The other point I wish to deal with, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down are the remarks from the Member for 

Lumsden — I'm sorry he is not here — I object to Members getting up and saying that the rank and file of 

labor union persons or any person is lazy, and this is really what he was saying. As I understood him to say, 

he said that many union people didn't work the first hour of work and if that isn't laziness I should like to 

know what it is. I just don't believe that this is true of any group of people. There may be the odd one but I 

certainly object to him saying that any group of people are deliberately wasting time. Then he went on and he 

asked a lot of questions of the Minister of Labour, he asked questions about labor problems. The strange 

thing was that there was a Liberal Government in this Province for seven years and they not only didn't look 

into any of the problems that he raised but they never even tried to look into them, they didn't try to solve 

them at all. I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, again that I am proud to support this, what I call a very 

progressive piece of legislation that I know will be acceptable to the rural constituency in which I represent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a certain amount of pleasure that I have 

this opportunity to support this Bill. 

 

Not since 1947 has there been any significant attempt to change the law related to hours of work, Mr. 

Speaker. Nobody on this side of the House is under any illusions that this particular piece of legislation is the 

be-all and the end-all of a labor policy, is the be-all and the end-all of the problems of unemployment, 

problems of poverty that we have in our Province. However, Mr. Speaker, it is in the tradition of regulating 

hours of work, of regulating the worst problems which our society has faced since the Industrial Revolution 

and that therefore it is a good piece of legislation. It is time that we finally catch up and realize that the norm 

of 40 hours is going to have to apply to our people and that people do not want to labor on beyond that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apart from the question of this Bill being in the tradition of the 40-hour week, there are a great 

many economic 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

540 

 

questions which must be considered; their obvious benefits to the workers involved in terms of reduced 

hours of employment or increased wages or a combination of both; that this piece of legislation is also in a 

certain sense a match for the previous Bill 6 which referred to the repeal of The Essential Services 

Emergency Act, inasmuch as that piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, referred to problems faced by organized 

labor. This piece of legislation is a small attempt to get at and realize the problems of the largely 

unorganized working poor, because it is these people who will largely be affected. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of arguments which could be raised in opposition to this Bill, and I 

should like to consider them as rationally and as fairly as possible. Now one very obvious and simple 

argument is that this piece of legislation will bring hardships upon the employers who have employees who 

will be affected. Mr. Speaker, obviously we must agree. This does impose this kind of hardship. In particular 

one should emphasize that it will affect largely small firms and primarily rural firms. Mr. Speaker, having 

stated that, let us realize the counter to that argument, that much as we want to preserve rural society — and 

we are going to be introducing many pieces of legislation to that effect during this administration —- we 

cannot save rural society by forcing it to subsist with poverty level wages for all kinds of small town 

employees. The gas pump operator, the rural telephone operator, the store clerk, all of these people who may 

be working more than 40 hours a week on very low wages, will not appreciate our sentiments about 

preserving rural society if it means that they have to do the jobs themselves if they have to subsist on really 

substandard wages. Then it comes back to the small firms themselves, the small firms themselves cannot 

survive if realizing the substandard wages which exist in these establishments, the people pack up and leave. 

We cannot save rural Saskatchewan by forcing on it poverty. 

 

A second argument, Mr. Speaker, that might be raised against this piece of legislation at this time is that we 

are in a depression. We are in a depression, but, Mr. Speaker, it is never the right time. This is a piece of 

legislation that has been advocated by the New Democratic Party, by the union movement, for many, many 

years. Thank goodness that we are now fulfilling the promise that we have made repeatedly to our people, 

and this legislation is coming forward. If the argument could be raised during a boom period, one could 

defend this piece of legislation on the grounds of sharing out the prosperity, then one can make the reverse 

argument during the depression that this piece of legislation could be defended on the basis of sharing out 

the poverty. This is the kind of legislation which affects people such as those working in restaurants, hotels, 

taverns, etc. One should realize, Mr. Speaker, the average wage of these people in January of 1971 as 

reported by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics for Saskatchewan was $1.62, that their weekly wage declined 

from 1970 to 1971. Also we have in front of us the impressive precedent that in the last session the 

minimum wage was increased by the Members opposite. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a third argument which could be raised is the question of what will be the net effect on 

employment on introducing this piece of legislation. On the one hand it could be said that due to the 

increased wage costs, certain firms will be laying off people. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

increased wage payments which will be in the community 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

541 

 

and the increased spending power that therefore arises, there could be increased purchases from these firms 

which might help save these small firms from bankruptcy. To repeat the first argument that if your small 

town people are leaving, packing up and going away from rural Saskatchewan, the firms are going to go 

bankrupt anyway. 

 

There are a great number of technical arguments, some of these arguments we do not have all the satisfactory 

answers for. Some of the Members opposite have said they would like to see a great deal more research in 

the labor department. Well they, Mr. Speaker, were on this side of the House for the previous seven years 

and they emasculated the Labour Department and they did nothing to do that kind of research which was 

needed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — It now falls upon us, now that we are the Government to quickly pick up the pieces 

and start doing the kind of research that is necessary in order to have a creative and constructive Department 

of Labour. And this piece of legislation which is the tradition of liberalism and reform, how, Mr. Speaker, 

can they possibly oppose it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I hadn't intended to enter this debate, I intend to only 

take a very, very brief length of time. I should like to compliment the Member from Saskatoon University 

(Mr. Richards) who just took his place, on a very forthright presentation of some of the problems involved in 

the changes of the hours of work and the changes in our labor laws. I think he did a very excellent job of 

presenting the case for both sides. 

 

I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, though that on one particular point I wish to present an alternative because I 

think that the Member who just took his seat has opted for what is very much the complaint of rural people 

in Saskatchewan, and indeed rural parts of Canada, that most economists are telling them that if you can't 

make a similar standard of living in your small town, then you should move to the city. That is basically 

what many economists have been telling rural people throughout the rural areas of Saskatchewan and all 

over Canada. They have been telling them you can't generate income here in your small town that would say, 

be comparable to what you should make. For example, if you want to use the sum of say $5,000 a year, it is 

frequently put forward by economists that the person is only generating $3,000 a year income in his small 

community, but that the poverty level says he should be making $5,000 and therefore he should no longer 

reside in that small community but should move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member has suggested that, by raising the wage that it is undoubtedly that we shall have a 

number of people in rural areas cut off the payroll. I don't think there is any question about that whatsoever. 

There is only so much blood to come out of the employer. If you go through the small towns of 

Saskatchewan you go into the cafes, you go into the garages, implement dealerships, through all of the small 

businesses that make up rural Saskatchewan, frequently you will find the owner will tell you, he'll come to 

you and say, "if the wage level goes much higher, I'd be better of if my employees own the business rather 

than myself and I would be better off if I was 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

542 

 

working for them!" Mr. Speaker, in no way is the employer being harsh on his employees in this case. It is 

simply a fact that he simply can't pay any more because he doesn't have it. 

 

I know from personal experience, I know every Member here in this Assembly has eaten in many small cafes 

throughout our country and they are finding it very expensive, not because the cafe owner is making a lot of 

money, he isn't making a lot of money at all. He is barely making an existence on probably 14 or 15 hours a 

day of work, he's not paying big wages. If you go into many of . . . 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Hot dog taxes! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . No, I don't think so. I think the fact is that they can't generate enough income. I was 

talking to a cafe owner in my constituency just a few days ago and he said, "if we continue in this direction, 

the only type of small business that will survive is a very high volume business that has a tremendously high 

volume because they can cover the overhead." Many of our small businesses in Saskatchewan don't have this 

type of volume and aren't going to have that type of volume. This particular man lives on No. 1 Highway, he 

can generate that type of volume to cover the overhead. But many of our other cafes unless they are going to 

put the price of coffee up to 25 cents a cup, or price themselves totally out of business, simply can't absorb 

this cost. The alternative is for the family to work longer hours to cut some of the employees off. 

 

If we follow through the analysis that the people working in these areas should have a higher income, then 

many of them are going to become unemployed. They simply can't do anything but become unemployed 

because the price level can't be raised that much more in many instances. 

 

Now, if they become unemployed they gravitate to the city. But I want to put forward the thesis, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am sure is held by many people, and that is that it isn't necessary to have what we often think 

of as an income of $5,000 in the city, to have a decent living in rural Saskatchewan. There are many other 

attributes about living in our smaller towns that accept a lower standard of living in a monetary sense. In a 

sense of say $3,000 a year versus $5,000 a year in a monetary sense but that person can have as good a 

standard of living despite the fact that he may not have the same number of dollars to spend. It may take 

$5,000 to reach a certain standard and quality of life in Regina but it may well take only $3,000 in Wawota 

where I live to reach the standard of life for an obvious number of reasons. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my point is simply this, that if we are going to have a blanket policy that is going to insist 

that everyone is going to receive the same remuneration, then in many cases we are asking for a mass exodus 

and disappearance of many of our smaller businesses. Because the difficulty financially of these businesses 

must be shared not only by the owner but by the employees as well. If the employer is making $2,500 a year, 

he simply is not going to be able to pay the employee $3,000 or $4,000 a year. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 

these are not big employers, they are not employers who are out to gouge the public or to unfairly treat their 

employees, these are little garage men who have three or four mechanics working 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

543 

 

for them, fixing tractors. They can't pass the price of a substantial wage increase on to the farmer who is 

already paying a large cost for machinery. In the cafes they can't pass on the price in the increase of the cost 

of food or else they'll not have any business. The people who are selling gasoline, they can't pass that price 

on to the customer unless they are working much more towards the age of more bulk tanks on the farm. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that there is a very good case to be made that for employees and employers in our 

rural communities, it's important we keep these small businesses going. They give a very, very excellent 

service, they add to the community. The difficulties associated with those businesses must be felt and 

appreciated by both employers and employees. Mr. Speaker, the alternative is simply that the employer shuts 

down the business and disappears. We'll have only a few high volume businesses left in Saskatchewan if we 

continue our rapid movement from the small towns into the city. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we would all agree that the quality of life in rural communities will severely 

deteriorate as these small businesses continue to close. I hope that the Government opposite recognizes this. 

I realize, as has been said, they are partisan to labor but I don't think that they will find that most of the small 

employers in the Province of Saskatchewan are unfair to their employees. Sure there is the odd one maybe 

making a good living and maybe he isn't paying quite enough, but there are a great many of them not making 

very much money either, Mr. Speaker, and they are trying to give their employees the best deal they can and 

under very difficult conditions. I think the alternative is to push for a continued rural exodus to the cities 

simply on a monetary basis. 

 

As I said originally, Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely convinced, having lived in rural Saskatchewan all my life, 

that many of us in rural Saskatchewan would like to remain there. We don't necessarily have to make as 

much money as we could in the city to have a good life. I think that, unfortunately, this is not recognized by 

enough people. I hope that more people will recognize the fact that you don't really have to make $10,000 a 

year living in Wawota, Saskatchewan or Kennedy, Saskatchewan, in order to have a good quality of life. 

Maybe you do have to make that if you live in Montreal, I don't know. But I think there is a real case to be 

made here. I hope the Government opposite isn't too tough because I am very concerned for the outlook of a 

number of very small businessmen in Saskatchewan who aren't trying to give their employees a bad deal. 

Maybe the odd one is but a lot of them aren't, they simply don't have it to pay. I hope the Government 

opposite will give those people a little consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health): — Firstly, may I make a few observations, Mr. Speaker, in regard 

to what the Hon. Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) had to say. I agree and sympathize with him as 

to the problems our rural communities are facing in the Province of Saskatchewan. May I also suggest to him 

that the establishment of the shorter work week in this Province is not going to create more business 

closures, as he seemed to indicate. I don't think that one can suggest that a shorter work week is going to be 

putting people 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

544 

 

out of business any more than one can suggest that reducing the hours of work will put people off the pay 

roll. I would suggest to him that from the standpoint of employment, the reverse is going to be true, there are 

going to be added jobs created and I am going to deal with that in some detail later on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the Hon. Member talks about the crisis our rural Saskatchewan is facing, I should hope that he would 

look back just a matter of a few months or a few years and look at the lack of action on the part of the 

Liberal Government to do anything about strengthening our rural communities and how passive they were 

during the last few years when the Federal Government was doing everything to worsen the problem for our 

rural communities, for example, the closure of rural post offices. I know that the NDP Members of 

Parliament made all kinds of representations, made all kinds of speeches in the House of Commons to have 

the Federal Government reverse this trend. We did not hear the Liberal Government in the Province of 

Saskatchewan make any protests to the Government of Canada because of the closing of post offices in our 

rural Saskatchewan, or the closure of our railway stations. One railway station after the other went down the 

drain but the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan remained passive. 

 

These were the problems that added to the confusion that today exist in rural Saskatchewan and why rural 

Saskatchewan is at the cross roads. We have the proposals from the Federal Task Force on Agriculture 

advocating that in the months and years ahead two-thirds of our farmers will have to disappear. The people 

who wrote this report were not farmers but it was a group of economists who wrote the report. This may be a 

way to get larger production out of agriculture but it certainly isn't going to be any kind of a solution to our 

farmers or to the solving of our problems of our rural communities, our towns and villages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is easy to talk piously now but I suggest that in the seven years of Liberal administration the 

small business was the least of the worries of the Liberal Party and, in particular, the small business people 

of rural Saskatchewan. When it came down to financial assistance, loans and grants and other assistance and 

encouragement, the Liberal Government provided funds at lower interest rates and made funds available for 

big business, but when it came down to providing funds at lower interest rates and making grants, helping 

with other problems and providing technical services for our rural people and our rural communities, I am 

afraid that the Liberal record is dismal and sadly lacking. So I don't think they can talk about this problem 

today with real conviction because their record is one, as I said, that is sadly lacking. We, in this 

Government, do propose to look at the problems of rural Saskatchewan, particularly what our towns and 

villages are facing. For the merchants, the small business people, we do have a specific program in this 

regard and in the matter of weeks and months ahead our programs will be announced toward the helping and 

aiding of small business people in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation establishing a 40-hour work week throughout Saskatchewan, I suggest, is long 

overdue. Labor legislation governing the hours of work has remained virtually unchanged in the Province of 

Saskatchewan for a period of 24 years. So the introduction of the 40-hour work week is certainly long 

overdue. We are not breaking any new ground in this Legislature, the vast majority of workers have been 

successful in 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

545 

 

reducing their hours of work through collective bargaining down to 40 and, in some cases, down to 36 hours 

a week in this Province. In many cases employers have granted their employees a 40-hour work week in 

order to keep up with the changing times. This is also true in rural Saskatchewan as well. One cannot assume 

or suggest that the hours of work in small communities are 48 hours a week universally. Many of our rural 

communities do have 40-hour work weeks and less, including the small towns and villages. 

 

Liberal Members opposite must candidly admit that Saskatchewan fell behind in the field of labor standards 

during their seven years of office. The Federal Government, for example, several years ago established a 

40-hour work week for all employees under its jurisdiction. Other provinces have taken the lead from 

Saskatchewan in terms of hours of work legislation and minimum wage increases, so today we are merely 

beginning on the work that must be done to catch up with other parts of the country in labor standards and to 

once again take the lead in labor legislation standards as Saskatchewan did once lead all of the Dominion. 

 

Given the fact that Saskatchewan has lagged behind other provinces, perhaps this is a good occasion to look 

back at the record of labor legislation of the Province of Saskatchewan. All of us know that labor laws prior 

to 1944 were incredibly poor. Labor legislation in this Province before the CCF Government was elected 

was medieval to say the least. But after 1944 and during the 20 years the CCF Government held power in 

this Province, our labor legislation was undoubtedly the most advanced and the most enlightened in the 

Dominion of Canada. The hours of work were shortened, time and one-half overtime provisions were 

established after eight hours a day of work. To start with, the CCF Government established two weeks 

annual vacation with pay after one year of service, being the pioneer in this regard, and later three weeks 

after five years of service. The Government also legislated eight statutory holidays with pay after breaking 

new ground in this respect where we were ahead for many years. In fact, Saskatchewan is still somewhat of a 

leader in this respect. Some of the provinces have not caught up. 

 

But in the last seven years we have seen Saskatchewan fall behind in the matter of labor standards, such as 

hours of work and minimum wages. The Federal Government and many other provinces brought in 

legislation which is by far more advanced than in the Province of Saskatchewan. The labor movement in 

Saskatchewan has strongly advocated changes, not only in labor standards legislation but urged the Liberal 

Government to bring in many new laws. After the election of the Liberal Government the Women's Bureau 

was abolished. Labor asked for its re-establishment, asked for the provisions of maternity leave, and 

effective action to deal with the problems of automation. All of these efforts on the part of labor were 

unsuccessful. The Liberal Government had a deaf ear when it came down to labor representations and the 

improvement of labor standards, similarly in the area of industrial relations legislation. 

 

While Saskatchewan was losing ground in the field of labor legislation, many thousands of highly skilled 

tradesmen were leaving the province to take advantage of improvements made elsewhere. This is a tragic 

loss and one that Saskatchewan could ill afford. Last year alone this Province lost some 32,000 people. This 

is a staggering loss when we consider the investment made 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

546 

 

in the training and education of these people. But the loss is enormous when considered in terms of the loss 

of productivity potential of so many thousands of skilled workers who left the Province of Saskatchewan. 

Despite the tragic loss of so many skilled workers, statistics show that the net value of non-agricultural 

commodity production per man per member of the non-agricultural working force in Saskatchewan has more 

than doubled since 1947, even after allowances are made for price increases that have taken place since that 

time. This fact is just one more valid argument for the reduction in the hours of work. 

 

There are many more valid reasons why legal hours of work should be reduced at this time, let me just list a 

few. Studies have proven that shorter hours of work often lead to an increase in productivity. Shorter hours 

of work reduce absenteeism and relieve the pressure on the family of the worker. Shorter hours reduce 

fatigue and relieve nervous tension. Shorter hours provide a more satisfactory combination of production and 

leisure and contributions to cultural progress. Shorter hours of work tend to minimize the effect of labor 

displacement and thus stabilize employment and increase employee productivity. Shorter hours make it 

possible for the older worker to compete more effectively with the younger worker. Shorter hours make it 

possible for the husband to share domestic duties, particularly in families where both husband and wife are 

working. And certainly shorter hours of work will lead to the creation of many needed new jobs. Many 

additional points can be made and many have been made. Perhaps one of the most important of these is to 

make time for the re-education and retraining of working people as we move so rapidly into the highly 

technological age that lies ahead of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have personally spoken out in favor of the 40-hour work week as a Member of the Legislature 

and as a trade union representative for many years. I have, on several occasions, brought bills into this 

Legislature seeking the establishment of the 40-hour work week. After The Labour Standards Act was 

amended which prohibited a private Member from moving a private bill, I introduced resolutions urging the 

former Liberal Government to establish a 40-hour work week and to raise minimum wages. Mr. Speaker, the 

merits of the 40-hour work week have been debated both inside and outside this House since the introduction 

of the 44-hour work week back in 1947. It seems to me that this is no longer a matter of debate. It is, in fact, 

an occasion I should hope, to ponder the reasons of our failure for so many years to have failed to take action 

in this regard. There have, on occasion, been arguments presented against the introduction of improvement 

of labor standards and we just heard part of that argument a few minutes ago. There have been those who 

have argued that better labor standards would hurt the farmer and the business people. Mr. Speaker, nothing 

would hurt the farmer and the business people more than to restrict the purchasing power of the wage earners 

living in our towns, villages and cities of this Province. I believe the farmers in Saskatchewan reject the 

notion of economic prosperity at the expense of the urban workers. The introduction of the 40-hour work 

week will have many immediate and positive effects on the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

First of all, the 40-hour work week may create as many as 5,000 new jobs. Mr. Speaker, a 40-hour work 

week, however, is really no earth-shaking legislation. Introduction of the 40-hour work week in 

Saskatchewan hospitals, for example, will 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

547 

 

have no effect. Since taking office I have asked the Department of Health officials to check and find out how 

many hospitals may be affected in the Province of Saskatchewan by the introduction of the 40-hour work 

week, and I find to my surprise — and perhaps I shouldn't be, I should have checked this before — but every 

Saskatchewan hospital is now on the 40-hour work week. In other words the 134 hospitals that we have in 

the Province of Saskatchewan are now working on a 40-hour work week. 

 

This particular legislation will, therefore, not place any additional cost on the hospitals and will not have any 

effect on the staffing. So while we have brought in this long overdue legislation, Mr. Speaker, we are 

looking forward to much more then merely updating that legislation that was allowed to become obsolescent. 

In this age of rapidly changing technology and automation, it is tremendously important to our people to take 

advantage of this new technology. We must make plans for using their leisure time at this age of automation 

and to make their lives much more pleasant and perhaps more productive in other respects. 

 

But let us never forget that those of us who sit in this Legislature do not give working people anything that 

they do not earn. When we pass this law we should remind ourselves of the long struggle over so many years 

for this legislation. Let's remind ourselves that in this case, and in every case, our workers and our farmers 

have had to struggle for every single gain they have made, whether economic, social or legislative. The 

workers of Saskatchewan have won their liberation from the Liberal oppressive years and they can now look 

forward to negotiating and working with the New Democratic Government which will listen attentively to 

their needs and will act accordingly for their interests. 

 

We are here with a mandate from the people. We are here to help the people of Saskatchewan to plan and 

undertake new and more equitable forms of economic and social development. We are here to assist the 

people to develop a humane and just society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a legal 40-hour work week is a move in this direction and I am proud to support the Bill 

introduced by the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to 

say a few brief words in closing the debate today on a Bill which in the near future will have the effect of, I 

believe, improving the working conditions for a fairly substantial number of Saskatchewan's working men 

and women. 

 

I want to take just a moment or two to comment on what I believe had to be a predictable position that was 

brought forward by the Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) and I think it would have to be 

agreed that he had some difficulty in justifying the position which he took today. I thought it was rather 

incredible, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Regina Albert Park showed the courage to mention the 

population exodus in the Province of Saskatchewan in light of the very dismal record of performance of the 

previous Liberal Administration which sat on these benches only a matter of a few months ago. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

548 

 

I think he should be reminded that some 30,000 fled the province in 1970 as visible evidence of the failure of 

the Liberal Government of that day to provide industry, to provide a stimulus to economic expansion or to 

provide what appeared to be a beneficial situation with respect to working men and women. 

 

I'd like to examine just very briefly one or two of the points made by the Member for Regina Albert Park 

when he suggested that in order to promote industrial expansion that if others were selling a product for 69 

cents, then we must sell it for 68 or I believe words to that effect. He suggested that if the minimum wage is 

$1.35 in a neighboring province or a neighboring jurisdiction that we cannot allow ours to rise above those 

which prevail elsewhere. I think what he was really saying was that low wages and long hours of work are 

somehow a blessing and a stimulus to industry and in fact the very opposite is the case. If you want to 

examine depressed areas, you'll find that depressed areas, low wages, miserable working conditions, go hand 

in hand. 

 

I think the time is appropriate for us just to remind ourselves, Mr. Speaker, that in order to make any strides 

at all, to make any advances, to make any improvements in working conditions for Saskatchewan's men and 

women, it will be necessary for this Province, I think, to provide the leadership in the way that we did during 

the 20 years between 1944 and 1964 when the CCF was the Government of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I thought the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane), Mr. Speaker, displayed a typical anti-labor 

bias that we in this House have become somewhat accustomed to over the years. I think it came as a 

disappointment because of his youth to see a Member opposite displaying the kind of anti-labor bias which 

has been evident among those sitting opposite to us in this House for some years. 

 

He said, and the Member for Regina Albert Park also intimated, that when the question of the minimum 

wage was to be considered in conjunction with hours of work, that he wondered whether we should take 

seriously the findings of the Minimum Wage Board. 

 

Well, just let me tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, that we shall be listening to the advice of the Minimum 

Wage Board and we shall treat them — that is to say, the members of the Minimum Wage Board — with a 

degree of courtesy in a way in which the previous Administration did not. 

 

The former Minister of Labour (Mr. MacLennan) was sitting behind the brass rail when one of the Members 

made this remark questioning the care with which we would judge the findings of the Minimum Wage Board 

and I thought I saw him shudder rather visibly when this matter was brought before the House. I think the 

former Minister of Labour will recall pretty distinctly the situation which arose in April of 1971 when he, as 

Minister of Labour, called the Minimum Wage Board together and asked them to rubber stamp a decision 

which had already been made by the Executive Council. They had recommendations of their own which 

were ignored completely, Mr. Speaker, but they were called upon to endorse the judgment of the Premier and 

the Executive Council, 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

549 

 

which caused them, Mr. Speaker, on April 27, 1971, to move a unanimous resolution and forward it to the 

Minister of Labour. And this is the resolution that the Minimum Wage Board made and passed on to the 

Minister of Labour on April 27,1971 last: 

 

In view of the decision made by the Cabinet and the subsequent announcement made by the 

Premier as reported in the press, it would appear that the Minimum Wage Board is redundant 

and therefore perhaps consideration should be given to doing away with the Board, because 

as the Board is a duly constituted body and because we are fully in accord with the proposed 

increase, we therefore ratify the increase of the Minimum Wage Board. 

 

Well, just let me tell Members opposite that when we call the Minimum Wage Board together, it won't be 

done for the purpose of establishing a minimum wage in advance by Premier and Cabinet and calling them 

in solely for the purpose of rubber stamping the judgment that has been made in Executive Council. 

 

I just want to say another few words, Mr. Speaker, in connection with the points that were made to 

emphasize the rationale for the shorter work week, and I think they by and large fall into three categories: the 

equity argument — if you like — the social advantages and the economic benefits that accrue as a result of 

the shortening of the legal work week in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think the essence of the first thesis is that workers are entitled to shorter hours as a matter of simple justice, 

Mr. Speaker. When over 70 per cent of Saskatchewan's employees now normally work 40 hours a week or 

less, then the question is a reasonable one when we ask ourselves why should a minority have to be on duty 

for a longer period than that 70 per cent majority. I think we need to ask ourselves if these people are any 

less capable or any less productive or any less deserving than the 70 per cent that work 40 hours a week or 

less. And we say the answer is, of course that they are not, Mr. Speaker. And it may be said with some 

justification that the existing hours of work legislation in its present form in fact encourages a form of 

employment discrimination with respect to the length of time that some employees are required to be on the 

job. I think it should be remembered too, Mr. Speaker, that a great many members of the labor force on the 

40-hour standard are filling positions which required up to 60 hours a matter of only 25 years ago. The 

transition to the 5-day week in these cases was accomplished without any undue difficulty and it may be 

added without any loss in pay at that particular time. There is no reason to expect that the situation will be 

otherwise when Bill No. 7 goes into effect, in spite of some of the dire predictions that arise from Opposition 

benches. 

 

It must also be borne in mind, Mr. Speaker, that the real output per worker in Saskatchewan today is more 

than double that of 25 years ago, and most authorities agree that all employees should gain from an increase 

in overall production in our Province. The legislation hasn't been altered, as has been mentioned in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, since 1947 — almost a quarter of a century ago. It's clear, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government of a modern, democratic, industrial state has the obligation to identify changing employment 

trends and apply their benefits to those wage earners who cannot rely upon the action of unions or large 

establishments to obtain them. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

550 

 

The second line of reasoning, Mr. Speaker, relates to the social advantages of legislation of the kind which is 

proposed today and has been discussed in some detail. I don't believe that at this time there is any need to 

restate the points that have been put forward except to say that they revolve around the necessity and the 

desirability of increased leisure time in this hectic age of technology. 

 

Thirdly, and finally, Mr. Speaker, despite any protest to the contrary, the shortening of the work week makes 

good economic sense. It's our hope that it will lead to the creation of some additional employment, both 

directly and indirectly. It can stimulate a real demand and an increase in purchasing power. It may well result 

in a further expansion of productivity. It will probably reduce the rate of sickness and accidents and 

ultimately these consequences will be of material advantage to all of us, including the employers of the 

province. 

 

I want to stress again, Mr. Speaker, that the Government intends to implement the provisions of Bill No. 7 in 

an objective and a rational manner. As I indicated previously, these provisions will not be proclaimed until 

the Minimum Wage Board has met to consider the relationship of the minimum wage and the hours of work. 

We do not wish to impose undue hardship on employers. Therefore, there will be sufficient administrative 

flexibility to permit exemptions and alternative means of observing the spirit of the law in special cases. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the Government does not intend that this amendment be merely window dressing. 

Those who may criticize it must realize that employees working longer hours have the right to expect their 

fair share of the rewards of improved working conditions and living standards. Wage earners represent 

something more than impersonal labor costs, they are subject to the same needs, the same influences and 

desires which can characterize all other human beings. 

 

That successful employers (and there are many thousands of these in Saskatchewan) take pains to ensure this 

fact is reflected in their employment policies. They in turn have the advantage of services of a loyal, 

contented and hard-working staff who are generally interested in the welfare of the business in which they 

are engaged. 

 

The employers affected by Bill 7 can probably do a good deal also to adjust the impact of the changing of 

hours through better work methods. I'm certain that their employees will be only too willing to assist them in 

every way possible to improve the efficiency of that enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a good piece of legislation. It will no doubt be duplicated before very long in other 

provincial legislatures and it is particularly fitting that it has been introduced shortly before Labour Day, 

inasmuch as this holiday and Bill 7 have a common purpose to recognize the contribution of working people 

to the progress and prosperity of our Province. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Hon. Minister will permit a question? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Yes, by all means. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

551 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Is it the intention of the Hon. Minister to implement this Act before Labour Day? Was 

that the implication of his last remarks? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Well, I think the Member if being facetious. I told you that it was going to be a matter of 

calling the Minimum Wage Board together, have them recommend on the appropriate level of minimum 

wages. I expect it will be later in the year before the Minimum Wage Board has had an opportunity to advise 

with respect to the appropriate level of minimum wages. Additionally, it's a matter of — as you well know 

— assessing the impact of this Bill on the various industries and businesses across the province and they will 

be reviewing all of the Orders-in-Council that provide the present exemptions by Order-in-Council, so 

certainly there is no intention, there is no possibility of it being implemented before Labour Day. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — A further question. I wonder if the Minister has decided on whether this Act will have 

universal application, that is, the 40-hour week will apply to all workers throughout Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Well, I thought, Mr. Speaker, I'd made my point sufficiently clear on that. I should like to 

see that the 40-hour work week be made to apply in the largest number of cases possible without exerting 

any hardship on specific individuals or groups; certainly it will not apply in cases such as those workers who 

are under Federal jurisdiction — over whom we have no control — certainly these are exempt. There are a 

number of others, as you know, under many other classifications and I'm thinking of highway construction 

industry and a number of others where neither employer nor employee are married to the thought of working 

a 40-hour work week. So as a result, all of these classifications will be re-examined in the weeks directly 

ahead. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney 

General) that Bill No. 9 — An Act respecting the Protection of Farm Property be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, what I concluded my remarks the other day, I was 

speaking in regard to the Bill before us. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that it can be safely said, never has it become more apparent in such a short time the 

bias which is shared by the Government opposite towards business, whether it be business of a large nature 

or of a small nature. I think it is unfortunate that the bias which is so widely felt by the Members opposite 

against any individual enterprise or private enterprise should become so obvious so quickly in legislation put 

forward to this Assembly. 

 

We have at times, Mr. Speaker, put forward some of the views that we have upon this Bill, and unfortunately 

the Treasury benches have not indicated to us, in the last four or five days, any reason to think that our 

observations have been listened to, or to believe, Mr. Speaker, that any substantial changes in this Bill before 

us are going to be undertaken. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

552 

 

The Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) put a very positive alternative to the Assembly when speaking 

in this debate the other day. He suggested that the Government of Saskatchewan had completely failed to 

plan any financial backing behind the purposes of this Bill and the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think this is very unfortunate, by a Government that campaigned so long, so hard, during 

the election campaign on salvation of the family farm and on the premise that they would do a great deal for 

the family farm in our Province. We think that a government that was sincere in their efforts and in that 

election campaign would have been able to find, at least, a substantial amount of money to be able to assume 

the obligations that are going to be expected to be undertaken by so many people that can ill-afford to 

assume these financial risks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member for Milestone eloquently placed before this Assembly the suggestion that the Law 

Amendments Committee should be constituted and that the various groups, that have been indicated, would 

have the opportunity to present their case. 

 

I think this suggestion has great merit and should still be considered by the Government opposite. I will, at 

the conclusion of my remarks, give the Treasury bench an ample opportunity to put before the Members of 

this Assembly any changes in attitude that they have had in the last four or five days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Assembly has listened for a number of days to proposed legislation put forward to assist 

labor in this Province. This, in itself, is fine, Mr. Speaker, but we think it very unfortunate that the 

Government opposite has asked every small businessman, and every independent enterpriser in the Province 

of Saskatchewan, to undertake tremendous financial responsibility if this Act is proclaimed. 

 

I want to pass on, Mr. Speaker, some of the problems that will be confronted by the small businessmen in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. First, Mr. Speaker, the implement dealer. I presented at least two or three causes 

for great fear on their part and I think there has been nothing done by the Members opposite to allay that fear. 

I am convinced in studying the Act and in talking to the many dealers in my own particular area, Mr. 

Speaker, that if I were a dealer myself I should certainly have the great apprehension that many of them feel 

at this time. For example, one particular provision in the Bill suggests that when the Act is proclaimed that 

an implement which has been repossessed by a dealer, that this implement may be taken back by the person 

whom it has been taken away from. I outlined at that time, the other afternoon, that this could certainly 

result, in many particular instances, where dealers have repossessed machinery the dealer may have had it on 

his lot for the last six or seven months, he has undertaken substantial changes and invested money of his own 

in that particular machine to the extent of several hundreds of dollars and now if this Act is proclaimed, the 

farmer who had originally lost the machine can go to the dealer and take it back. Precisely how the dealer 

hopes to reclaim the lost investment that he has put into this machine, I certainly would not know under this 

particular Act. I think that many dealers have machines sitting on their lots that have been repossessed. I 

know that no dealer whom I have ever encountered has ever made any amount of money out of repossession, 

in fact, I think it could safely be said that 99 per 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

553 

 

cent of the time that if a machine is repossessed, the dealer actually takes a loss. 

 

I have also talked to many credit unions which find themselves in a similar position. Mr. Speaker, in this 

particular case of repossession by credit unions, I have been assured in all of these cases that the credit 

union, if they thought the farmer was a bonafide operator, a person who was sincere in his efforts to get on to 

better financial ground, that they had extended credit wherever possible and that only in the most severe 

cases had they undertaken repossession. 

 

I have before me, Mr. Speaker, an advertisement that has just recently been published by the Wolseley 

newspaper, July 28th that I should like to read into the record in the next few minutes. It is an advertisement 

put out by the Montmartre Credit Union, Mr. Speaker, because I am sure that the shareholders of the 

Montmartre Credit Union, many of whom are farmers, all local people, that they have not undertaken 

repossession except in the most extreme circumstances. 

 

For example, a ten-foot grain cultivator is advertised for sale in the July 28th issue of the Wolseley paper, for 

$50. A 50-foot Minneapolis disc, $150. A ten-foot heavy duty discer, $125; Minneapolis diesel tractor, $500. 

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, it can readily be seen that if the repossession could not take place on any of 

this machinery for over one year, these machines would practically be worthless after they have been used 

for another year if no payment was made. 

 

I am certain that no ulterior motive could be ascribed to the shareholders of the Credit Union of the 

Montmartre district. Most of the shareholders would be farmers or people who are working people in the 

town. And I think it would be very irresponsible of the Members to suggest that this is big business trying to 

perpetrate hardship on the local people. I think that would be complete nonsense, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . to say that they are large mortgage lenders, banks or some other accusation, would 

simply be a misconstruction of the facts. 

 

I think it is very obvious that many of the small people of Saskatchewan — and I hold no brief for the 

mortgage companies or the banks, Mr. Speaker — certainly can look after their own interests, and after this 

Act, and I am certain they will continue business as they have in the past. But I am certain that many of the 

smaller businessmen in Saskatchewan will find themselves in a much more difficult position when this Act 

is proclaimed and comes into operation. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that if I were an implement dealer I should be also very concerned because of other 

provisions of this law. I think a very, very dangerous provision of this law is simply that no matter how well 

off the farmer is he can walk into the place of business and say, 'I am unable to pay.' And as has been amply 

put forward by the Dealers' Association themselves, this is a very, very dangerous aspect of the Act. It is 

very, very dangerous, Mr. Speaker, because it makes normally good payers into bad ones. The result of this 

simply is that a 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

554 

 

person who wishes not to pay this particular year, can walk in and say, 'I'm sorry. I am unable to pay my 

debt.' The obligation then lies on the creditors' shoulders to go to court and prove, Mr. Speaker, that that 

individual is able to pay. 

 

Well you can just imagine, Mr. Speaker, if the dealer, for example, or a small businessman had even seven 

or eight farmers who may be of a marginal nature. Possibly they are marginal in the sense that they maybe 

could qualify under the Act. Possibly they are marginal in the sense that they can't afford to pay, but they 

walk in and say, 'I am not able to pay, now you take me to court and you produce the evidence that I am able 

to pay.' 

 

The implications of this for the small businessman is tremendous. The possibility of creating many more bad 

debts, as far as they are concerned, the possibility of creating a substantial number of people who will take 

advantage of this, as unfortunate as it may be, as much as I may dislike to say so, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

we must all recognize and be realistic that we do have a number of people who simply will take advantage of 

the Act, who could pay their debts but will simply take advantage of it because they hope to postpone that 

debt for another year. I think that this, if I were a small businessman, this aspect would make me very, very 

sceptical about its worthiness. 

 

I want also to say a few words about another aspect of the Act which I think is of great concern to many 

people, and that is the credit to the individual farmer. Already many of our lending institutions are saying, 

and have said privately, that they are carefully scrutinizing any credit which is given out to all farmers at 

present, simply until they are able to determine what the intentions of the Government are as far as this 

particular Act is concerned. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that as a farmer that the one thing that many, many 

farmers take great pride in is their ability to pay their debts; their ability to meet credit obligations . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . and I think it goes down very badly when they appear at their bank or credit union 

or whatever financial institution it is, and they are given an answer, 'We regret we are unable to discuss any 

financial loan to you simply because the Government of Saskatchewan is contemplating passing a law which 

may make it very difficult for us to take any type of security.' I think, Mr. Speaker, that if this law is passed 

that many, many farmers now who should be able to receive loans, in good faith, will find it very difficult to 

obtain loans. They will find it extremely difficult to obtain loans, simply because the lending agency has very 

little security on which to lend this money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should think that from the point of view of every farmer in Saskatchewan he would be 

extremely concerned about the nature of this Act, particularly because of his own reliance upon credit. There 

are very few farmers who operate in Saskatchewan who do not have to rely on credit at some particular time 

of the year. The outcome of this Act will mean that except for the very best of the farmers, the very, very 

best farmers who are able to obtain loans under any arrangement, because of their assets and standing, that 

practically all other groups, except for probably 10 or 15 per cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan, who have 

extremely high credit ratings, I should 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

555 

 

think that a large percentage of the farmers of Saskatchewan will find that loans will be much harder to 

obtain. 

 

In this regard, I think that most farmers of Saskatchewan would view with great alarm the intentions of this 

law. Mr. Speaker, in essence, I have suggested at the opening of my remarks that it is most unfortunate that 

the Government opposite has decided on this attitude towards most of our individual enterprisers in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I fully realize that being a Socialist Government they probably have very little 

sympathy for most of the small business people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I realize that being a Socialist Government the only time, to my knowledge, that the 

small business people of Saskatchewan have ever received any suggestion that they would be supported by 

the Party opposite was a few days before the election. 

 

I must confess after having listened to speeches from that side when they were on this side of the House that 

it was not surprising to me. It is a little surprising that they were so fast to introduce and so reluctant, after 

studying this Bill, to withdraw it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I could even forgive the Government, Mr. Speaker, if, for example, after it had been brought to their 

attention that the Bill was ill-conceived, that the Bill had been brought in, in haste and was bad legislation, I 

could even forgive the Government, Mr. Speaker, if they had stood in their place and said, 'Well, we are a 

new Government. We regret that we have acted in haste, that we have presented a Bill which has been poorly 

thought through. We didn't understand its implications.' 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was last Wednesday. Thursday went by, Friday went by, Saturday, Sunday and today it is 

Monday. Mr. Speaker, the Government opposite can scarcely say now that they don't understand what the 

effect of this Bill is. This is sad, Mr. Speaker, because it only means that they have determined that this Bill 

must go through and will be passed at all costs. I think that they could well be forgiven if they stood in their 

places, when they get the opportunity, to say that they have made a mistake, that they would withdraw the 

Bill or bring in substantial changes. I must confess, Mr. Speaker, that even though substantial changes in this 

Bill, if they are made — and I have no indication that they will be made — that it is very difficult to see how 

this Bill could be patched up to the extent that many innocent people would not suffer from any transaction 

which may take place in the coming year. It is so encompassing that it is hard to envisage just exactly who 

will be affected. 

 

For example, I discussed with one of my colleagues just this afternoon an aspect which I had not thought of 

and which I believe had not occurred to most of the Members on this side. For example, a small fuel dealer 

in a town in Saskatchewan where the dealer has sold $300 or $400 worth of fuel to a farmer and frequently, 

if payment is not forthcoming, the local dealer has paid for the fuel. He has been forced to pay to the 

company he represents for the fuel and therefore he has accounts receivable of about $300 or $400. Now if 

the time of six or seven months goes by and he received no payment, he frequently goes 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

556 

 

to the farmer and says, 'I must have payment or I will have to proceed in a court action against you' which in 

most cases if the farmer is able to pay, he makes some settlement. I should think that under this Bill, if it 

comes into operation, that fuel dealers will find this extremely difficult to do. Many of his accounts 

receivable, which are out now, he would be unable to collect in the next year. 

 

I think that these are only a very few of the difficulties which this Act will bring about. I mentioned the other 

day, Mr. Speaker, that it is like an iceberg with a little bit showing above the water. I think that it is hard to 

visualize by any of us precisely the difficulties that it could create, because it is all so encompassing and 

could have so many ramifications for so many people. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, I wish to support the amendment which has been moved by my colleague from 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and I want to support it on the basis, first, Mr. Speaker, because of serious 

effect that this Act will have on the many credit unions throughout the Province of Saskatchewan. It is quite 

obvious the credit union, which is in a depressed area, could have many clients who may suggest that they 

are unable to pay the bill and it could have a very serious effect on the credit union shareholders and the 

credit union assets in that particular area. I also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it should go to the Law 

Amendments Committee because of the serious effects it may have, and will have, on small machinery 

dealers and automobile dealers. 

 

This Act as it is presently constituted will jeopardize the credit position of every farmer in this Province and 

make every farmer in Saskatchewan become suspect as to whether he can legitimately have credit or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fourthly, the dangerous provision of this Act, that anyone refusing to pay must be taken to court 

to prove that he can pay, I suggested the other day that this provision should result in practically no 

unemployed lawyers in our Province. 

 

Fifth, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has suggested that the money released from debt payment can go to other 

living expenses. Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish that I had that confidence in human nature that the Minister has. I 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that all of us know too well of many times visiting in small business places 

when the businessman looks out the window and he says 'so and so owes me a substantial amount of money. 

He just bought a new car or a new snowmobile.' 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it is very obvious that the money which is released from the principal payments or 

the interest may not necessarily go to the small business person in the community. It may well go to some 

other particular item that that individual wants. 

 

Six, Mr. Speaker, most of the farmers under this Act will receive no benefits simply because their debts 

become due in one year and the net income that they will have remains totally unchanged. It does absolutely 

nothing to improve the net income of some farmers and, in fact, only postpones the net obligations which he 

has for one particular year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in essence this legislation will have such far-reaching effects that I think it is impossible for any 

of 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

557 

 

us to comprehend the ramifications it may have for many people. Many groups and organizations have 

indicated their willingness to appear before the Law Amendments Committee and I want to suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that we on this side of the House hope that the Government opposite will accept our suggestion and 

go to the Committee and hearings be held so that determination of the good this Act can do will be weighed 

against the difficulties it will create. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. Feschuk (Prince Albert East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to compliment the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) and this Government which took immediate action to introduce new legislation 

which will no doubt bring relief to many farmers, legislation the farmers will welcome in their present plight. 

May I point out, Mr. Speaker, that during the Liberal term of office when the Saskatchewan Liberals and 

their bed partners in Ottawa failed to provide agricultural policies they encouraged farmers to diversify. 

Farmers were encouraged to assume unrealistic debt loads to extend their farming operations, to buy larger 

equipment, to build $40,000 and $50,000 hog barns, to buy and raise more cattle, to buy more land for a 

viable farm operation, all in the name of efficiency. Some of the other people who were guilty of 

encouraging the farmer to assume unrealistic debts were the machinery companies, the banks, the financial 

institutions, and public lending agencies as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feschuk: — These are the people who exploited the farmers with highly inflated prices and excessively 

high interest rates. These are the people who have betrayed the farmers of Saskatchewan who have to exist 

from day to day in poverty and insecurity. These are people who by their policies are driving the farmers of 

Saskatchewan into bankruptcy. Farmers are being threatened with repossession action on farm machinery 

and farm land. The situation appears critical. Different tactics have been used by creditors to force farmers 

into debt, to force farmers into debt into giving up their lands and equipment or else forcing farmers into 

signing new debt agreements at a high interest rate. Various banking institutions, Mr. Speaker, have renewed 

farm improvement loans from five per cent interest to eight and one-half per cent interest, almost double the 

interest rate, when farmers could least afford it. Farm Credit Corporation loans in arrears in the Province of 

Saskatchewan in 1969 were 6.6 per cent, in 1970 they were 12.2 per cent and as of June, 1971 Farm Credit 

loans in Saskatchewan were in arrears of 21 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, along with the Farm Security Act there is a need for further legislation to protect farmers' 

rights. There is an urgent need to re-establish the Agriculture Machinery Act, to provide protection to the 

farmer. There is need for legislation to do away with planned obsolescence in equipment. Mr. Speaker, 

presently the onus is still on the farmer to take legal action and in many cases farmers lose their land and 

equipment by default because of legal technicalities. That is a sin in these difficult times and many 

repossessions are taking place because farmers have no protection, while others do not understand their 

rights. Mr. Speaker, in 1968 and 1969 cash advance 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

558 

 

payments were given throughout though outstanding cash advances had not been paid back. In 1970-71 crop 

year they were not and a producer must pay back one-half of all prior or outstanding cash advances. 

Although the delivery quota for the 1970-71 crop year has been set on an eight bushel quota for the LIFT 

acres, the eight bushel quota was only an illusion. The eight bushel quota on the old specified acres is only a 

four bushel quota and many farmers realize only one-half of that four bushel quota because of repayments of 

prior or outstanding cash advances. But most important, Mr. Speaker, is the implication imbedded in the new 

regulations that the farmer has been trying to get away with something. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) in bringing forward Bill 9, an Act respecting the Protection of Farm Property, will have done much 

to help farmers temporarily. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feschuk: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this motion, I believe we must recognize our present economic 

agricultural situation. Many of our agricultural problems are such that only a Federal Government can solve 

and may, I submit, that if the Government of Canada insists on a cheap food policy, then the time has come 

to bring a subsidized two-price system or a guaranteed annual income for our farming people. 

 

I am pleased to support this legislation and I feel that it will be welcomed by Saskatchewan farmers. I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that much more can be done if we had a New Democratic Government in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feschuk: — Wheat sales and farm protection are urgently needed but the lowering of farm production 

costs and increases in farm income is really the only step towards the solution to the farmer's situation. And 

these, Mr. Speaker, are in the hands of the Federal Government and it appears likely that with a New 

Democratic Government there after the next Federal election, that this will greatly assist this Government in 

providing a better deal for our total farming population. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. Macleod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few remarks to address to this Bill which is 

called The Family Farm Protection Act, 1971. Now to begin with, I should like to express my agreement 

with the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) when he says that the prime industry is farming, is 

agriculture. When the farming economy is good, everything is good. When the farm economy is bad, 

everything is bad. And in this Province we are all farmers. I want to mention this because I like to be 

agreeable whenever possible and I have looked at this Bill and it is probably the only thing we can agree 

upon. Although I do agree, if the implication of the remarks of the last Member can be taken at face value, 

that he has now concluded that they elected an NDP Government in the wrong place. I am prepared to agree 

that it isn't in the right place. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

559 

 

Now to begin with, Mr. Speaker, I looked at paragraph 1 of the Act and it is cited as I mentioned, The 

Family Farm Protection Act, 1971. I have looked for the definition of family farm in the Act but none 

appears. This is intended to be a farm protection Act and the addition of the 'family' just doesn't add anything 

to it. Unless they have decided in Saskatchewan everybody is now a family farmer instead of just a farmer. 

The Government then has fulfilled a promise by changing a name so I find that today that a farmer isn't a 

farmer anymore, he woke up this morning and found that he is now a family farmer. So he says, what did I 

do, more children? No. Have you done anything? No. What were you yesterday? Well, I was a farmer 

yesterday. What am I today? Today I am a family farmer. It's like changing the name of Trans Canada to Air 

Canada. It's wonderful but it doesn't change anything. All I know is, it's like the girl up in our country called 

Mabel Auganschlotz. She didn't like her name so she changed it to Olga Auganschlotz. 

 

The farmers in this Province have had a promise kept to them by the change of a name. A promise in words 

and a completion in words. But having studied the Act, Mr. Speaker, I recommend that the name be altered 

to read Farmers' Credit Destruction Act. There are so many faults with this statute, so many defects and 

inconsistencies that it is difficult to know where to start, so I think I'll list them as they come to mind just as I 

went through the statute. 

 

Now, the question of land I think, gives us an excellent example of what I am talking about. Our laws 

presently have tremendous provision for the protection of the farmer. Under Agreements for Sale and 

Mortgages the law is stacked heavily in favor of the owner and very much against the man who owns the 

Mortgage or the Agreement for Sale. I want to give you an example. Let's suppose you do have a farmer who 

has not paid for his land and is in default. Before the mortgagee, that is the fellow who gets the money, can 

commence action he must follow the procedure which is presently set out in The Land Contracts Actions 

Act. 

 

I want to outline briefly what this involves. To begin with the mortgagee, as I mentioned the fellow that has 

the money coming to him gives a notice to the Provincial Mediation Board. He can do nothing for 30 days, 

he has to give the Mediation Board an opportunity to intervene and use its office to bring about the 

settlement. At the end of 30 days the mortgagee can then start his preparation of documents. He goes to a 

judge and asks permission to commence action. Then he gives notice of this to the farmer and he has to wait 

another 15 days minimum. Then the judge hears the matter and the mortgagee asks permission to start 

action. Now the judge can adjourn this application up to eight months, he can dismiss the action, he can 

make interim orders, and do all sort of things along the line. So let's suppose the judge eventually agrees that 

it is fair to let the mortgagee continue with his action. 

 

Well, he gives an order permitting the mortgagee to start the action. And what I wish to emphasize to this 

House is that after all these procedures that he has gone through, taking anywhere up to eight months after he 

has actually got before a judge, he still hasn't begun any action to foreclose. He has no permission yet, at this 

point to start it. When he gets permission he then can start action. I want to read what it says in dealing with 

this in The Land Contracts Actions Act, Mr. Speaker, I am reading from Chapter 104, Section 4, first part: 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

560 

 

In any action, whether heretofor or hereafter commenced, the court or judge may require the 

parties to furnish information respecting the value of the land, the state of cultivation of the 

land, the state of the mortgagor or purchaser's account with the mortgagee or vendor the 

income and assets of the parties . . . 

 

(Not just one but both parties) 

 

. . . prevailing conditions of a local or temporary nature, and all other matters that may appear 

relevant. He may make such inquiries with regard to any of the said matters as he deems 

necessary. He may grant or refuse to grant an order, stay the action, postpone payment of any 

monies due, prescribe the terms and conditions to which an order shall be subject, vary or 

extend an order from time to time, give directions as to cost . . . 

 

And so on. Those are the matters that a judge must look upon and consider when he is thinking about giving 

permission in the first place in allowing this man to start his action. Just let me look for a moment, Mr. 

Speaker, as to what is said in this particular statute: 

 

When an application is made by a creditor under subsection 1, the court shall require the 

parties to furnish information respecting the value and state of cultivation, value of the 

security, the state of accounts between the parties, the earning capacity, income and assets of 

the farmer, the general or local economic and climatic conditions, including hail, drought, 

frost or agricultural pests, any other conditions or circumstances beyond the control of the 

farmer, and all other conditions and circumstances that appear relevant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the difference in wording is totally immaterial between the two statutes. What they have done 

precisely is take the wording out of The Land Contracts Actions Act, put it into this statute and pretend that 

they have done something new. Great delays have occurred under The Land Contracts Actions Act as any 

lawyer knows. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the similarities in the two statutes are so identical that 

obviously Section 22 is put in for the purpose of avoiding ridiculous duplication of effort. In fact, Section 22 

says this: 

 

If a man proceeds under this particular Act, then he does not have to proceed under the Land 

Contracts Actions Act. 

 

But obviously he is doing the same thing under one as he would under the other and, therefore, the new Act 

is a waste of time. It is a pretense at something new that isn't new at all. 

 

Well, let's suppose that under one statute or the other the mortgage owner, now considerably in arrears under 

the mortgage, does eventually get permission to start an action. The judge gives him permission and says, all 

right, you can go ahead. Well, he starts out by preparing a writ of summons and statement of claim, setting 

out in full detail all of these particulars again. That's what the mortgagee does. The farmer gets a copy of this 

and the mortgagee has to stop, he has to bide his time for awhile until the farmer can enter his defence. If the 

farmer does enter a defence the usual trial procedures apply and this 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

561 

 

can last anywhere up to a year or two, depending on how rapidly the parties press the case. 

 

Now let's suppose the farmer doesn't do anything at all. Let's suppose he has abandoned the farm, he has 

taken off for some other location. Even in this case the mortgagee must proceed right through the case. He 

must make the usual applications for default, he must eventually wind up by getting an order nisi which does 

the following. The order nisi says, well, we've calculated the account and this is how much is owing. This is 

how much is in arrears, and the arrears is the only part he has to pay to bring it back in good standing. It's an 

interim order that, in addition, gives a period of time in which to pay all these arrears, three months, six 

months, who knows, the judges usually give a fairly liberal length of time in which to repay the balance. A 

copy of this order has to be served on the farmer. If the farmer pays anything in the meantime, the mortgagee 

has to go back and do it all over again. Make a new application, get a new calculation of accounts, get a new 

redemption period and a further extension of time is granted. The new order nisi is again served on the 

farmer. And even when all of this is done, he has now gone through the entire Land Contracts Actions Act, 

he has gone through the entire procedure of a lawsuit, he's got his order nisi, he was waited all these periods 

that can go anywhere into years, not months, years. Even then he has got to back and apply to a judge for a 

final order. And that final order can be appealed or you have got to wait 30 days before it's final. Yet we look 

at paragraph 4 of The Family Farm Protection Act, which says that these orders nisi will again be set over for 

one further year. Here we have a mortgagee that may have waited anywhere up to three or four years and he 

finds that he has got to wait another year. The entire procedures, as I have described, for foreclosures and 

mortgages apply exactly and identically in the cases of the cancellation of Agreements for Sale. In the case of 

mortgages, after the appeal period has expired, you can still go back and redeem the property by payment of 

the arrears. Even if the farm is abandoned, the mortgage owner has to go through this entire procedure and 

the unfortunate part is that having gone through it once, he may well be required, having gone through to the 

order nisi stage, to go back and do some of it again. 

 

The Act before us cannot possibly help anyone. Whom will it hurt? Well, I assure the Hon. Attorney General 

(Mr. Romanow) that the mortgage companies won't be hurt and Traders Finance will not be hurt. The Farm 

Credit Corporation can't be hurt very badly. It will still be in business, it is the Government of Canada. The 

trust companies have long feared this kind of legislation in Saskatchewan and they have long since stopped 

lending money to farmers with this security. They have virtually no outstanding loans to farmers. If they 

have any, they are residual ones from many years ago. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . wonderful legislation! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Great! I agree with you when you say that is wonderful legislation. 

 

Now I will tell you who will be hurt — a lot of credit unions will be hurt. And maybe they won't lend to 

farmers any more. The persons who suffer the most from this legislation, of course, are the farmers. Is it 

possible that the failure to get credit 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

562 

 

to buy or sell will result in a reduction of farm prices? A reduction in people who can actually borrow money 

to buy land? I wonder if this will benefit the Government when it establishes its Land Bank? I wonder if this 

will help the Government to get land at cheaper prices by driving out the lending institutions? Is this, the 

offer to acquire land, freely offered at competitive prices? Certainly it is wonderful. Nobody else can borrow 

a dime to buy that section of land so the only person with any money will be the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There are already so many protections for the farmer in the case of land that if anything else is needed to 

destroy the farmer's credit, this statute is it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have today is an example of protective overkill. If any farmer has any difficulty in 

borrowing money he should blame no one but the Provincial Government. 

 

Section 13 is obviously too vague to be workable. In effect it says that the operator of the land can take as 

much of the land as is necessary to pay for all his expenses, including a living allowance, before he actually 

pays his crop share to the owner. So if a man sells his farm to someone else and is to receive a third of the 

crop share as part of the purchase price, the new owner can keep the entire proceeds until he receives this 

amount to pay all legitimate costs of harvesting and a necessary living allowance for the support of himself 

and his family. 

 

What happens if a farmer has all sorts of other land? What happens if he has just purchased one more piece 

of land from one more owner? How in the world are we going to determine what is a fair living allowance? 

How long is it to last? Is it one year, one month, six months? If a farmer has this section of land in his own 

name and buys some more, I gather that the living allowance is to be charged first to the land he bought. 

That is what it says in the Act. How do you determine these amounts? I wonder, has the Government 

proposed that the seller of land has the right to look into another man's income tax? If so, I strongly reject 

this, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Section 13 is pure nonsense. Just window dressing. 

 

So now we come to farm implements and that includes farm trucks. To answer the comment of the Attorney 

General earlier, the Attorney General mentioned that The Land Contracts Actions Act and The Limitations 

of Civil Rights Act were outstanding legislation. Well, I agree with that. These amendments were brought in 

last year under the last Administration by Mr. Heald when he was the Attorney General, and we accept the 

compliment on behalf of the last Administration. 

 

Under the present law, the Saskatchewan farmer is more protected than his counterpart in any part of North 

America and probably protected more at the present time than any other farm in any other place in the world. 

Now, many sales in Saskatchewan are made by what is called a 'Condition Sale'. Now under a Conditional 

Sale a farmer buys the machine, takes it home and uses it and he agrees to pay for it. And if he pays for it, of 

course, it belongs to him. It becomes his property, but if he doesn't pay for it, he can never be sued. And that 

is the essential of this type of contract. The dealer can take the machine back but he can never by law sue the 

farmer. So it doesn't matter how much is owing. It doesn't matter how long 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

563 

 

the farmer has used the machine or how much it has depreciated. It doesn't matter if the machine is worth 

only a fraction of what the farmer agreed to pay. Under the present law the dealer can take the machine back, 

and that is all that he can do. I think that is excellent legislation and it is more than ample protection for the 

farmer. It is the right amount of protection that a farmer is adequately and properly protected. But what you 

are suggesting is that the dealer can't take that machine back for another year. 

 

Let's see what happens then. Let's suppose that the dealer now looks into it and says the farmer agreed to pay 

$4,000 for that machine. He has used it for two or three years and he hasn't paid for it. I should like to take it 

back. What can he do before he seizes it? Well, to begin with, if you follow Section 19 and the following 

sections in The Limitations of Civil Rights Act, he must give 30 days' notice that he intends to seize the 

equipment. Then he does nothing. Then the farmer can go to a judge and tell the judge the reasons why he 

can't make payment. And while that procedure is going on, the dealer is not permitted to seize the 

equipment. In fact, he can no longer seize the equipment after that occurs until a judge gives him permission. 

Now that is the law, the way it is. The judge may allow the farmer to keep this without making any payments 

whatsoever or he may decide that the farmer should pay some payments and he can alter the arrangement. 

 

But let's suppose that the creditor eventually gets permission. He takes possession of the article and he gives 

another 30 days' notice that he has the article. This is the second set of notices. And if the farmer didn't make 

application in the first place, he can make application to the judge now. And, again, they go through this 

entire court procedure. These cases can drag on for months and even years. And it is only after a judge has 

been totally convinced that it is proper, fair and reasonable that the creditor be allowed to seize the 

equipment, that the dealer is actually permitted to proceed. 

 

And all the while remembering that at no time can the farmer ever be sued for the purchase price. He can 

give the machine back or it can be taken back, but he can't be forced to pay for it. This Act, this Farm Credit 

Destruction Act, is like carrying coals to Newcastle. It gives protection where no further protection is 

needed. There comes a time when more protection isn't protection at all. Well, then it's window dressing. If 

there is nothing new in the Act, then it is pure and simple window dressing and let's not go out to the people 

and say that you have done anything. 

 

Now a similar principle to that which I have discussed is set forth in Section 12. To show the protection 

presently given the farmer, let's deal with the situation as it relates to the tax enforcement proceedings. In 

Section 12 of this Bill they suggest that no final applications for title shall be taken by any rural municipality. 

It doesn't matter what it says in The Mediation Board Act or The Tax Enforcement Act, everything stops for 

a year. Well, let's suppose this is true, that this stuff does get through. What have they done? Well, let's look 

at the present Act and the present law. I want to show you the protection that is now given to the farmer. So 

let's assume that he doesn't pay his taxes in 1971. Nothing can be done by the municipality until June 30, 

1972, then The Tax Enforcement Act applies. Then the municipality sends in a notice to the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

564 

 

Provincial Gazette and that says if they aren't paid within 60 days, the municipality will file a lien. 

 

Well, let's suppose that the 1971 taxes aren't paid, so sometime in the last half of 1972 the tax lien will be 

applied to the title. The municipality must wait two years before it proceeds to acquire the title. We may well 

now be into the fall of 1974 depending on how quickly people operate and then this is the procedure that 

they have to follow to get title. The municipality must make application to the Land Titles Office and then a 

notice is served on the farmer telling him his taxes are in arrears. If he doesn't know already that the 1971 

taxes are in arrears, we are not out in the middle, or past the middle, we are half past 1974. Nothing further 

can be done until after the expiration of another six months. 

 

Another six months goes by and if the taxes aren't paid after this additional six months, the municipality can 

now proceed. And before it can do anything at all it must now apply to the Provincial Mediation Board and 

the farmer gets another 30 days. Before making final application for title, the owner gets notice of this final 

application, so they have to make two separate applications in the Land Titles Office, one other application 

to the Provincial Mediation Board. If the Provincial Mediation Board will not proceed, then you can't 

proceed. And it would be very simple for this Government to have said to the Provincial Mediation Board, 

which is now their servant, take it easy on these applications for final title. Make very sure that anybody, that 

any municipality that applies for final title, absolutely should do so, before letting them go ahead. It can 

easily be stopped at that level because there is no municipality in this Province which can get final title 

without the consent of the Provincial Mediation Board. 

 

Here we may well be in the midst of 1975. Now, from the things that I have said, you might get the idea, you 

may well get the idea, that it takes anywhere from three to five years to acquire title by tax proceedings. And 

if you have that idea, you have the right idea. The taking of land by a municipality for taxes is a long and 

tedious process. Now, of course, you can shorten it up if you move instantly the very moment you are 

entitled to take the next step. I have never yet seen a municipality move the very first second that it is entitled 

to do so. 

 

I have only dealt with a part of this Bill. Livestock presents a special problem, particularly the buying and 

selling so frequently of these cattle. All I wanted to do was attempt to show to this House the total futility of 

this Bill. This Bill is absolutely unnecessary. Now it would help if the Government was willing to spend 

some of its own money, of course. In the end the farmer is hurt very much by this Bill. Will the machine 

companies be hurt? Well, not likely. The machine companies cannot sue the dealer while the Act is in force 

but at the end of that term the bill still must be paid. This means that the dealer will be obliged to pay the 

machine company and he may lose money because in many cases the machine will have been kept another 

year and it will be worth a lot less than when they would have liked to have seized it. 

 

So as a result, the farmer has had continued use of the machine and the machine dealer loses. As I 

mentioned, under the Conditional Sale Agreement, the farmer cannot be sued for the value of this machine. 

So at the end of this year, if the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

565 

 

machine is worth what is owing on it, the farmer pays for it but if it is worth a lot less, the farmer says, the 

heck with it. He doesn't do anything. The dealer takes the loss. 

 

So we face the prospect of these machine dealers through the province, not the machine companies or the 

manufacturers, we face the prospect of machine dealers throughout Saskatchewan going broke or suffering 

serious financial difficulties because of this legislation. It won't hurt the banks, and it won't hurt the trust 

companies. The Co-op Trust Company, however, may well be hurt because it does make some loans to 

farmers. 

 

Trust companies have the odd residual one and that is all. Banks, frequently are covered by Federal 

guarantees, but credit unions are in the class of lending institutions which lend the most — on a percentage 

basis — across the board, across the board groups referred to in this legislation. That is, they lend on land, 

they lend on farm implements and they lend on livestock. No other lending institution is more broadly under 

the shadow of this legislation than our credit unions. 

 

I spoke to a manager of a credit union this morning. He tells me that at least 30 to 40 per cent of his loans 

will be affected, or could be affected, by this legislation. I have a letter dated August 6, 1971 delivered to me 

this morning. It is from the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society Limited, 2625 Victoria Avenue, 

Regina, Saskatchewan, and it is addressed to me, re: Family Farm Protection Act, 1971, and it says this: 

 

Saskatchewan Credit Unions, like the Members of the Legislature are concerned about the 

debt problems of farmers. While The Family Farm Protection Act, 1971 seeks to alleviate 

these problems, it may create secondary effects which would interfere with the ability of 

Saskatchewan credit unions to meet their commitments to a large number of their members, 

who deposit money with and borrow from credit unions. We, therefore, request that this 

legislation be referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated 

Powers so that credit union members may be heard on this vital matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — A higher percentage of their accounts, of credit unions, will come under this Act than any 

other lending institution, and as a result they suffer the most. No institution has as high a percentage as the 

credit unions of Saskatchewan. Now these weren't dealt with by the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) in his 

remarks. His only comment was that the Liberal Party would return to its traditional role of defending the big 

Eastern lenders. Now that is the kind of argument you use when you don't have an argument. That's the very 

argument that you use when you don't want to discuss the Bill on its merits. You go back to this old hate 

program, all those big Eastern lenders and jazz like that. 

 

So the Provincial Government wants to get the political mileage but it wants someone else to pay for the gas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

566 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — We gather from the remarks of the Members that they do not desire this Bill be discussed 

in detail on its merit. We recommend that it be sent to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments 

and Delegated Powers, which I refer to as the Law Amendments Committee. I suggest that all interested 

parties be permitted to present their case and give their views as to this legislation. Now, if you cannot 

present this Bill and subject it to the cold light of careful scrutiny, then I have reason to doubt that it has any 

merit. We also have reason to doubt that the Government itself has any confidence in this enactment. 

 

Now, the Attorney General frankly admitted that the Bill was an experiment. If it is an experiment as he 

says, it is only fair that those affected must have the right to express their views. We don't know whom they 

have consulted. They certainly have not contacted the 17 organizations that we contacted, at least not prior to 

the time that we contacted them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few more remarks to address to this Bill, and I call it 5:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 until 7:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it may be worth noting for the record that there is, at very best, a corporal's 

guard on the other side, and I wonder if we chased them all way. I don't think we have a quorum here. Not 

even a private's guard, let alone a corporal's guard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before the call for 5:30, I reviewed for the House the various measures presently enforced for 

the protection of farmers, dealing in some detail with the protection of farmers having mortgages, protection 

from seizure of implements under The Limitations of Civil Rights Act and the protection given to farmers 

who have failed to pay taxes, this letter under The Tax Enforcement Lien Act and The Provincial Mediation 

Board Act. 

 

I acknowledge to the House that if a diligent rural municipality desired to take every step the very second the 

time became available, it would, of course, shorten the procedure somewhat. It would materially shorten up 

the procedure and the same remarks would apply with equal force to the other two proceedings that I 

described. 

 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, my statement and my submission to this House is that the proposed legislation is 

ill-advised, badly drafted, badly conceived. It has no place at the present time in our farm economy, it does 

harm, it can't possibly help anybody. One of the speakers across the way, the Hon. Member from Prince 

Albert East (Mr. Feschuk) was speaking to this Bill and said that many repossessions are taking place at this 

time. But he didn't tell us how many repossessions were taking place. I wonder if his imagination is running 

away with him in this regard, the same as it was in connection with the threatened foreclosure of land. 

 

You recall, Mr. Speaker, that in the Act there is a section that makes this Statute apply to the Farm Credit 

Corporation and all the rest of the lending institutions. Now, Farm Credit Corporation has told us that the 

last foreclosure that it did was in 1957, 14 years ago. I don't propose to suggest that there is a 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

567 

 

great deal of significance about the fact that the then CCF were in power at that time. The point I wish to 

emphasize is that it was 14 years ago that the Farm Credit Corporation last took a foreclosure proceeding in 

the foreclosing of property. The only one under way now, at this time, by the Farm Credit Corporation in the 

Province of Saskatchewan is a foreclosure that has been necessary because the husband and wife have 

separated. It is a family problem and neither one of them are prepared to make the payments on the mortgage 

and if nobody is prepared to make payment on the mortgage for fear of helping the other party, then the 

mortgage company has no choice but to proceed to foreclose. Probably the Farm Credit Corporation will be 

doing one or other of the parties a favor by carrying out these foreclosure proceedings and perhaps forcing 

one or the other of the parties, or both of them, to do something about the farm land. But the point that I 

make is that the only foreclosure under way at the present time, and the last one for 14 years, is one dealing 

with a family separation where the parties absolutely refuse to pay the mortgage. I don't know what you can 

do in good times or in bad times, that if people refuse to pay the mortgage, you have no choice but to let the 

mortgage company foreclose. In this case, because it is a family break-up that is the initiating cause of the 

foreclosure, I conclude that in this case the Act becomes a non-family Farm Protection Act. It certainly isn't 

protecting a family farm or certainly not a family. 

 

This is the sort of imagination that has gone into the creation of this particular statute. It would be very nice 

if in listening to the speeches of the Members of the Government we could be given specific facts on the 

number of foreclosures, the specific facts on the number of seizures, and the specific facts on the number of 

lands being taken for tax under tax enforcement proceedings. How many final ones have gone through and 

how many extensions are actually being granted? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that isn't the only problem. The Hon. Attorney General said in his remarks in support of the Bill 

that he hoped that the Bill wouldn't be needed after July 31, 1972. Now, that implied threat or that implied 

future extension of the Bill, is one that is a concern of many people. The Bill could be extended in two ways. 

First of all, it could be extended as to time. It goes at the present time to July 31, 1972, but there is absolutely 

nothing to say that it couldn't be extended for a year or two beyond that, and it could be extended to cover 

other items. It could be extended to cover repairs, gas, oil and, for that matter, it could extend to cover 

practically anything that the farmer might purchase. The result of all of this is that the farmers will probably 

be put on the cash basis. I doubt if anyone would dare to sell to the farmer except by cash if there is the 

threat that the bill which the creditor puts on his books cannot be collected by an extension of this Act one 

way or the other. As a result, the family farm or any other farm will find itself having to pay cash or be 

deprived of the items that it wants. 

 

Now the Attorney General said that 99 per cent of the Saskatchewan farmers are honest. Well, that is 

absolutely true and that is exactly the 99 per cent that are being hurt by this legislation. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, we suggest that the Government do one or other of the following: First of all, we think it should go 

to the Law Amendments Committee. We urge that it go to the Law Amendments Committee. We hope the 

Government will not deprive such people as the credit unions, and I 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

568 

 

refer specifically to the letter which I read earlier. If this statute has any merit at all, the Government should 

have absolutely no fear of placing the cold light of day upon it. 

 

Secondly, we ask that the Act be amended. There is no reason why this cannot be greatly improved. We are 

not happy with it, and we do not intend to specify the type of amendment that should be put into this Act, 

obviously, however, it could use a lot of amendment. The very best solution, of course, is to withdraw the 

Act entirely. I realize that there is a problem of saving face . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — . . . there is a face-saving problem and to get over that — if I may be so bold — I should 

like to recommend to the Government that it pass the legislation and never proclaim it. I think they should 

treat this legislation the way they propose to treat the amendments to The Labour Standards Act. They 

propose to pass it but who knows when, if ever, it will be proclaimed, and that would be a nice face-saving 

gesture. We should be out of this House and they could run around saying what good guys they are and yet 

nobody would be scared off by the ridiculous Statute that we are discussing. 

 

I realize that withdrawing the Act involves a tremendous sacrifice of face and one which this Government, 

so newly installed in the office, may not wish to suffer. I am fearful that this will not come about, however, 

because I just read in tonight's paper of the determination of the Government. The heading on page one of 

the Leader-Post, "Bill to be enforced at once." 

 

The Government intends to bring in at once The Family Farm Protection Act as soon as the 

Bill is passed through the Legislature, Agriculture Minister Jack Messer said Monday, 

despite protests from implement dealers and finance companies. 

 

Maybe the Leader-Post should well have said, "despite protests from implement dealers and credit unions." I 

suppose credit unions may well be included in the group called finance companies. 

 

My recommendation to the Government is that the Act be withdrawn and quietly buried as quickly as 

possible. The next recommendation is that if they can't withdraw the Act, that they guarantee the debts of 

farmers, that would be the most positive step that this Government could take. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Follow our example! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Follow the example of the last Government which actually guaranteed the debts of 

farmers. Don't ask somebody else to take a risk that you are not prepared to take. How about putting up some 

money yourself? This is another recommendation. How about actually putting up some dollars if this is such 

an urgent need? The Federal Government proposes to put out $100 million, if it isn't continuously stymied 

by the Opposition parties in Ottawa. How about something from this Government? Under the circumstances, 

I have no choice but to support the proposal that this Bill be transferred to the Law Amendments Committee, 

failing that, we do ask for substantial amendments, 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

569 

 

failing that, we ask that it be withdrawn, failing that, we ask that they put up some money and failing that, I 

shall oppose the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I really can't agree with the Hon. Member from Regina 

Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) that there is no need for some form of legislation that provides protection for the 

farmer, because I have had a conversation with a sheriff, just not too long ago before the election and he 

said, that he has never been so busy in all the years that he has worked for the department. There must be a 

need for it, he wouldn't be busy if he wasn't going around doing something about some of the debts. 

 

I recall another example where last year in my constituency a farmer who had a substantial amount of land 

had to give up one quarter of land so that he could save the rest, because he couldn't make payments on all of 

it. He had made a $2,000 payment on that land but he gave up the quarter and lost the $2,000. So there 

definitely is a need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this second reading of this Bill to protect farm property, this House is looking at the most 

important industry in Saskatchewan. We can talk about our potash mines and our pulp mill, or any other 

industry, we can combine all of them and still the primary industry of this Province is agriculture. There have 

been times when some forgot the importance of farming in Saskatchewan, but in recent years — which have 

been crisis years for our farmers — the dependence of our towns and yes, even our cities, on agriculture, on 

the farmer, has been made very clear. 

 

During recent years, Mr. Speaker, the degradation of Saskatchewan agriculture has been accelerated. There 

have been many reasons for this, one has been the serious drop in markets for our wheat and a drop in 

Canada's share in the world market for grain. Another reason is the fact that while the cost of production has 

been rapidly increasing, the price for the farm produce has remained the same, or in some cases declined. A 

third reason, and maybe the major reason for this degradation of Saskatchewan agriculture and the related 

decline of our rural communities, is the inaction and neglect of the Federal Government. Mr. Speaker, for 

some time now pressure has been put on the Federal Government by community, business, professional and 

farm organizations for a massive cash injection into the Western farm economy. 

 

As a matter of fact, the New Democratic Party has time and time again urged the Federal Government to do 

this. At the 1970 Session of the Legislature, the NDP Members presented a resolution which urged: 

 

That this Legislature urge the Government of Saskatchewan to consider and the Federal 

Government of Canada to provide an immediate cash injection to farmers of Saskatchewan in 

order to stabilize agriculture and its related services. 

 

Being in Opposition at that time, the NDP asked for no less than $200 million. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

570 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reply of the Liberal Government in 1970 was such that a resolution was substituted which 

essentially said that they were satisfied with what the Federal Government was doing. As a result of this 

economic crisis, Mr. Speaker, and as a result of Government neglect, many farmers have been forced to sell 

out. Many farmers who still hang on have been forced to go into debt to such an extent that their whole 

operation is geared from one mortgage payment to the next. Our rural areas are being very rapidly 

depopulated. Anyone who did any travelling during the recent election campaign couldn't help but notice that 

the auction sale posters, almost outnumbered the election signs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, many of them didn't, that's why they are not here. 

 

This kind of situation is very desperate, it is a serious crisis, and there is need for some fast action. Many 

farmers, if they do not get some relief, will not last the winter. Some farmers, if they do not get some 

protection of their property from seizures, will not be able to pay any other debts. 

 

Farmers need some time to catch their breath. They are unable to sell enough grain to pay their debts. This 

Bill will free farmers who are seriously short of cash from the enslavement to large mortgage payments for 

one year. 

 

I can see the possibility of farmers using the money saved from the payments on mortgages on land, 

machinery and livestock, to pay small debts in their local communities. This, Mr. Speaker, is important 

because our small businesses in our rural communities are finding themselves in a desperate situation along 

with the farmer. 

 

In the last year sales in this Province have dropped by a large percentage from 1964 by something like 40 per 

cent or 50 per cent. If farmers use the money they would ordinarily use to pay mortgages to pay local debts, 

this will help the rural community businessman get back on his feet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in every sector of our economy different industries are protected and continuously get 

concessions. When the publishing industry gets into difficulty, the Canadian Government is right there with 

money, is right there with a loan. 

 

When Parsons and Whittemore want to build a pulp mill in Saskatchewan, the people of this Province pay 

for subsidies that are provided. Saskatchewan people, including the farmers, are expected to risk millions 

while Parsons and Whittemore are guaranteed 70 per cent of the profits if the mill is successful. The mill 

gets natural gas at cut prices, the mill gets pulp provided by a Crown corporation which lost money, which 

was subsidized by taxpayers, many of whom are farmers. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the farmer is left unprotected and with no guarantees. No government of Canada has been 

prepared to guarantee the farmer anything worthwhile. In Britain the wheat support prices are set at $2 a 

bushel; in Mexico $2.13 a bushel — poverty-stricken Mexico; in the European economic community $3.10 a 

bushel. These are a long way from the wheat price guarantee in Canada which is $1.50 a bushel, the lowest 

in the world. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

571 

 

The debts that many farmers find themselves in today are due to a large extent to the lack of protection or 

guarantee in a world where almost all concerns that farmers deal with are protected. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that I do not believe that this Bill will in any way solve the 

real problems in agriculture, the problems such as the rising costs and declining prices and declining sales 

and bad advice from too many politicians who think more of their political ambitions than they do of the 

people whom they represent. 

 

These problems will not be solved by this Bill, but it will give farmers just a little more time until the 

remainder of the New Democratic Party's New Deal for People is implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — When the Land Bank Commission is established, it will provide cash relief. This 

protection of farm property from seizure may give many farmers a little more time while the Federal 

Government decides when it is going to let the $100 million be sent out to the farmers as it should have been 

done months ago. It is going to give Mr. Lang just a little more time to get the message from the people that 

he is now hearing as he travels across this Province, that they are not going to be blackmailed, that they want 

that $100 million, but they are not going to be blackmailed and go for the passing of the Stabilization Act 

which should get some pretty close study before it is ever passed. 

 

It should be clearly understood that it would be of no advantage to any farmer who is able to make his 

payments to withhold them, that payments and interest are stayed for one year, but they are not forgiven 

forever. 

 

The fears expressed by the Members opposite about the damage to farmers' credit rating are somewhat 

exaggerated. This Bill will protect farm property from seizure which has been mortgaged prior to the 

implementation of this Bill. Any purchases made after this are not subject to this Act. Credit will still be 

available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in summary, this Bill will give farmers short of cash a one-year period in which to find 

themselves financially. It may prevent many from leaving the farm and further depopulating our rural areas. 

This in turn will be important in preserving our rural towns and villages. Farmers who find themselves in 

this crisis need some protection. This Bill will provide a short period of protection and therefore I will 

support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Cowley (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to enter the debate and rise to speak in 

support of The Family Farm Protection Act. 

 

It has been rather interesting to watch the Opposition wiggle and squirm and try to find someone whom they 

could find in the Saskatchewan populace to defend. I can understand why they didn't want to come out and 

speak in favor of the multi-national farming companies or the large mortgage companies, so they have now 

become the self-appointed protectors of the credit 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

572 

 

unions. After seven years of ignoring the credit unions and allowing the Co-operative Department to fall into 

a state of disrepair, they now emerge as the knights in shining armour, defending Saskatchewan's credit 

unions. I am sure we all welcome them into the fold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have also come out in favor of supporting and bringing forward ideas to help the small 

implement dealer. For seven years they watched a number of these implement dealers decrease rapidly in 

Saskatchewan as one by one they were forced into bankruptcy. Now, sitting in the Opposition, they all of a 

sudden realize that this segment of the economy, is in difficulty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all realize that there are problems facing agriculture in Saskatchewan. The major problem is 

one of rising costs of production and declining prices for the products farmers have to sell. We have not put 

this legislation forward as a solution. We have put it forward as a stop-gap measure to attempt to stabilize 

the agricultural situation while further legislation is prepared to meet the crisis that we find Saskatchewan 

agriculture in. Mr. Speaker, the Opposition have spent most of their time picking holes in this Bill, they have 

never once spoken to the principle, the idea of a debt moratorium, they've simply picked a hole here and a 

hole there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — I should be interested in their comments as to whether or not, if they could design what they 

would consider a perfect Bill for debt moratorium, whether or not they are in favor of the principle or 

whether they are just picking holes in it so they don't have to take a stand one way or the other. Mr. Speaker, 

we have not chosen to tie up this legislation, as the Federal Government did with the $100 million payment, 

by sticking it on to a piece of other legislation so that it would be held up in the House and the payment 

couldn't be made or the assistance given to the farmers. 

 

This weekend I spoke to many people about this Bill. Nowhere did I meet any outright opposition to it. Many 

people put forward questions and in most cases I was able to answer them. I know the Opposition will find 

this hard to understand. It is something that has been absent in Saskatchewan for the past seven years, but 

people of this Province have faith in this Government. The people I talked to are convinced that if this 

Government finds that this Bill works hardship on a particular group, the Government will take action to 

remedy it and on this basis they are ready and willing to support this legislation at this time in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, on that basis I am pleased to indicate that I will support second reading of this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words in regard to this Bill that is before 

us now. It is interesting to note that this Bill is to protect the farmers and yet the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) deems it necessary to be out of the House practically every minute since this Bill came up this 

afternoon. I saw him here a minute ago and he was reading something in the Leader-Post. That's the 

contribution that he makes to this debate. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

573 

 

Then the Hon. Member for Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski) mentioned that there were more 'for sale' signs of 

farmers than there were NDP signs. Well, when I looked at the NDP signs where they were at the farms, you 

know, in my constituency I don't want to say that all the people who voted NDP were poor farmers, but when 

you look at the New Deal signs, they were always placed at the dilapidated junk yards, that my sign just 

couldn't come up there at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — All you are doing is you are supporting the two-bit farmer, maybe one per cent of the farmers 

that you are applying this Bill to. Nobody would want to give them credit but here you think that you have a 

real Bill for the majority of the farmers in Saskatchewan. The Humboldt Member also said that we have been 

subsidizing the pulp mill, Landegger, etc., with gas and pulp, well, you know, you are in the driver's seat 

now, you are the Government, why don't you subsidize the farmer? You don't give him anything. No, sir. 

The farm machinery implement dealers that were here today and who have met with you since morning and 

this afternoon, have told you the facts of life. They want you, and we have their brief, and in point 2 they say: 

 

Financial assistance or guarantees on loans presently held by farmers. 

 

No, you are going to the implement dealers, you are going to the merchants in Saskatchewan, you are going 

to the Family Credit Corporations and saying, now look, the Saskatchewan farmer is hard up and we want 

you to help share and ease their burden. When I listened the other day to the Attorney General's (Mr. 

Romanow) remarks on the second reading of this Bill, never to my knowledge have I heard a Minister of the 

Crown present such an unconvincing argument, such a lame excuse, for the reasons given how and why this 

legislation is intended to assist the farmer. Although I realize that he is a labor lawyer, he doesn't know a 

farmer from a load of hay. I know he tried to make a good case but I couldn't get the point at all. I believe the 

editorial in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of last Saturday sums it up very well when it says that the 

Government feels it necessary to introduce such a Bill at this time. It states that the farm debt legislation 

seems to have been conceived in some ways . . . Oh, welcome here, Mr. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) . . . The Star-Phoenix editorial says that the farm debt legislation seems to have been conceived in 

some haste as a sop to the farmer voters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Many dealers and farmers have expressed shock and dismay at the Government's attitude to 

the farmer. The dealer, the implement companies and those involved in helping to finance agricultural 

industry are shocked. I am surprised that there are a good number of dealers who supported the NDP and as I 

said, on election night that people voted for Socialism and Socialism they'll get. Yes, sir! They are shocked 

by the fact that the Minister of Agriculture and the Attorney General were considered right-wing Socialists at 

their leadership convention. They are considered to be right-wing Socialists, they did not support the 

left-wing, the Wafflers, my friend there from Saskatoon University 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

574 

 

(Mr. Richards), they didn't support him. And this cost the Attorney General the leadership. The Attorney 

General didn't get the leadership because he was considered to be too right wing. Neither did Mr. Messer. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They weren't sure which wing he was on. He was wing ding, I think. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The farmers and the dealers had stated to me personally that if these right wingers introduce 

such extreme left-wing legislation, what is one to expect from the Premier and the left-wing elements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — He had to promise all kinds of support in order to get this leadership. Dealers have told me 

that with this legislation, no farmer except those personally known to them, and this is important, no dealer 

unless these people are known by the dealer who have good security and financial backing, will be given as 

much as $1 worth of credit. It would be interesting to know, Mr. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) how 

many farmers will be able to buy this chemical to spray their rape fields. Will the banks give them credit? 

 

Mr. Messer: — This Bill will pay for it! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No, sir, no, sir! They say if the Government tells the farmer not to pay the bill to the dealer, 

credit union or machine company, they are better off to keep their repairs in the stockroom. This is what the 

dealers are going to do. 

 

A little better than a year ago a Saskatchewan lawyer, Otto Lang, introduced to the farmer the Operation 

LIFT Program. What it in fact did was to tell the farmer in no uncertain terms that if you want to sell a 

bushel of wheat you have to have at least of one acre of summerfallow. I had never before witnessed such 

dictatorial, in fact Communistic attitude, by a Member of a senior Government directed toward a Prairie 

farmer. Never had I realized that there would be another two lawyers, plus the Minister of Agriculture in 

Saskatchewan, who would want to display the same type of arrogance, perhaps illegal dictatorship, as 

witnessed in Bill 9. 

 

The Attorney General and the Minister of Agriculture said in this debate because of the great many legal 

technicalities involved it was felt that the Attorney General should pilot the Bill through the House. Well, 

you know, it is really too bad that they have a Minister of Agriculture who can't even pilot the Bill, he 

doesn't even know what the farmers want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — A Bill that cannot be understood and explained by the Minister of Agriculture is poor 

legislation in itself. I want to tell you why Operation LIFT and this Stabilization Program by Otto Lang had 

so much trouble being explained to the people, because nobody believes in it and he can't explain it anyway. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

575 

 

If the Bill is so technical that even the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) found it difficult to explain in the 

House — as a matter of fact he didn't explain it — then I suggest that if it is passed, the Saskatchewan 

lawyers are going to have a real field day with it. Rather than call it the farm debt legislation, it should be 

entitled the Saskatchewan lawyers' field-day bill. Every lawyer in this Province and outside are certainly 

going to have their feet in the trough. 

 

When one reads the Farm Credit report and the statement by Mr. J.M. Day, Branch Manager of 

Saskatchewan, in which he reports and I quote: 

 

A quick check of his files showed that the last time he Corporation foreclosed on a farm for 

money owing was back in 1957. 

 

There is currently one case before the courts but it involves a family matter, as the Hon. Member (Mr. 

MacLeod) from this side who spoke has mentioned. I don't think there is any need for the farmers to be 

worried about losing their land. The Farm Credit Corporation does not want to seize land. The Federal 

Government doesn't want to own land. It wants to assist the farmer to own his land. That's what the Farm 

Credit Corporation is there for. 

 

Mr. Messer: — . . . 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, will you keep that young Minister of Agriculture, who doesn't know what he's 

talking about, quiet until I finish speaking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I don't doubt whether he knows that Bill 9 is being debated now. I really doubt if he knows 

that Bill 9 is being debated. 

 

The Farm Credit Corporation doesn't want to seize land, it wants to assist the farmer to own his own land. 

And they will do everything possible to help the farmer in making the necessary arrangements to make it 

possible for him to pay off his loan. I am confident that it has been aptly proven that as far as the farmer is 

concerned, he should have no fear or concern that he will lose his land by foreclosure. There is absolutely no 

need for Bill 9 to protect him in this area. 

 

The implement dealers have come out strongly opposing the Bill and saying that it is a bad piece of 

legislation and we don't want it to go past second reading. 

 

Many of the officials of lending institutions intimated that the Act would make it more difficult to get loans 

this year. I am sure that this will be the case. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that many farmers today will find 

it extremely difficult to borrow money to spray their rape fields with this Bill hanging over the lending 

institutions' heads. 

 

Instead of wasting his time on this left-wing legislation, the Minister of Agriculture should have been busy 

checking out where and what kind of chemicals could be made available for the 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

576 

 

control of the army worm which is now destroying a multi-million dollar crop in Saskatchewan. Then of all 

the things, you hear from the Minister the other day the way they have ridiculed foreign investment, we don't 

want United States' capital in here, he had to stand up and say that the chemical is going to come from 

Texas. Hundreds of acres of rape are already totally destroyed. Had this happened when we were the 

Government, one would have been severely criticized by the farm leaders. Why is Roy Atkinson so silent 

about this matter? You are so embarrassed that you didn't have any of these chemicals here, you people 

knew. Surely, so many farmers are almost completely dependent on the proceeds of their rape crop to see it 

destroyed in only a matter of a few days. Norman Bourassa, Collection Supervisor with the Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Credit Society, is reported in the Leader-Post as saying that farm machine manufacturers are 

becoming leery of dealing in Saskatchewan. And here you want to bring industry and jobs into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a Government that only a few weeks ago told the voters of Saskatchewan, elect an NDP Government 

and we will get industry in Saskatchewan and jobs for our young people. Already the Choiceland iron mine 

development and the pulp mill at Meadow Lake have been told they are not welcome in Saskatchewan. Now 

the farm implement dealers and the machine companies are getting their dose of Socialism, and their eyes are 

popping, and they are already thinking of closing their doors. 

 

Wells Construction of Saskatoon — for the city Members of Saskatoon — who have been in this Province 

for 60 years, a few weeks after the election of June 23rd announced that they were pulling out of 

Saskatchewan. Socialism does not want industry and many more industries and dealers will be moving out in 

the next four years. The Attorney General said the other day that all the Government is asking the lending 

institutions, the machine companies and the implement dealers to do is to leave the farmers alone for one 

year. And he said, quote: 

 

You have made good money in years gone by, please be good boys for one year and help 

carry the farmers through the crisis. 

 

That's the farm legislation that we are talking about. This is hard to understand when more grain has moved 

through our ports in the last crop year than ever before. More rape, flax, and barley have been sold in the last 

crop year than ever before. Wheat deliveries are up only a shade but almost 80 million bushels more have 

been sold than a year ago. Why this legislation now when things are going up? When things are beginning to 

look better for the farmer, the implement dealer and the lending institutions, the NDP Government is 

prepared to put the damper on the economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Well, I cannot agree that the implement dealer has made good money in the past on the farmer 

and that he now has an obligation as a good citizen to carry them on for one year. Many manufacturers have 

had hard times in the last four years and they, too, cannot agree with the Attorney General that they are 

loaded with past profits. Now be good boys and help the farmers by carrying his interest and debt charges. 

The NDP Government is not prepared to put up one plugged nickel to save 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

577 

 

the family farm. The Premier said, during the election campaign, elect an NDP Government and we will save 

the family farm. Whom does he ask to save the family farm now — the implement dealer, the lending 

institutions. The past Liberal Government made millions of dollars available to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

This was done through the credit unions, the Wheat Pool and the banks, and other lending agencies. The past 

Government guaranteed loans and in some cases subsidized the interest rate. This Government has no 

intention of financially assisting the farmer. The facts will be proven in a matter of months that the NDP is 

not the friend of the farmer. The farmer is his enemy. The NDP is a Socialist labor Government. It is no 

supporter of Free Enterprise especially when he is a farmer. How long will it take this Government to 

introduce legislation asking Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation not to collect from the owner 

payments if the landlord is unemployed through lay-off or through strike action? Why do it only for the 

farmer? The Attorney General has admitted that Bill 9 could be challenged in the courts as being illegal. This 

is a strange attitude, a real strange attitude from the labor lawyer who is now the Attorney General and a 

serious one to take by the Attorney General, although not a surprise to me when I examine the left-wing 

elements within his Party. Unless the Government is prepared to put up its guarantee to the implement 

dealers, I just cannot see how I can support this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the delegations who are meeting with the Government and with the Members of the 

Opposition, we want to meet with the credit unions, the implement dealers again, with the automobile 

dealers, with the livestock dealers, and real estate organizations, I beg leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
Motion for adjournment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 11 

Messieurs 

Gardner McIsaac Lane 

Grant Loken MacDonald 

Boldt  Weatherald   (Moose Jaw North) 

MacDonald MacLeod  

 (Milestone) McPherson  

 

NAYS — 42 

Messieurs 

Blakeney Robbins Dyck 

Brockelbank Pepper Cowley 

Byers Michayluk Cody 

Wood Meakes Gross 

Smishek Whelan Feduniak 

Romanow Brown Mostoway 

Messer Kwasnica Comer 

Snyder Carlson Rolfes 

Bowerman Engel Lange 

MacMurchy Tchorzewski Hanson 

Kowalchuk Richards Oliver 

Baker Owens Feschuk 

Thibault Taylor Kaeding 

Matsalla Faris Flasch 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

578 

 

The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I'm very sorry that the Government has felt that they do not want to see these 

delegations. They have intimated to us and I'm sure to them that they will want to come in tomorrow and 

they certainly would have an opportunity to weigh their opinion as to whether it is good for Saskatchewan, 

for the implement dealer, for the farmer. I regret very much that this huge majority doesn't listen to the 

majority of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, the legislation before the House at this time will do more harm 

than good in its present form. It will destroy the farmer's ability to obtain credit. Members opposite use as a 

defence the position that the legislation does not apply to future debts. I submit this argument is false and 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, because this legislation postpones debts and does not cancel them. At the end of the 

stated period of one year, the farmer will have two debts, two payments to make. Who will loan money to 

anyone who has a substantial debt load? Who, I ask, Mr. Speaker, will loan money without any collateral? 

Small loans may be available on credit but the collateral necessary for large purchases will be tied up by this 

legislation. This legislation removes collateral from past debts but it makes the farmer a poorer credit risk by 

requiring the delayed payment to come due next year, in effect requiring two payments on August 1,1972. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) says the legislation will protect the local 

implement dealer. Let's see what the Act does to him. Section 14 removes the right of action against the 

vendor of a farm implement as long as the vendor's action is stayed. Where does that leave him? He will be 

required to pay interest to his manufacturer and if he does attempt to repossess he will repossess an 

implement that has an extra year's depreciation. It is the implement dealer who will be required to take this 

loss which could be worth thousands and thousands of dollars on large implements. Now the implement 

dealer is required to take a loss. What about the farmer who has sold some land and is using this money to 

live on? He will have absolutely no action if the purchaser does not intend to pay. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, will help, and I repeat 'help', the American who has purchased farm land from 

our citizens under an Agreement for Sale. Here's what the absentee purchasers can do under this legislation. 

They can get by for several months without paying under the protection of this Act. It gives them the 

opportunity to invest their monies at interest rates that are usually high on a short term while the local 

Saskatchewan vendor get nothing in the meantime. It is our Saskatchewan vendor who is living in the city, in 

the cities of this Province, who will now have to pay and probably have to go on welfare because he will 

have no income coming in. The absentee landlord will not be available to give evidence and is not required 

to give evidence. The onus will be on the local vendor of that land to try and prove that an absentee 

vendor-purchaser is able to pay under this Act. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

579 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will help and not hinder the American absentee purchasers of 

Saskatchewan land. I submit again that this is some new deal! This legislation can harm and will harm and 

not help both the implement dealers and the farm vendors. 

 

Now what about the lending institutions. Mr. Speaker, we are not talking about banks, mortgage and 

insurance companies. We are talking about local community credit unions. Members opposite seem to have 

forgotten about their former co-operative friends. There is no Minister in charge of the Department of 

Co-operation and Co-operative Development. The local credit union will have no right to recover money 

owed to them for a year. There will be little money coming in and no credit will thus be available to the 

farmer. I ask the Members to think back to the debt adjustment legislation of 20 some years ago, and you've 

used the argument that the farmers are basically honest and we quite agree with that — but they are not 

dishonest by using this legislation and the debt adjustment legislation showed that the farmers would take 

advantage of the legislation passed and if the farmers take advantage of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it is the 

small credit union and no one else which will suffer because there will be no monies coming in. The farmer 

is not being dishonest by taking advantage of this legislation. There will be little money coming in and again 

no credit will be available. This legislation is going to devastate the local small credit unions and no monies 

will be available for the farmer. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A year from now when you read the word "devastation" you'll be sorry you said it. 

 

Mr. Lane: — I'll never be sorry I said this unless you are changing the legislation, Mr. Attorney General. 

 

So far this Bill hits the farmer, the farm-vendor, the implement dealer and the credit unions. What does the 

Government do about it? The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) very proudly stated that in this House 

that the Government doesn't have to put up any money at all. A lot of faith you have in the Saskatchewan 

farmer and I ask what kind of a Government that won't back the Saskatchewan farmer in this crisis that has 

been pounded into the people by the Government opposite. 

 

Now for argument's sake, and I repeat for argument's sake only, let's accept the Government's position and 

see what the Bill does not do. The definition of debt in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, does not include debt 

consolidation loans and there are probably millions of dollars loaned out for debt consolidation which may 

have no security or charge and may merely be evidenced by a promissory note given by the farmer. Now 

most of these loans are held by finance companies and the NDP is in the very unenviable position by this 

legislation of protecting such companies as the Attorney General has said, Traders Finance, Pacific Finance. 

You are the defenders of the finance companies with this legislation. The Bill makes no provisions for those 

farmers who made an honest effort to straighten out their affairs in the past under the provisions of The 

Orderly Payment of Debts provision of the Bankruptcy Act of Canada. The Minister of Agriculture has 

stated that there is no concern about legislative jurisdiction but I don't think the Attorney General of 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

580 

 

this Province will argue that government can interfere in any way with the bankruptcy legislation by means 

of this Provincial legislation. 

 

Returning to the Bill as it now stands, the Premier made some very, very pious statements in this House in 

dealing with Medicare Bill about Government by Order-in-Council, when trying to justify the calling of this 

Session to deal with the medicare deterrent fees. Now again we have the Attorney General of this Province 

proudly saying that there will be all sort of exemptions, and all sorts of powers of legislation by 

Order-in-Council. I ask the Government opposite where is your consistency and where do you stand, Mr. 

Attorney General and Mr. Premier, on the principle of governing? Make up your mind or at least quit being 

hypocritical about your position. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, does nothing in its present form to solve the farm problem. It is another 

example of window dressing legislation. It is legislation which will protect the American purchaser of 

Saskatchewan farm land. It is legislation that will make the Saskatchewan vendor of farm land suffer. It is 

legislation which will harm the local implement dealer and make it difficult for the farmer to obtain credit 

for repairs and equipment in the time of equipment breakdown. 

 

I cannot support this legislation in its present form, Mr. Speaker, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Motion for adjournment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 11 

Messieurs 

Gardner McIsaac Lane 

Grant Loken MacDonald 

Boldt Weatherald    (Moose Jaw North) 

MacDonald MacLeod  

   (Milestone) McPherson  

 

NAYS — 42 

Messieurs 

Blakeney Robbins Dyck 

Brockelbank Pepper Cowley 

Byers Michayluk Cody 

Wood Meakes Gross 

Smishek Whelan Feduniak 

Romanow Brown Mostoway 

Messer Kwasnica Comer 

Snyder Carlson Rolfes 

Bowerman Engel Lange 

MacMurchy Tchorzewski Hanson 

Kowalchuk Richards Oliver 

Baker Owens Feschuk 

Thibault Taylor Kaeding 

Matsalla Faris Flasch 
 
The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, again I have asked the Government 



 

August 9, 1971 

581 

 

to be very, very careful with this legislation. In the past the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) has stated 

that I was critical of the previous Government's legislation and I was trying to give the Minister of 

Agriculture some constructive criticism by telling him that the legislation that is already on the books, which 

is more advanced than in any other province in this country, has gone far enough. He made mention the other 

day that I told my constituents this. Yes, I told my constituents this whenever they mentioned the fact that 

they were having difficulty getting parts or equipment. I advised them that it was this legislation which was a 

pretty big factor in many of these people leaving the province. I explained to them — and I make no 

apologies for this — that the legislation was put in at their request and for their protection. They agreed with 

this. And I also explained to them that it was this legislation that served to drive many of these people out of 

business and the farmers have suffered because of it. The farmers admitted that they wanted this legislation 

at that time. 

 

I am saying, simply, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, that the legislation we have now goes far enough, and the 

farmer will be hurt and will suffer by the legislation that you have proposed in its present form. If you have 

major changes, we should certainly like to hear about them. We have seen nothing. I cannot support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Engel (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to speak in support of The Family 

Farm Protection Act. Regardless of what the Members opposite have had to say, as far as how much sense 

the farmers have if they can understand this Bill or not, in my constituency I give the farmers credit for 

knowing that this Bill is designed to help them. 

 

There are many people in my constituency. I've visited with them at two or three Homecoming functions in 

the last week and they are really concerned that this kind of protection be given to our families who need 

help. We need a program where steps are taken to salvage the farm units that are doomed by the threats of 

repossession and seizures and we need this help now. Hard-working, good-managing people have found 

themselves in difficulty. They need this extra time that this Bill will give them. Surely, Mr. Speaker, they 

have earned a chance at one more year of operation. Surely they have earned a chance to keep and maintain 

their way of life that they have chosen. The Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) doesn't seem to 

have a clue what this way of life is all about. Ever since settling in this Province, farming is a way of life. 

This Bill was designed to protect this way of life. 

 

There are several reasons why some farmers find themselves in a position where they are unable to meet 

their present commitments. During the growth process in this Province we accept it as a norm that we had to 

expand. We thought we had to get bigger to stay in the game. The farmer found himself in a vicious circle 

where he needed more and more credit to develop an economic unit. Going into this new crop year, he is 

now faced with a shortage of cash, the prices of his commodities are lower than they ever were, the prices of 

his parts and repairs for his equipment are higher than it has ever been. The farmer finds himself in a 

situation where it is easier to buy a new 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

582 

 

piece of equipment than to dig up the cash to repair his old machine. There are those farmers who didn't get 

on that merry-go-round and expand and buy larger equipment. 

 

A good old friend of mine was at my place just two weeks ago. He is living by himself; he is 65 years old; he 

took over three-quarters of a section of land from his father; he farms with a John Deere Model D tractor; he 

has his same 10-foot cultivator and a Model 26 combine. He is not a big spender, Mr. Speaker. But he told 

me that this is the first year that he had to borrow money to operate since he had his farm. Under Liberal 

Administration in Ottawa and here in Saskatchewan during seven years of operation, the point I'm trying to 

make, Mr. Speaker, is that the farmer who expanded is in trouble, the farmer who stayed the same size is in 

trouble too. 

 

Much of my constituency is suffering this year because of lack of rain. Many of the farmers were telling me 

that they went into a LIFT Program last year to get sufficient quotas to meet their commitments. This year 

they put that extra summerfallow back into a crop hoping to make up some of the grain they lost last year, 

and, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we found out the hard way. We don't need man-made crop failures down 

in the southern part of Saskatchewan. Operation LIFT was a program where the Federal Liberals lifted cash 

out of the farmer's hand. As an example, I should like to quote a farmer who put 250 acres into LIFT last 

year. If you take into account the crop we had last year, which was a very good crop, and what we expect for 

this year and the Federal Liberals lifted 5,000 bushels of grain off of this farmer without paying him for it. 

He got $1,500 in cash but this was more than used up by the extra summerfallow he had to work. 

 

I have tried to outline some of the reasons why we as farmers find ourselves in so much trouble at this time. 

Now I should like to point to some of the reasons why we should tide a farmer over on a short-term basis. 

First, we are all aware of the past performances of the old line parties in Ottawa. They'll throw out a few 

tidbits every four years or when there will likely be an election so we can expect some extra goodies within 

the next year. This is one thing the Members opposite have confidence in. They are looking at this Bill as 

though it is a means in itself. We look at it as though it is a stopgap measure where we're going to hang on 

for one year longer. 

 

The second little bit of help in the wind is that the famous $100 million — and I brought along a statement I 

got in the mail just this past week and I'd like to read it for you in case some of these farmers didn't get 

theirs. The figures on this insert represent the amount you should receive as a transitional payment under the 

Prairie Grains Stabilization Act when the legislation has been passed. The Bill has reached the report stage in 

the House of Commons and will be dealt with after the House of Commons reconvenes. The House is 

adjourned until September. 

 

The amount is calculated on a basis of $1.45 per eligible acre with a maximum of 640 acres that are eligible, 

and my name is on there and the amount I expect to get. Now, this is promised to us and I'm quite confident 

that Mr. Lang, even if he is an attorney, that he'll come across with this payment within a year, and so I'm 

saying we need a program that will help us hang on for one more year. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

583 

 

The third reason the farmer needs this Family Farm Protection Act on a short-term basis is that we have to 

help him hold the fort until the really big guns arrive. There is one program that would put him on his feet 

without having this big axe hanging over his head. The program I'm speaking about is this Land Bank 

Commission. It will take some time to set up this program but this time is worth buying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I feel I have outlined sufficient reasons why the rest of the community will have to bend a little to give the 

family farm the protection it needs. 

 

I'm happy to say that I'll support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I. Carlson (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to enter this debate to speak to this 

legislation that is so drastically needed at this time. 

 

First of all, I want to emphasize some of the reasons that this legislation is needed so urgently right now and 

some of the reasons why the farm population finds itself in such financial straits at this time. It is well known 

that throughout Saskatchewan as a result of low prices, low quotas, increasing production costs, and in many 

cases reduced production due to Operation LIFT, many deserving citizens are in receipt of insufficient 

income to meet their certain fixed financial obligations. One might divide these obligations into two distinct 

classes. First of all, there are obligations or debts arising under rigid contracts made in harsh terms under 

conditions entirely different from those at the present time. These are contractual obligations, in some cases 

secured by mortgages and in other cases unsecured. 

 

On the other hand, there is a certain type of obligation imposed under our system on married people with 

families arising under an entirely different form of contract, under a contract which has received the blessing 

of the church, The Marriage Contract, to provide food, clothing and shelter for one's family. Must the first 

priority be the debts or the contractual obligations? In many instances in Saskatchewan homes today this is 

the case. Families are doing without in order to meet payments on land, machinery or livestock. 

 

This legislation is designed to allow our people to meet their obligations to their family and postpone their 

contractual obligations for one year. 

 

At this point I just want to say that in order to secure respect for contracts, they must be fair, humane and 

possible of performance. I want to make it clear that this legislation does not allow for avoidance of 

contracts. We must have respect for contracts whether written or even the spoken word if we're going to 

avoid chaos in our society. Although at times, it appears that certain types of contracts are rigid and harsh, 

and are not worthy of respect because there is no possibility of performance. Unfortunately our lending 

institutions have ignored a fundamental fact with respect to the agriculture sector of the economy. This has 

resulted in widespread breakdown and avoidance of these contracts. These contracts have been drawn up in 

terms of fixed and definite secured money payments which must be met out of unsecured and uncertain 

incomes, 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

584 

 

therefore, impossible to fulfil unless the conditions are favorable throughout the whole term of the 

agreement. 

 

What I am saying is that our farmers need an extension which this legislation provides because the original 

contracts do not account for unforeseen things like crop failures or even more seriously now, the low quotas 

that the farmers are faced with, the government policies of non-production or low production. 

 

These contracts do not give credit for a farmer whose bins are full of grain. The farmer has become a victim 

of circumstances. His income has declined, not because of laziness or inefficiency but because of poor prices 

and low quotas but there is nothing in the agreement to forestall or ease the incidence of the default position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only a couple of weeks ago one of my constituents phoned me about his particular case. In 

1968 he borrowed some $12,000 to purchase a new tractor and a new truck. He's now found himself in the 

default position although he has bins full of grain. On July 7th the bank seized his machinery and gave him 

one month to fulfil or to pay his note in full. This kind of action, in my opinion, reduces the credibility of our 

financial institutions. If a farmer cannot meet an annual payment, how is he going to meet the full 

obligation? This type of arbitrary dictation compounds the problem rather than helps it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, I'd also like to say I know of a farmer who went into a bank last Saturday to 

borrow money to purchase some cattle. He wasn't turned down. The young farmer, with a limited amount of 

assets, managed to borrow $6,000 to purchase cattle. I think really the Opposition is trying to build false 

fears in their arguments against this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — The kind of protection that this legislation gives the farmer will allow him time to finish 

off his crop this fall and again put in his crop next spring. Also it will allow him time to arrange for 

refinancing if necessary during the next 12 months. It will also give the Government some time to draft more 

permanent legislation, legislation that will help the farmers in the long term. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me say that knowing the farmers of this Province as well as I do, they do not 

need to have their debts waived. The farmers of Saskatchewan are responsible people, but they do deserve 

economic justice. This Bill is the first step towards the economic justice that the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve. I, indeed, am pleased to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown): — This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is one that any Socialist government, anywhere, is 

liable to pass. It reflects Socialist thinking or a lack of thinking from Section 1 to Section 29. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

585 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will do more harm to far more people than it will help. This legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

typifies Socialist non-help. The Government, in this Bill, has done absolutely nothing to help anyone, in fact 

by bringing in this legislation, it jeopardizes the very existence of thousands of small businesses in this 

Province. This legislation is dangerous and could be ruinous to some of our credit unions as well. 

 

The ruination of our small implement dealer and the harm that it can do to the small credit unions, can, Mr. 

Speaker, have harmful and serious effects on farming and on farmers in general. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been engaged in the implement business in rural Saskatchewan for 39 years and have 

had thousands of dealings with thousands of farmers, through prosperous times and through hard times. The 

same experience Mr. Speaker, is shared by many other dealers in this Province. The relationship between 

farmers and dealers, Mr. Speaker, was and is not one forced by law but one that was built up over many 

years of mutual trust and close friendship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Loken: — The farmer and the dealer, Mr. Speaker, because of the basis of their relationship, were able 

to work at their business arrangements that were mutually satisfactory and beneficial to both. The same holds 

true, Mr. Speaker, between the bank manager, the credit union, your grocery storekeeper, the hardware 

dealer, the bulk fuel dealer and the farmer. These people, Mr. Speaker, and the farmers, were able by 

working together to build their schools, hospitals, recreation facilities, our churches, and in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, our communities. 

 

This Bill attempts to split these people into good guys and the bad guys. It divides the community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Loken: — The farmers here, Mr. Speaker, have successfully worked out credit arrangements in tough 

times with the business community. They have been able to do so because they were working with 

sympathetic, understanding friends. The implement agent, for example, Mr. Speaker, is essential to the 

process of farming. He understands the difference between good years and bad ones. Once this Bill passes, if 

it does in its present form, the farmer loses every additional source of credit that he has ever had. Without 

this credit many farmers will not be able to carry on. The businessman who depends on agriculture for his 

livelihood has gone through tough times. Also, Mr. Speaker, now he is being forced into an even tougher 

position. 

 

This Socialist Government, Mr. Speaker, is toughening these times for him. They will drive some of them 

right out of business, thus causing the farmer even more difficulty by lack of competitive buying, by the lack 

of service and facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this Government really wanted to help the people in rural Saskatchewan, they would, as a 

Government, guarantee the debts so that no one would be hurt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

586 

 

Mr. Loken: — This, Mr. Speaker, is probably too much to ask a Government that is made up of people who 

are Socialists. Socialists have been in power in this Province before, Mr. Speaker, and in the 20 years they 

were in office, the disregard and contempt for small enterprisers engaged in business in this Province is well 

known. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Loken: — The New Deal for rural people, Mr. Speaker, is one that is as old as Marxist Revolution in 

Russia with the same authors. It was their desire to control people, land, or property, and all ways of 

distributing goods and services. This, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill no one in Saskatchewan has asked for or will 

support. 

 

It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I oppose the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, the Bill under discussion here today is certainly causing 

grave concern and consternation throughout rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The suggestion of a one-year moratorium of debts is the kind of idea that appeals to most people initially. It 

sounds good. But it is also the type of idea which appeals to you less as you consider it further. This Bill 

could have disastrous results for the entire farming community in Saskatchewan. It could have disastrous 

results for small merchants and rural communities. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan was developed as a result of co-operation between the farmers and the merchants who 

supplied them with credit whenever credit was desirable and necessary. 

 

This Bill suggests, Mr. Speaker, that its purpose is to protect the assets of the farmer. Mr. Speaker, talk to a 

farmer and he will tell you that one of his most valuable assets is his ability to borrow money. When a farmer 

needs cash to buy farm machinery, land or cattle, in the past generally he has been able to borrow that 

money. When a farmer needs fuel or groceries or twine, he has usually been able to get credit if it is 

necessary or go to the bank or credit union and get money to buy these essentials. 

 

A good credit reputation is one of the most prized possessions of our farm people, and farmers, generally, 

have a good credit reputation. If this Act is passed in its present form, it could be one of the greatest 

tragedies ever suffered by the rural people of our Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Some speakers opposite, Mr. Speaker, have said that it only applies to debts incurred 

before July 31, 1971, and therefore it will not affect the farmers' ability to borrow. Surely they don't believe 

this to be true, Mr. Speaker. Credit available to farmers is already drying up and the Bill has not even been 

passed yet. Credit unions, merchants, banks, individuals and other lenders are not going to extend credit to 

farmers 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

587 

 

when the attitude of the NDP Government indicates that at any time these debts could be rendered 

uncollectible. 

 

Last weekend, Mr. Speaker, I talked to farmers and dealers in my constituency about this Bill and they were 

uniformly genuinely concerned. One dealer told me last Friday that he sold a truck which a farmer badly 

needed for harvest and because of this Bill the farmer was unable to raise the money and the deal could not 

be made. The farmer was denied a truck which he badly needed with his crop coming off. The dealer was 

denied the sale of a truck. The Government, of course, lost the sales tax which it would have had if the sale 

had been made. I talked to an older farmer in my constituency, he does mixed farming — he has about 30 

cows — and he wanted to buy a bale elevator. He said he had always stacked the bales by hand and his wife 

had helped him. They are small farmers and not prosperous, but they had decided this year to buy a bale 

elevator to make the job a bit easier. 

 

Because of this legislation they are afraid they will not be able to get credit to buy the bale elevator. I wonder 

if the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) and the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) have any feeling for 

these people. I wonder if they would go out on these last few hot days and help these old people stack their 

bales. If I thought they would, I would certainly supply them with the names. I don't think there is too much 

chance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Western Canada was founded on credit and this Bill will destroy that foundation. Surely the 

NDP know that a young man cannot start farming today unless credit is available to him. If this Bill is 

passed, it will destroy the hopes of thousands of young people who would like to have a future in farming. 

There is no way that a young person can start farming today without financial assistance. This Bill will deny 

him financial help for many years to come. It could well become known as the Bill respecting the 

Destruction of the Family Farm. 

 

If this Bill, Mr. Speaker, would help a substantial number of farmers, it might merit some support. It 

purports to protect the land, the cattle and the machinery of a farmer from seizure for one year. I think 

everyone knows, Mr. Speaker, that the Farm Credit Corporation is by far the largest lender of funds in this 

Province for the purchase of land. No one will deny that they have not been reasonable with their clients. 

Some one has mentioned here already today that there has only been one foreclosure in 14 years. Farm Credit 

Corporation doesn't want the farmers' land. They want them to continue on the land and they have done 

everything possible to see that the farmer can make satisfactory arrangements. 

 

The previous Provincial Government guaranteed loans for the farmer so he could buy breeding stock and 

increase his livestock herd. And these loans, Mr. Speaker, amount to a large amount of money owing on 

cattle today in the province. Over $25 million for this purpose, and I certainly don't expect any foreclosures 

under this program even under the NDP Government. The Liberal Government gave the farmers something 

besides sympathy. They gave them financial support when the farmer wanted to buy cattle. It would appear 

that cases of seizure of land or cattle have been very few. Mr. Speaker, I should have thought that the 

Minister of Agriculture would give us some more precise figures in this regard, to support his argument that 

this Bill is 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

588 

 

necessary. I haven't heard him say how many foreclosures there have been. Surely he has people in his 

Department who have some idea of the seriousness of this problem, but so far he hasn't seen fit to give us 

this information. It would appear that the only area where a problem may occur is with farm machinery. 

 

Farmers, generally, are well protected in this regard with the legislation that we have at present. If, Mr. 

Speaker, there are cases of individual hardship and there may well be, I believe that the Government could 

have set up a board to make separate investigations in cases where hardships did exist and the Provincial 

Government could have backed the farmer the same way that the previous Liberal Government backed the 

farmer when he wished to buy livestock. 

 

A policy such as this would have enhanced the credit rating of the farmers collectively. Contrast this to the 

NDP legislation which we are now considering, which will destroy the credit rating of 99 per cent of the 

farmers, in order to give questionable help to perhaps less than one per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the immediate results of Bill 9, if it is not amended and goes through in its present form, are 

obvious to all and could bring disaster to our rural areas. The long-term results could be even more 

destructive to our family farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the NDP, particularly the Waffle group, must be given credit for long-term 

planning. I propose to show how this Bill ties in with still another NDP program. I should like to refer you to 

several statements made recently by Members of the New Democratic Party. 

 

One quotation is headlined, "Public ownership proposed" and I shall quote: 

 

Members of the Saskatoon University Provincial NDP constituency organization called 

Tuesday for public ownership of all Saskatchewan's natural resources, including farm land. 

The resolution was passed with only one dissenting vote at a constituency meeting. 

 

Everyone knows, Mr. Speaker, that a recent convention of young New Democrats in Moose Jaw, called also 

for nationalization of farm land. More frightening, Mr. Speaker, is the recent attitude of the Wafflers in this 

regard. You will recall, about one year ago, a disagreement arose within the NDP about some of the demands 

of the Wafflers. It seemed that the Wafflers wanted a policy of immediately getting control of the farmers' 

land and as cheaply as possible. As an election appeared imminent, some NDP politicians became concerned 

about adverse publicity. Mr. R.A.Walker, former MLA and law partner of the present Attorney General, Mr. 

Romanow, circulated a letter which has become well publicized, and I should like to quote from the 

Leader-Post, June 1, 1970: 

 

Literature under the Caucus and Party name was sent out which described itself to be a draft 

statement of purpose and called for legislation empowering the Crown to purchase retiring 

land at assessed value. Evidently retiring land means the land of retiring or deceased farmers, 

and as every farmer knows, assessed value means approximately one-fifth of market value. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

589 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that some NDP constituency organizations quoted above, young NDP and the 

Wafflers, want the Government to take over the farmers' land. And the Wafflers want it, as you will note, 

Mr. Speaker, at one-fifth of market value. This was contained in literature sent out by them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wafflers have apparently not changed their policy and I quote from the Leader-Post of 

August 2, 1971 — just a few days ago. The heading is, "Waffle group outlines policy", and again I quote: 

 

Among the demands that the Waffle will be making are that the Party take a pro-labor stand 

to bring about changes proposed in the 1970 convention with respect to agriculture and 

resource development and that it return to a firm Socialistic program. 

 

Wafflers apparently are still sticking with the acquiring of the farmers' land at one-fifth the 

value. The Wafflers know what they want and they are still after the land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how would any government take over the farmers' land at such a cheap price as one-fifth of the 

actual value? Any government wanting to do this would take the first obvious step of passing a Bill which 

would prevent the farmer from getting a good price from other buyers, and we are considering, Mr. Speaker, 

such a Bill here today, Bill No. 9. If money is not available from the Farm Credit Corporation, if it is not 

available from banks, credit unions or individual lenders, the NDP Government can step in, get the farmers' 

land at bargain prices. No doubt we shall see a Bill before long where they are trying to acquire some of this 

land. 

 

When farmers, Mr. Speaker, become fully aware of the dangers of this Bill, they will oppose it vigorously. 

This Bill could well be the start of a policy which will finish the NDP in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — It is very unusual, Mr. Speaker, for a political party to commit political hari-kiri so soon 

after being elected. As the Opposition we have the duty to bring these matters to the attention of the people 

and the people certainly, at this time, haven't had an opportunity to bring their wishes before the 

Government. Many organizations would like to express their views. Many of these organizations have only 

heard of this Bill in the last few days. 

 

I should like to make further comments on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Motion for adjournment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 10 

Messieurs 

 

Gardner McIsaac McPherson 

Grant Loken Lane 

MacDonald Weatherald MacDonald 

  (Milestone)    (Moose Jaw North) 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

590 

 

NAYS — 43 

Messieurs 
 

Blakeney Pepper Dyck 

Brockelbank Michayluk Cowley 

Byers Meakes Cody 

Wood Whelan Gross 

Smishek Brown Feduniak 

Romanow Kwasnica Mostoway 

Messer Carlson Comer 

Snyder Engel Rolfes 

Bowerman Tchorzewski Lange 

MacMurchy Richards Hanson 

Kowalchuk Owens Oliver 

Baker Larson Feschuk 

Thibault Taylor Kaeding 

Matsalla Faris Flasch 

Robbins   
 

The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — We know by now that the Government realizes that they have a real hot potato on their 

hands with this Bill. They are trying to rush it through before the implications that I have mentioned become 

well known and this is the reason for trying to continue the debate tonight. They want to push it through 

before the general public have a chance to find out the true implications of the Bill. We are disappointed that 

the Government has, once again tonight, used its huge majority to prevent the common people of the 

province from being heard on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will oppose this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I regret very much that the Government has not seen fit to 

indicate that they will send this legislation to the Law Amendments Committee, because it seems to me that 

the Bill before us, in its present form, serves only one useful purpose, Mr. Speaker, and that is to 

demonstrate, I think, more clearly than we have seen yet in this House the hypocritical attitude of my friends 

opposite for the farmer in the province. 

 

Here is a Bill called The Family Farm Protection Act. Now the name in itself is a pure hoax, Mr. Speaker, 

because if the Bill goes through and is passed in its present form, it will surely become known as The Family 

Farm Destruction Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — I think one thing that we have learned this evening as we listened to some of the Members 

opposite participate in this debate, is some of the reasoning for bringing this hasty, ill-conceived legislation 

into the House, it is merely to give them time to develop a Land Bank and develop other programs and other 

policies. We are prepared to give them time, Mr. Speaker, to bring in some sensible policies to help the 

farmer in this Province, but they don't need to bring in this piece of legislation that does nothing for anybody, 

to have that time to bring about some of their election promises. 



 

August 9, 1971 

591 

 

I can certainly tell the House, the Members opposite and the Government, that this Liberal Opposition group 

is anxious to support and safeguard the family farm in this Province, just as anxious as they are, or more so. 

And to this end, Mr. Speaker, we only need to look at the record of seven years of Liberal Administration 

and what we did for family farms in this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Let's look at some of those things, Mr. Speaker. We first permitted farmers the use of 

purple gas in farm trucks. Good legislation, meaningful legislation. Millions of dollars of savings to farmers 

every year since in reduced operating costs. Millions of dollars saved by the farmers of this Province. 

 

We brought in a rural road program with a half a dozen or more new programs in the Municipal Road 

Authority, like grid road maintenance, feeder road programs — I could name a dozen others. We increased 

dollars in the equalization grants to keep the farm property taxes municipally at as low a level as possible. I 

think, Mr. Speaker, if there is any man that deserves credit for urging diversification in this Province, it is the 

former Premier of this Province, Mr. Ross Thatcher. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — He went up and down this Province for years warning farmers of the dangers of depending 

entirely on wheat or the straight grain economy. And we backed that up with policies to help farmers 

diversify into other crops, into livestock and so on. Yes, community pastures for cattle operations, sheep 

operations. Hogs, and yes, I will agree that we are not happy with the current hog market situation, not any 

more than you are. As a matter of fact, we implemented a $2 premium policy which you people were good 

enough to extend and cover more farmers for a longer period of time. It couldn't have been that bad or you 

wouldn't have extended it. But certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think we need not take a back seat to anybody for the 

effort of the former Premier, and when we were the Government, in trying to encourage and assist and 

stabilize the family farm in this Province. 

 

We brought in The Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act that some Members here have referred to, and we 

guaranteed it and it has been supported with dollars. And that is the reason that the Member for Yorkton 

(Mr. Carlson) was able to report tonight that he had a constituent go to the bank and get his $6,000. Why? 

Because it is Government guaranteed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — And in that Act we guaranteed the farmers credit. We did not jeopardize it or destroy it as 

this Act is bound to do if it is carried through in its present form. 

 

I think that one piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, The Livestock Guarantee Act demonstrates pretty 

conclusively the difference in approach between the two parties in this House in solving farm problems. We 

acted to help the farmer with good 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

592 

 

sensible policies, with good hard cash and dollars. And what are they acting with? Nothing whatsoever. 

 

This Act before us, Mr. Speaker, unless it is very drastically amended, does nothing whatever for the 

Saskatchewan farmer. There are no government funds; there is no direct assistance to the farmer; there is no 

real assistance to anyone in Saskatchewan. Now, the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) in introducing it the 

other day tried to imply, at least, that this legislation will make the big lender — Traders Finance, the big 

corporate lenders, and so on — make these people carry the farmer for one more year. Now this is utter 

nonsense, Mr. Speaker, because there is nothing in this Bill to hurt the big money lender, now or next year 

on August 1, 1972. They merely wait another year with their money and their loans, accruing interest and at 

that time the farmer is going to be faced with a double shot and double payment. 

 

There are hundreds of small lending institutions, like the credit unions of this Province, which will definitely 

be hurt by the implementation of this NDP effort to help the family farm. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will not 

help any class of farmer. We certainly realize, on this side of the House, just as well as they do over there, 

that farmers are or have been in serious financial difficulties. This isn't going to help the small farmer; it isn't 

going to help the large farmer, or the grain farmer, or the mixed farmer, or the livestock farmer, in any way, 

shape or form. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one aspect of this Bill that particularly disturbs me because one of the real bright spots 

in Saskatchewan agriculture is the cattle industry, particularly in the past few years. And that the cattle 

industry is in such good shape today, is due largely to the kind of people who have built the industry, not due 

to the governments in particular. I think of the Purebred Dealers' of this Province, the commercial men 

themselves, the Stockgrowers’ Association, and many other groups of people associated directly with the 

livestock business. Due to these men and their own initiative, and assisted by former policies of the previous 

Government of years ago, and certainly by the climate created and developed by the Liberals when they were 

in power, provincially, have created and promoted a livestock industry in this Province second to none 

anywhere that you will find. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill, in its present form, is a threat to that livestock 

industry in Saskatchewan, a real threat because that industry certainly depends on credit. And if there are any 

of the Members opposite — and I am sure there are some — who know anything about the cattle business, 

they know that credit is essential in the feeder cattle operation and in almost any other phase of the cattle 

industry. 

 

I think the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, made one other rather telling admission when he was introducing 

this Bill. He said, "I frankly admit," he said, "it is experimental." Well, what an admission, I think, Mr. 

Speaker! Surely the last thing that Saskatchewan farmers need at this stage of the game is NDP 

experimentation with their credit. Not only are they experimenting with the farmer and his credit, but the 

implement dealer, the credit unions, automobile dealers, livestock commission firms, the bulk fuel 

distributors, every class or category of small business in those very same rural areas that our friends opposite 

expressed so much concern, are being jeopardized by this particular legislation. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

593 

 

I urge the Government, Mr. Speaker, as other Members on this side of the House have done, to withdraw this 

hasty legislation, this ill-conceived piece of legislation. I believe that their overall intentions must be good 

but certainly it isn't demonstrated in this Bill 9 that is before us here tonight. I urge them to withdraw it and 

take time to seek the opinions of the farm groups and other groups in the province who are going to be very 

directly affected by this legislation. Surely they don't want to jeopardize further the position of the family 

farm and the farm economy and the small town and the rural economy generally by pushing onward with a 

piece of legislation that hasn't been properly studied, the full implications haven't been considered and the 

people concerned with it haven't had a chance to really sit and give the Government their side of it. What 

chance do groups have trying to meet the Government opposite during the noon hour, after supper and such 

other times, Mr. Speaker. There is no need for this kind of consultation whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I can tell the Members opposite and the Government that we on this side of the House will 

come back any time to look at legislation that is meaningful and that will do something worthwhile to help 

the hard-pressed grain farmer in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — We'll only be too glad to support any useful legislation that they put forth and this certainly 

isn't such a Bill. I can't support a Bill, Mr. Speaker, that says to the implement dealers and the credit unions 

— in effect it says this to them — in the rural areas you've been fleecing the farmer, you are going to have to 

carry him for another year, you've made lots off him through the years, so carry him for one more year. I can't 

support a Bill that says again to farmers, in effect, you are poor payers and we really know you need this 

legislation. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that's a slap in the face to the farmers who have been making every effort 

and always have to pay their bills; and pay them as they go and that want to pay their way. Again, what a 

slap in the face to the dealers as outlined so well by the Member for Rosetown (Mr. Loken) here who has 

been in the business himself for longer than most of us would like to think about, but people who have 

helped farmers in difficult times, there have been difficult times here before, from one part of the province to 

another, going back to the '50s we had the same kind of grain situation. If this Government is concerned 

about people, why aren't they guaranteeing the farmer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Why aren't they guaranteeing some of these farm implement dealers who certainly will pay 

the price for this legislation? It may be a year or so away when they pay the direct losses of this particular 

Bill, if it is forced through in its present form. Because of the far-reaching effects of this Bill and as they are 

only now becoming aware of them across this Province, I would again ask the House to adjourn debate at 

this time to hear more representations from other people who are directly concerned in this Bill. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

594 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The Member asked to raise a point of order. I must entertain a point of order, 

the motion isn't lost yet. 

 

Mr. Carlson: — I just want to point out to the Liberal Member from Wilkie, he made a comment about a 

statement I made regarding a young farmer who got a loan at the bank . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! That is not a point of order. It is a debating point. 

 

Mr. Carlson: — I just want to clarify that this was not a Government guaranteed loan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, it is not a point of order. It is a debating point. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — On a point of order. In regard to this, I do believe that you, Sir, wish to 

give the Opposition all the opportunity they have to express themselves in this House. I am sure that we on 

this side have no desire to endeavor to restrict them in any way. It is my understanding in the rules that no 

motion to adjourn the debate may follow a motion to adjourn the debate, unless there is some piece of 

business which is worthy of being put into the Votes and Proceedings intervenes. We have had tonight —I 

think this is the fourth motion in regard to adjourning the debate — and I don't think there has been any 

business of the House that is worthy of putting into the Votes and Proceedings in any case. I think you will 

recall that Mr. Beauchesne is quite definite on this matter. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I am not 

an expert on the rules of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I have been in this House for seven years and never once have I ever seen 

a debate refused to be adjourned or at least refused to have the motion put. Mr. Speaker, when they were the 

Opposition, they moved the adjournment of many debates and standing votes were called. This Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, we consider to be of vital importance and if the Opposition is only permitted one opportunity to 

adjourn the debate, this would be the biggest closure that would ever be written into the rule books of this 

House. All I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that every speaker individually should have the opportunity to reply 

to an address or to a point made by the Government Members when new information is provided. New 

approaches may be needed, new research required and every individual Member should be permitted to 

adjourn the debate. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

595 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member for Swift Current raised a point of order. It is plain in the rules that an 

adjournment is always in order, but no second such motion shall be made unless some intermediate line of 

business has taken place. There must be some business of the House which has been transacted in the 

meantime before it can be moved again. 

 

I think I should have to say that as long as the debate continues and as long as we have other speakers in 

between time, that it is in order, but I shall check out more fully for later rulings in case this problem is 

raised again. But I do believe that we have had now one, two, three, four speakers, in between, we have had 

two adjournment motions and three speakers and this is the second adjournment by the last two Members 

who spoke. I should ask the Members to refrain from moving too many motions in this manner, but I think 

on this occasion I will allow the motion to stand. 

 

I declare the motion lost. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Call in the Members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I want to get this point clear. No Member may ask to "call in the Members". What 

the Members do have the right for is to rise and ask for a recorded vote and it is the Speaker who calls for the 

Members to come in. One stood and sat down, and then another one stood, but no request for a recorded vote 

was made. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, with deference, it has been customary in the House to rise. I realize that the 

request is to record the vote. Three of us rose. We might not have risen simultaneously but I am asking for a 

recorded vote. And very often in the House, we have had the Opposition Members say "call in the 

Members". 

 

Motion for adjournment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 12 

Messieurs 

Steuart McDonald McLeod 

Gardner   (Milestone) McPherson 

Grant McIsaac Lane 

Boldt Loken MacDonald 

 Weatherald   (Moose Jaw North) 

 

NAYS — 43 

Messieurs 

Blakeney Pepper Dyck 

Brockelbank Michayluk Cowley 

Byers Meakes Cody 

Wood Whelan Gross 

Smishek Brown Feduniak 

Romanow Kwasnica Mostoway 

Messer Carlson Comer 

Snyder Engel Rolfes 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

596 

 

 

Bowerman Tchorzewski Lange 

MacMurchy Richards Hanson 

Kowalchuk Owens Oliver 

Baker Larson Feschuk 

Thibault Taylor Kaeding 

Matsalla Faris Flasch 

Robbins   

 

The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I regret very much that the Government again has seen fit not to allow the 

House to adjourn on this Bill for the very reasons that I outlined earlier, and for the reasons that other 

Members on this side of the House have put forth in the course of this debate. 

 

We do not believe that this legislation will do what it is intended by the Government to do, to do anything at 

all for the family farmers, Mr. Speaker. We believe, and we are well aware that there are many farm groups 

in the province who have very serious concern about the far-reaching effects of this legislation, not only farm 

groups but implement dealers, farm truck dealers, bulk fuel distributors and other sectors of the small 

business, particularly the small business in the rural community. 

 

Why only today we had representation from the Farm Implement Dealers' Association, and I think, in their 

brief to the Government they themselves made some excellent points for deferring debate on this legislation 

until the Bill goes to the Law Amendments Committee for further consideration and amending of some of 

the many clauses that are in this Act. 

 

I am going to quote some of the pertinent paragraphs from this submission of the Implement Dealers' 

Association to my friends opposite. Some of them may not have had time to catch the hasty caucuses that 

were called today, to consider this brief. They say here, Mr. Speaker, they begin by wishing to make it clear 

that their remarks are confined to the family farm and not the large scale farmers who have problems also, 

but have enough backing to work out credit arrangements satisfactorily. In other words, they make it clear 

that the implement dealers themselves are concerned, not about the corporate farmers, but about the same 

family farm that concerns the Members on both sides of this House. They go on to say, generally, the farm 

economy has come through a period of high productivity, with low sales, and in most cases, low prices. 

 

However, the brief points out, there are indications that the farm economy today is in a much better state 

than it was a year or two back. We have just come through a year of record grain sales and relatively high 

prices for cattle. I am sure that the Member for Notukeu-Willow Bunch (Mr. Engel) when he got his letter 

notifying him of this $900 or whatever amount he is getting, also got another little notice, another little piece 

of information from the Wheat Board pointing out the record sales last year of wheat abroad and the 

prospects for quotas for the next year. 

 

Now they go on to say: 

 

For the immediate future, the farmer looks forward to 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

597 

 

payments under the Federal Stabilization Program, and immediate grain sales under the 

already announced quotas. 

 

In addition to these quotas, Mr. Speaker, special quotas exist for rapeseed, but it also appears that a net 

increase in cash advances is available this coming fall. 

 

From the above observations we can see considerable improvement in the cash position of 

the farmers of Saskatchewan, enough improvement so that the farmer with the 

accommodation that he has already received from creditors, will be able to meet his 

obligations. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, without special legislation. The brief continues: 

 

Our concern lies mainly for the two groups that this legislation proposes to protect, namely, 

the family farm and the implement dealers. We respectfully submit that this legislation will 

harm these two groups. 1. We see this legislation as seriously limiting credit to the farmers. 

 

Again, we are particularly concerned about the family farmer who makes one major purchase at a time. They 

go on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We know that the banks and other financial institutions will not and already are not 

extending credit as they have in the past. While the Government may proclaim, as they have 

done in the course of this debate, that this is a one-shot deal, these lending institutions are not 

convinced particularly when the Government has indicated that it is uncertain as to what 

additional measures will be required come the 31st of July, 1972, when this present proposed 

legislation is due to expire, if, indeed, adopted. Also these institutions cannot be sure that 

further legislation of this sort will not be forthcoming August 1, 1972, in the light of the 

rather gloomy predictions made recently by the Canadian Wheat Board for marketing. 

 

Legislation that is selective amongst creditors may make poor payers out of good payers. 

Again, this would upset the normal business relationship in a community . . . 

 

I think, once again, so aptly discussed and pointed out in this debate by the Member for Rosetown (Mr. 

Loken). The brief goes on: 

 

. . . while we heartily recommend to farmers to take advantage of farm improvement loans, 

because of its low interest rate and its accommodating features. Many farmers have 

established credit with other financial institutions, and those institutions are going to be 

leaving the farm equipment field. One has already left after the Limitations of Civil Rights 

Act which was passed by the Liberal Government a year or two ago. This will limit credit 

choices to the farmer and in turn will curtail dealers' sales. 

 

The Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) in his remarks this evening illustrated that point very, very well. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

598 

 

The brief continues, Mr. Attorney General: 
 

We know, as dealers, that farmers are already being accommodated on past due payments 

and will be in the future, with or without this legislation. As long as the farmer puts forth a 

just case and a reasonable method of repayment, he has been and will continue to be 

accommodated. 
 

Let's be perfectly frank about this matter of repossession, as long as the farmer has equity in 

the equipment, and by equity we mean the difference in market value of the equipment and 

what he owes on it, no financial institution wants to repossess. While we don't want this to 

happen, the farmer who has negative equity and equipment is really better off to have it 

repossessed and go out in the market and buy equivalent equipment for less money than he 

owed on his present equipment. 
 
The brief goes on to state: 
 

It is at this point that most repossessions are made, The Limitations of Civil Rights Act 

prohibits the dealer from recovery of losses in cases of wilful damage or abuses. 

 

I think the operation of The Limitations of Civil Rights Act was again very capably outlined by the Member 

on this side of the House, the Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) here earlier in the course of 

this debate this afternoon. 

 

The brief goes on, Mr. Speaker, and one observation, and I think it is worth reading into the records at this 

time: 

 

We wish to make one observation about this legislation that most media have implied by not 

specified. Agricultural equipment depreciates while land and cattle usually appreciate, 

especially during buoyant farm conditions. To compound the situation, used equipment 

depreciation accelerates when times are good, because more farmers are then in a position to 

buy new. It is this fact about used equipment that concerns us most. 

 

So say the Farm Machinery Dealers of Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 

 

It is well known that all dealers are on full recourse on the finance paper they write with their 

machine companies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — If a farmer is going to be repossessed, all this legislation will do is postpone it for a year 

and the dealer will take that much bigger loss at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — There is no provision in this legislation to compensate the dealer for additional losses. No 

provision to compensate the farmer, Mr. Speaker, nothing to compensate the dealer indeed as I said earlier in 

the course of my remarks, nothing for anybody in this legislation. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

599 

 

I believe too, Mr. Speaker, that the Government should seriously consider the request made at the conclusion 

of this brief as an alternative to the present legislation that they have before us. Their alternative is very well 

worth repeating and recording in the records of this House. 

 

As an alternate to the legislation proposed, we respectfully propose the following: 

 

1. Immediate setting up of a mediation board to hear cases and advise. 

 

I am sure the Attorney General will welcome that suggestion. When we were on the Government side, we 

heard him many times seek to set up boards — mediation boards, civil rights boards, you name it. I am sure 

he would be receptive to this particular suggestion. 

 

2. Financial assistance or guarantees of loans presently handled by farmers. 

 

I don't know why the Government opposite refuses to entertain this very worthwhile suggestion, a suggestion 

that they have had precedent for in much of our legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, a suggestion of the implement 

dealers . . . 

 

3. An educational program advising farmers on programs that exist, such as the Farm 

Improvement Loans, that are tailor made for his benefit. 

 

They conclude their brief: 

 

We finally submit that the answer to the farmers' problem is not a moratorium on repayments 

of loans or a restriction of credit but a solution to the problem that the farmer does not 

receive adequate returns for his labor. 

 

With this, I am sure, we can all agree and concur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these and for other reasons I have outlined, I certainly cannot support the Bill and will be 

supporting the amendment of my seatmate, the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Prince Albert West): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, I think one thing 

that shines through crystal clear is that this is a phony Bill, put forward in a phony fashion, for the purpose of 

them standing in their place and saying, "We're going to help the farmer." The great friend of the farmer, the 

Socialist, the NDP. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I can't hear . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who's that deaf vociferous person in the back that can't hear? Well, just calm down and I'll 

make it loud and clear and you'll be able to hear everything. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I shall ask the Member to withdraw that statement. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

600 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn't referring to any of them, but if the shoe fits, I'm sorry. If any of you 

feel that way, I withdraw. 

 

They haven't done anything for the farmer. What have they really done? They have put the load on the little 

man. They put the load on the little businessman, they put the load on the little implement dealer, they put 

the load on the credit union. They said, Oh, look at the death-bed repentance of the Liberals supporting the 

credit union. You look back on the history of this Province and you will find that all decent legislation, 

setting up co-ops and credit unions was put on the books of this Province by a Liberal Government. All you 

people did was to infiltrate the co-op movement with your Socialism and turned it into almost a political 

movement that hurt the co-op movement in this Province and hurt it badly. Whom have you asked to carry 

the load? The little people. Oh, they say the Liberals are the big friends of the banks. Don't you kid 

yourselves that the big banks or that the big finance companies are going to be hurt by this. They can't be 

hurt by this. If you knew anything, if you knew anything about business, if you knew anything about 

enterprise, you would know that every time a big bank or a big finance company or one of the finance 

companies of the big implement dealers signed to pay for the advance of any credit, he gets the signature of 

the little dealer on it. The man you are going to hook, the man you are going to hook for this deal today and 

one year from now and 18 months from now, is the little man, the implement dealer, the small purveyor of 

credit. If you don't know that then God help the Province of Saskatchewan in the next four years. 

 

Let's talk about another group of people you're going to hurt. You read the Bill, I don't think you have read 

the Bill, Mr. Minister from Moose Jaw, I'm sure you haven't read it or you wouldn't sit there with that smug 

look and all the Members over there giggling and laughing and saying what they are going to do for the 

farmer. You go back and you just talk to some of the retired farmers in your little towns. Some of those 

people that you just took the utilization fees off, so you did them a favor. Now go back and find out what 

kind of a favor you really did them. Because in this Act if a retired farmer has sold his land and he's 

depending on one-third crop share, that one-third crop share will be denied him and there are all kinds of 

retired farmers on Old Age Pensions; the kind of people that you bled for. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Jack didn't know that! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, Jack didn't know that! Happy, jolly Jack, the family farmer! He is the super family 

farmer. He already owns ten family farms. He didn't know what was in the Bill. I've never seen a Minister in 

the time I've been in this House who had to have someone else bring a Bill before this House on his behalf. 

Then he asks the farmers of this Province to please understand it, when he doesn't understand it himself. Mr. 

Minister (Mr. Messer) you read the Bill and you ask the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) to go and ask the 

people who helped him misdraft this Bill to find out what happens to retired farmers when they want their 

one-third share of the crop that they depend on for a livelihood. You'll find out if you don't change this Act 

that they have to stand back until that farmer takes out his living 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

601 

 

expenses for this year and next year. And he's the judge of that. Who's the judge of how much his expenses 

will be if he isn't? It's not in this Act. I don't know if you're going to bring some legislation in to cover it. 

Who is going to be the judge of what is fair and reasonable for that farmer to take out of his crop that he sells 

before he has to give that man who sold him the farm his one-third share, or what's left of it? Just check into 

that. We'd like an answer to that. I'll tell you there are thousands of retired farmers, not rich farmers, not big 

banks, not just finance people, just ordinary little "joes" who live in our small towns and our cities who have 

retired off the farm after years and years of labor who depend on that one-third. And you, by this 

ill-conceived ridiculous Bill are denying it to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — There is another question that I think the people of this Province are interested in. In your 

first Session, after your great big, spanking new, wonderful victory, you come in here all shined up, polished 

and happy and smiling. You hadn't even met half your own Members and already what have you done? 

You've taken that great big victory and you've punched a hole in it, because you've shown to the people of 

this Province in five or six short weeks that you intend to use that great majority that the people of this 

Province gave you to steamroller things through this Legislature. Why? When the Premier and the Attorney 

General could take two days, three days in fact, because you could have sat Saturday, could take three days 

off and go out to Victoria and adjourn this House, then why all the rush to put this Bill through? Why are 

you making us stall, and we are, you won't get through tonight. Make no mistake — you won't get through 

tonight. Why? Because up in the gallery are implement dealers, back out in Saskatchewan there are little car 

dealers, there are still hundreds of people, maybe even thousands of people who want to be heard on this 

Bill. You don't want to give them a chance, you're afraid to give them a chance. Why won't you take this Bill 

into Committee, Mr. Attorney General, why won't you give those people a chance to be heard? Why? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I'll answer that! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well answer it now. You haven't got an answer that's worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I'll answer . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You haven't got an answer. You know what you'll do, I'll tell you what you said you were 

going to do, unless you've changed your mind, and I hope you do and show some flexibility. You said we'll 

put this Bill in and then this summer we'll set up a committee to see how it works. You're going to hang the 

man and then two months later you're going to say, how do you like that for justice? It's a little late, Mr. 

Attorney General. When you pass this Bill, you have cast a shadow on the credit of every farmer in this 

Province. You have cast doubt on the credit of every farmer in this Province. You are so ignorant in this 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

602 

 

field that you don't even know what you're doing. I honestly think you are trying to help the farmer. I think 

you are, but you won't stop and listen. Listen to those implement dealers. For God sake listen to some people 

and don't get the idea that all the sanctity, all the piety, and all the good wishes and all the good hopes and all 

the sincere thoughts are on that side of the House — that the implement dealers are out to rob the people, 

that the credit unions you should laugh at their problems, that if the Opposition stands up and says take a 

second thought, that all we want to do is break you down — you ignore them all. Why haven't you got some 

confidence in the people to sit for two days or even a day and say, okay we'll listen to them, we'll listen to 

these people and if they make some good, valid points, we'll be prepared to change the legislation. On top of 

everything else, why haven't you got the courage to put your money where your mouth is and put the credit 

of the Government behind the farmer. 

 

You should understand what you're going to do with this Bill. You are going to put into jeopardy the credit 

of every farmer in this Province. You're going to do that. It's a serious thing, a far more serious thing than 

you realize. If you were going to enhance the credit of the farmers you would put the credit of the 

Government behind them, and the implement dealers and the banks, and the credit corporations, all of them 

which have advanced millions of dollars of worthwhile credit in this Province. They would say, look, when 

the farmers of this Province of Saskatchewan get in trouble, what does the Government do? It put the entire 

credit of the Government behind them. It gives us double assurance. Set up a board, you're fond of boards, 

set up a board. Ask any farmer who is in jeopardy of having his land, his machinery or his cattle repossessed 

to come before that board. Sure, stop everything until you hear what that farmer has to say. And if he's got a 

legitimate case, then go to the credit grantor and say, look, what do we as a Government have to do to extend 

this man for six months, or a year, or maybe 18 months. If you have to make some payment, well, take a 

chance, take a little risk, show that you mean what you say. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have some more thoughts on this Bill. We're going to bring them in tomorrow. We 

have an amendment. If the Speaker won't call it 10:30, I will while away the time reminding you of an Act 

that's on the books, to show you that you didn't really need to put this act on by bringing this Act in because 

the farmers of this Province right now have ample protection in the Statutes. What did you say? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Limitations of Civil Rights Act is what you're searching for. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That's right. I'm searching and I've got it right here and I intend to read it. I intend to read it 

into the records of this House, because obviously you didn't know about it and if you did know about it, and 

obviously you did, you should get a lawyer. Not the ones you got to draft that Bill, but get a good sensible 

lawyer who hasn't worked for the Government, Mr. Premier, most of the time, who hasn't worked for labor, 

Mr. Attorney General, most of the time, but has had something to do with business and knows how the 

whole system that we live under works. 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

603 

 

Well, this is called an Act to amend the Limitations of Civil Rights Act, and it was assented to April 18, 

1970, that's when we were the Government, governing the Province of Saskatchewan in an enlightened and a 

well ordered manner. Now, Mr. Speaker, I will read the first line and I hope you'll understand it. There's your 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), I know he won't understand it, and I'll explain some of the big words. 

Well, it starts off: 
 

Her Majesty . . . 
 
(That refers to the Queen of Canada) 
 

. . . Wherein with the advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan an 

Act as follows: 
 
Now there is a note in the column, it says: 
 

Revise Statute C-103. 

 

1. The Limitations of the Civil Rights Act is amended in the manner hereinafter set forth . . . 

 

That means from now on, Roy. 
 

2. Subsection (1) of Section 18 is amended by striking out the words "The Agricultural 

Machinery Act" in the seventh line thereof . . . 
 
(That's right after the sixth line, Mr. Minister of Agriculture) 
 

. . . and substituting therefore the words and the number "The Agricultural Implements Act, 

1968". 
 
Doesn't that grab you! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well done! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — What has that to do with it? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Oh, it has, in case you're wondering. I haven't even got to the good part yet. 
 

Subsection (3) of Section 18 is repealed. 

3. Section 19 to 22 are repealed and the following headings in sections are substituted 

therefore. 
 
Now this is it — 

 

Procedure for Possession. 

 

(If you've any questions, I'll deal with them later). 

 

In Sections 19(a) to 22(a) agreement means a conditional sales contract or agreement, or a 

chattel mortgage, contract or agreement heretofore or hereafter executed. 

4. The article means (1) an implement to which The Agricultural Implements Act, 1968; 

 

Roy, you're not leaving! He's not even interested in the Acts of the Legislature. 

(2) a motor vehicle classified by the Highway Traffic 

 



 

August 9, 1971 

604 

 

Board in regulations made under The Vehicles Act as a farm truck or a special farm truck 

and registered under The Vehicles Act as such . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . three years! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, it's been another three years. It must have been the same people who worked on this 

that you got to work on yours. 

 

. . . a cream separator, a washing machine, a stove, a heater . . . 

 

Mr. Messer: — A what? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — A heater — you know what heaters are. 

 

. . . a sewing machine, - 

 

(They are even going to seize a sewing machine). 

 

A refrigerator or freezer or a unit that is a combination of a refrigerator and a freezer or a 

snowmobile as defined under The Vehicles Act, that is used by a farmer in connection with 

his farming operations. 

 

Get this — 

 

(C) creditor means a vendor under a conditional sales agreement or his assignee. 

 

Mr. Messer: — . . . your consultant? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He's taken that post graduate course, too, and there are a couple of you lawyers over there 

who could afford the same thing. If you pass this, you get a degree . . . 

 

Debtor means a purchaser under a conditional sales agreement or his assignee. 2. Under a 

chattel mortgage agreement or his assignee. 4. A person appointed under Subsection (1) of 

Section 19. 

 

The Assembly adjourned by Mr. Speaker at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

 


