



















































Hansard: April 07, 1971


1697 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

38th Day 

 

Wednesday, April 7, 1971 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

PRESENTATION OF RAINBOW TROUT 

 

HON. A. C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, 

I have something that I think will be of interest to the Members. Yesterday, you will recall, a Member 

presented the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) with a bottle of water taken from the effluent, apparently, 

from the pulp mill. We have heard a great deal of talk about industry moving into an area and polluting 

everything. I want to tell you this morning a success story where industry has moved into my country - 

sodium sulphate in the dead alkali lake that is neither good for man nor beast - they are now producing to 

capacity. They have created a fresh water lake fed with springs as a necessity to the production. Two years 

ago they stocked it with fish and I want to pass around this morning a rainbow trout which was caught 

recently in this fresh water lake. When you can do that, the industry has created a thing of beauty! 

 

Now then, I shall give you the dimensions - the length 20 inches, the girth 12-3/4 and the weight 3 pounds, 

6-1/2 ounces. This, Mr. Speaker, is from Maple Creek country, guaranteed free of mercury or any blemish 

whatever which may detract from the exotic flavor of this sportsman’s delight. It’s garnished, incidentally, 

with a spring of Scotch heather. I should like the page boy to take it around the front benches so the 

Members may attest to the authenticity of this tremendous story. I have the scale too, incidentally. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It’s an exceptionally fine looking fish. I thank the Member for having displayed it in 

this Chamber and I shall have it passed around for all to see. I must say that I heaved a sigh of relief when I 

found that the Member wasn’t going to table it because anything that is formally tabled in this Legislature 

must be kept by our office henceforth and forever more. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — We have a vault down there that is full to the roof and we are going to have to get some 

more space shortly if much more material is to be tabled. I doubt very much if there is any provision in the 

Estimates for refrigeration equipment for the vault of the Legislative Assembly office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate this wonderful specimen of 

rainbow trout. I think it’s a rainbow from the 



 

April 7, 1971 

 

 

1698 

Maple Creek country. It’s not the first or the last that will be caught; this fish-stocking program has been 

going on there for years. I think that this offering is significant from the people across the way because I 

think that this ought to be the token that indicates the present state of the Liberal Party - dead fish on a 

platter! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I think it is timely, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals should now have this mascot and they 

should enshrine it because it is significant and I think a portent of things to come. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — It is a gourmet’s delight! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

RETURN NO. 106 

 

MR. E. I. WOOD (Swift Current): — Referring to things that are tabled I was wondering when we might 

look for the tabling of a Motion for Return No. 106, I believe, that I asked for on March 10th with regard to 

the widening of No. 32 Highway between Junctions 1 and Success. 

 

MR. D. V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Give me that number again and I’ll have a look and see - 

Return No. 106? 

 

MR. WOOD: — Yes, it has to do with highways. 

 

REVENUE FROM ANGLO-ROUYN MINE 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Once again I appreciate the offering of the Minister of Mineral Resources and the 

Member for Maple Creek. I wish he was as willing to give me my answer as to what the revenue was from 

the Anglo-Rouyn mine which has been on the Order Paper now for more than a month. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What’s the number of the Motion for Return? 

 

POISON BAIT ON PICNIC SITE 

 

MR. W. J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East—Cumberland): — Before the Orders of the Day, I have 

tried to get up on my feet two or three times. I am sorry the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) is not 

in the House. Mr. Speaker, in spite of the successes that we have, and I am very glad to congratulate the 

Government for this kind of conservation program, yet there are some problems that aren’t quite so good. Up 

at Pinkney Lake it appears that poison bait is located at a picnic site. I just got a report where a citizen of my 

constituency has lost a dog. They went to the picnic site to fish and apparently there was no sign set up, the 

poison bait was there and they lost a favorite animal, a dog of theirs. I don’t know what they are going to do 

about it but I want to ask a question. Is this the policy of the Government to set out poison bait at picnic sites 

in the North where people go out fishing and where 



 

April 7, 1971 

 

 

1699 

they endanger the life of domestic animals? I wish the Premier would pass this on to the Minister of Natural 

Resources so he would look into it. 

 

THIRD READING 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN (Minister of Labour) moved third reading of Bill No. 57 - An Act to amend The 

Essential Services Emergency Act. 

 

MR. W. E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, if I may I should like very briefly to make a 

further appeal to the Government to withdraw Bill No. 57. During the last few days we have demonstrated to 

the Government very strongly that this is bad legislation and that there is no justification for this Bill to be 

introduced at this time. There have been two Government committees established since this Government 

took office. Both committees advised and recommended against compulsory arbitration as is included in this 

Bill. This is the most sweeping compulsory arbitration law that has been introduced in any Legislature in the 

Dominion of Canada. We have produced proof to the Government that compulsory arbitration on this kind 

of a broad basis, wherever it was tried has not worked. It does not resolve industrial disputes. We have 

argued that what is needed, in order to improve and strengthen collective bargaining, is more meaningful 

conciliation and mediation procedures, the strengthening of research facilities and other services by the 

Government in order to make collective bargaining work more effectively. We have demonstrated that the 

Government has been starving the Department of Labour and has not provided necessary services for the 

working people. We have demonstrated strongly that this is an evil and savage Bill which is not going to do 

anything for the working people, for the employers or for industrial relations generally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only that but I submit that this is a breach of faith. The Government last fall said that they 

intended to establish a special legislative committee and make inquiries in other countries before they would 

proceed with compulsory arbitration legislation. This has not been done. Mr. Speaker, they have said that 

there would be a Government committee visit other countries, Australia and Sweden and perhaps others. Mr. 

Speaker, this has not been done and this commitment was made to the working people. I say it is a breach of 

faith and that the Government is acting contrary to its own commitment. I, therefore, make a final appeal and 

ask that this Bill not be read a third time and that the Government withdraw it, this is the least they can do. 

They can also hold this Bill and not proclaim it until, at least, a further study has been made as suggested by 

the Premier last fall and that no labor courts legislation be introduced. Mr. Speaker, for these reasons, I ask 

the Government not to proceed with third reading and that the Bill be held. 

 

MR. A. E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to detain the House 

long, I simply want again to repeat the feeling on this side of the House that this Bill is a bad Bill. It proceeds 

on what we believe to be fundamentally wrong assumptions on how a government should attempt to 

organize the affairs of its citizens. It seems to me that this Bill reflects a view of society which is 



 

April 7, 1971 

 

 

1700 

not shared by us on this side of the House and I should have thought was not shared by most people on the 

other side of the House. We cannot help but think that in respect of almost all of the affairs of men, the 

relations are best worked out by negotiation, by free bargaining and by an absence of coercion and duress. 

We have during the course of this debate pointed out that there may well be circumstances that require 

legislative intervention. We have tried to say that these ought to be restricted to the absolute minimum and 

should in no case be arranged in advance since the very prearrangement sullies and soils the process of 

bargaining and negotiation. We have tried to point out that, in our view of society relations between men and 

their employers or men and their employees, as the case may be, should be the matter of the free meeting of 

minds and not of any coercive action by a Government, however well meaning. We have tried to point out in 

our own way that distinction which Lincoln made many years ago. When asked what is the difference 

between a slave and a free man, Lincoln said, "A free man can withdraw his labor, a slave cannot." That may 

be a simple and perhaps over dramatic way of putting it. But this Bill now decides that for all organized 

workers in Saskatchewan, if the Government so decides, then they may not withdraw their labor, then they 

may, in fact, be put into the category which Lincoln called that of slavery. 

 

I think that this is most unfortunate. I think nothing that has happened in the province requires or necessitates 

this action. I won’t repeat all the arguments of my colleagues, which have been put forcefully and eloquently. 

At this stage of the debate I shall ask only one thing: that the Government refrain from proclaiming this Bill 

until some emergency, in the view of the Government, does in fact arise and until the Government has had 

an opportunity to pursue that solution to this particular problem which it is commending to the people of 

Saskatchewan at this time, labor courts. At present ill-defined labor courts. If, in fact, it has any faith in that 

solution it should pursue it with vigor and should refrain from proclaiming this Bill until it had been 

pursued. This, it seems to me, is a minimum act on the part of the Government in demonstrating its good 

faith in pursuing some other solution rather than the odious Bill which is before us. I ask the Government to 

consider that. And I point out that it cannot possibly prejudice the Government’s view of the public welfare, 

it can only demonstrate to the people of Saskatchewan whether or not the Government has any confidence in 

the solution which, in itself, it is propounding for the problem which this Bill purports to deal with. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite are truly 

amazing, first of all, at their convention they take a firm stand against compulsory arbitration, they put it in 

their platform, then we see the Members start their wiffle waffle movements once again where they come out 

in favor of compulsory arbitration in that particular instance. Now two or three or four days later we see the 

Members opposite once again opposing compulsory arbitration. They broke faith with their own followers 

when they came out in favor of compulsory arbitration a few days ago. Their own followers now know that 

they cannot be trusted. The people of Saskatchewan know that the Members opposite cannot be trusted. 

 



 

April 7, 1971 

 

 

1701 

MR. DEWHURST: — On a point of order, in closing a debate can a Minister introduce new subject matter? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — When a person is closing a debate he has the privilege of answering the arguments of 

others or reinforcing an argument that he himself has previously made. The Member did not speak except to 

move that the Bill be read the third time so he did not make any arguments which he could now reinforce 

when he moved the motion. However, he can answer the arguments of others. The arguments of others are to 

the effect that the Bill should not be passed and that it should be withdrawn. The motion before the House is 

that this Bill be now read the third time. Arguments have been advanced as to why it should not be read the 

third time and a counter argument is being advanced as to why it should. 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — The argument mostly pertained to the subject matter raised by the Member who 

spoke on third reading and not second reading. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — All the arguments must pertain to what the Members said when they spoke in 

opposition to the Bill which they did, if I understood them correctly. 

 

MR. MacLENNAN: — Just a few brief words in closing this debate. The dire consequences that were 

predicted upon the introduction of Bill 2 in 1966, have proved to be unfounded, as will the predictions that 

the Members opposite are making, because of the amendments now brought in, in Bill 57. Once again these 

will be proven to be unfounded and no concern should be shown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1966, Bill 2 was introduced and in 1967 it was endorsed by the people of Saskatchewan in 

the last general election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLENNAN: — 1971 sees Bill 57 introduced and I hope 1971 will see it likewise - and I’m sure - 

endorsed by the people of Saskatchewan 

 

I move third reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the third time on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS - 33 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Howes McFarlane 

Boldt Cameron Steuart 

Heald McIsaac Guy 

Barrie Loken MacDougall 

Grant Coderre Larochelle 

MacDonald Estey MacLennan 

Gallagher Hooker Heggie 

Breker Leith Radloff 

Weatherald Mitchell Gardner 

Coupland McPherson Charlebois 

Forsyth McIvor Schmeiser 

 



 

April 7, 1971 

 

 

1702 

NAYS - 19 

Messieurs 

 

Blakeney Bowerman Kramer 

Messer Wood Romanow 

Davies Dewhurst Meakes 

Berezowsky Smishek Thibault 

Snyder Michayluk Pepper 

Matsalla Wooff Kwasnica 

Byers   

 

The Assembly recessed at 12:30 p.m. until 2:30 p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Before we come to order I should like to introduce the following groups of 

students situated in the galleries: from the Mayfair School, Saskatoon, under the direction of their teacher, 

Mr. Weber, from the Saskatoon Mayfair constituency represented by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank - he is not 

here right at the moment; also a group of 100 students in the Speaker’s gallery from the Davin School under 

the direction of Mr. Graham, from the constituency of Regina South West represented by the Hon. Mr. 

McPherson. There is also a group of 97 students of the Regina Vocational School in the west gallery under 

the direction of Mr. McConnel - there is no constituency listed here. The first group is in the east gallery. 

 

I should like to extend a welcome to them and we hope that they find their stay here interesting and 

informative. We wish them all a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


