



















































Hansard: February 24, 1971


279 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

 

7th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 24, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I wish to introduce to all Hon. Members the following groups of students situated in 

the galleries of the Legislature; from the constituency of Regina North East, represented by their Member, 

Mr. Smishek, 52 students from St. Michael School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. B. Horning; from 

the constituency of Milestone, represented by the Minister of Welfare, Mr. MacDonald, 27 students from 

Avonlea School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. McKellar; from the constituency of Regina South, 

represented by the Minister of Health, Mr. Grant, 67 students from the W.C. Howe School, under the 

direction of their teacher, Mr. Wallenberg; from the constituency of Saskatoon City Park-University, 

represented by Mr. Charlebois, 26 students from the Richmond Heights School, under the direction of their 

teacher, Mr. Taylor; from the constituency of Regina South again represented by the Minister of Health, Mr. 

Grant, 62 students from St. Matthew School, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. W. Eger; from the 

constituency of Wadena, represented by the Member Mr. Dewhurst, 24 students from the Wishart School, 

under the direction of their teacher, Mr. J. Milham. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members will wish to join with me in extending a very sincere welcome to these students 

and express the very sincere wish that they will find their stay here enjoyable and educational and wish to 

each and every one of them a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

He said: Before we enter into the Orders of the Day I wish to advise all Hon. Members that in view of the 

fact that there may be a Division this afternoon, I draw your attention to the fact that due to circumstances 

beyond our control, I cannot guarantee that all the bells will ring on that occasion. I give you that information 

and let everyone govern themselves accordingly. 

 

SILVER MEDAL WON AT CANADA WINTER GAMES 

 

MR. M. KWASNICA (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I am sure that all Members 

of this Assembly would like to join with me in congratulating John Dzus of Lloydminster for winning a 

silver medal at the Canada Winter Games. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

280 

MR. KWASNICA: — John Dzus, an 18-year old grade 12 student won the silver medal after losing the 

final Middle Weight bout on a decision to Jim French of Ontario last Tuesday. 

 

Since John and his trainer Gene Connett are both ex-students of mine I am particularly proud of their 

accomplishments. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KWASNICA: — The silver medal is particularly impressive when one considers that John had had 

only three serious bouts before entering the Winter Games and had been boxing for only nine months. 

 

I should like all Hon. Members to join with me in wishing John Dzus the best of luck in his future 

endeavors. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

FEDERAL INCENTIVE TO INCREASE FORAGE 

 

MR. J. MESSER (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question 

to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) in regard to the federal incentive to increase forage. It is my 

understanding that a farmer who planted forage in 1969 and 1970 will not be eligible. My question is, as 

there are a number of farmers in the province who did not get a payment through LIFT for forage planting in 

those years, whether the Minister has communicated with the Federal Minister responsible justifying the 

eligibility of these farmers for this incentive payment. 

 

HON. D.T. McFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture): — I think the Hon. Member wants to bring that to 

my attention and if he can verify the cases that he has referred to, I should be pleased to take it up with the 

Federal Minister. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, it also has been brought to my attention that the Provincial Incentive 

Program will be dropped as the Federal Plan requires over 25 acres to be seeded before one is eligible. There 

will also be some further hardship in regard to farmers who have under 25 acres for planting forage. Is there 

going to be some consideration given in regard to this situation, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. McFARLANE: — As far as the Provincial Government is concerned, no. 

 

DISCONTINUING GRANTS TO HOG FARMERS 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister in his speech the other day announced 

that the grants to hog farmers were being discontinued. I thought he said 'as of now.' Now if this is correct 

would the Minister tell the House when these grants were actually discontinued. On what date? Because 

there seems to be some 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

281 

confusion in the country about this. 

 

MR. McFARLANE: — The program was actually terminated as far as the province is concerned. There was 

an extension given a year ago, but in order to qualify for extension and to receive remuneration during this 

fiscal year, a hog farmer had to have a substantial start on a building prior to December 31st, a year ago. 

 

CORRECTION ON ARTICLE IN LEADER-POST 

 

MR. McFARLANE: — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I should like to rise to make a 

correction in an article appearing in the Leader-Post, February 23, 1971. It quotes me as saying that the 

number of female mink in the province has dropped to about 1,400. The figure I gave was 14,000, which 

makes a considerable difference. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Mitchell (Bengough) and the 

amendment thereto by Mr. Blakeney (Leader of the Opposition). 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before moving into the main text of my 

speech I should like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the motion for the reply to the Speech 

from the Throne, the Hon. Member from Bengough (Mr. Mitchell) and the Hon. Member from Watrous (Mr. 

Schmeiser) on the fine job that they did. 

 

I should also like to congratulate Mr. Jess Charlebois and the Mayor of Saskatoon, and all the wonderful 

people that worked with him from Saskatoon and the city of Saskatoon, for the fantastic job that they did for 

all of Saskatchewan and for all of Canada in their Winter Games. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — There were a great many skeptics about the Winter Games on the other side of the 

House — and some say no, no and it is yes, yes. You have short memories you fellows over there. There was 

a great many skeptics as usual from the other side of the House. Some of the hon. members from the City 

Council of Saskatoon were also of the same persuasion as the people on the other side of the House, were 

crepe hangers, one of the candidates for Leader. But in spite of that Mayor Buckwold being of sterner stuff 

and of finer political persuasion, and Jeff Charlebois pressed on and hired committees. I think that they made 

a tremendous success and deserve the thanks of all of the people of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I should like to congratulate the new Leader of the 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

282 

Opposition. I don't really know why for sure, I should really sympathize with him, but I noticed in the paper 

that the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour is either in the process or about to raise $70,000 from back 

sweat of the poor working man of this province. This is just one more little group for Allan to answer to. 

He's got his own group that he ignores, the old CCFers who put him in, or some of them that put him in. 

Then he has the Wafflers and of course in the background — well the Commies. I didn't want to mention 

that because I am such a gentleman. In the background now he has as usual the labor unions. I wonder how 

many of those people will willingly give up that $70,000, the $1 or $2 that they can ill-afford. I wonder if 

Mr. Whelan and some of the other boys will get up and cry crocodile tears for the poor working man who 

can hardly afford the $2, $3, or $4, which most of them will be blackmailed out of, to help the NDP. 

 

But anyway the people of Saskatchewan should take clear notice just exactly who is calling the tune and who 

is pulling the strings as far as the NDP are concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to talk today about the Prince Albert pulp mill and I am going to talk about the 

Meadow Lake pulp mill. And many of the things that I am going to say have been said before and have been 

placed on the records. I am going to do it not so much for the benefit of the Members of the Opposition 

because they don't want to be convinced, they can't be convinced. But I am going to put it on the records for 

the people of Saskatchewan, because I think that when it comes to the actions, the speeches, of the Members 

Opposite, concerning the Prince Albert pulp mill, the sanctimonious and the hypercritical attitude of the 

NDP and its leadership have never been more clearly proven than in the debate that centres around the Prince 

Albert pulp mill. 

 

Today, I shall review for the people of Saskatchewan, the distortions, the smearing and the actual attempts to 

sabotage the pulp mill by the NDP and the possible consequences of their irresponsible actions in this regard. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I shall also put on the record the plain truth about the Prince Albert pulp mill, a record 

that has been placed before the Opposition and the public as the mill developed, a record that goes back to 

1966 when the first agreements were tabled in this Legislature. 

 

I should first like to look at the performance of the new Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) before he 

became the NDP Leader and since his election. Mr. Speaker, you will notice a great change took place in Mr. 

Blakeney's attitude after he became the Leader of the Opposition and I think that this change tells an 

interesting story. 

 

Back in the spring of 1966 when the late John Cuelenaere placed the original agreements concerning the 

Prince Albert pulp mill before the Legislature, Mr. Blakeney was the official critic for the Opposition. He 

first asked for an adjournment of the debate so he could study the documents, then on April 4, 1966, he 

congratulated the Government on obtaining the mill and indicated his support of the Bill. He did qualify his 

support by 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

283 

stating his concern about the viability of the mill, and he raised a few questions. 

 

He had all the documents then laying out the financing of the mill itself and he indicated that he understood 

them and he supported the Bill in principle. His performance was intelligent, constructively critical and 

responsible. 

 

From early 1966 until September of 1970, Mr. Blakeney continued his interest in the Prince Albert pulp mill 

but again his attitude was that of a responsible Member of the Opposition, keeping an eye on a large 

government undertaking. Then in the summer of 1970 he was elected Leader of the Saskatchewan NDP. 

 

I shall remind the Legislature of the circumstances leading up to his eventual victory in that bitter leadership 

fight. 

 

Mr. Blakeney didn't sweep to victory on the first or second ballot! Oh no! He didn't even take the lead on the 

first ballot. Who took it? Mr. Romanow who sits at his side with obvious impatience for the next leadership 

race, led on the first ballot. It was not until the third ballot that Mr. Blakeney won out, with the support of the 

followers of Don Mitchell, who ended up holding the balance of power in the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he still holds the balance of power in the Party and when he threatens Mr. Blakeney jumps, as 

evidenced by the premature unveiling of the NDP platform. Who is Don Mitchell and who are his 

supporters? 

 

Well, he is a young man who first came to prominence as a radical activist on the University of 

Saskatchewan Regina Campus. He has been identified with such enterprises as the Prairie Fire, a far left 

newspaper, the Farmers' Union, and can usually be found leading the more wild-eyed protest marchers who 

litter up various parts of the city of Regina from time to time. His followers include most of the NDP youth 

movement, the far left Maoists, who would like to take over the NDP and make it an outright Communist 

Party, and a group of very sincere Socialists who believe their party has become too conservative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no sensible person will ever be convinced that this radical group did not wring some promises 

from Mr. Blakeney before they threw him the votes that made him Leader. You know their natural choice 

should have been that epitome of the new, brave, young look, Mr. Roy Romanow. He should have been their 

choice. But there is only one trouble, no one is really sure where Roy stands on anything, not even Roy 

himself, except that he is young and is all for motherhood, except when he is talking to one of his liberation 

movements. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — So, Mr. Speaker, the radicals turned to Mr. Blakeney and their pay-off is becoming 

evident. These far out left wingers who are moving into power in the NDP are making a little puppet out of 

Allan Blakeney. They hate all forms of private investment, especially the American variety so the Prince 

Albert pulp mill is a natural target. 

 

On September 22,1970, they pulled the string and Mr. Blakeney jumped and he responded with the most 

irresponsible speech of his political career up to this point in time. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

284 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — In this speech, as reported in the September 23, 1970 edition of the Regina 

Leader-Post, Mr. Blakeney accused the Government of giving away our resources and of allowing Parsons 

and Whittemore to make unconscionable profits. He accused this company of financial hanky-panky and of 

taking huge rake-offs. 

 

In short, he tried to smear the whole Prince Albert pulp mill development and everyone connected with it. 

He based this irresponsible outburst on documents filed in the Queen's Bench Court by the Foundation 

Company of Canada. This company, Mr. Speaker, was the major contractor involved in the construction of 

the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

The Foundation Company claims they are entitled to an additional $2.35 million for building that mill. 

Parsons and Whittemore are suing the Foundation Company for $14 million for negligence, over 

expenditures and damages. So here we have two companies involved in a large construction job suing each 

other for claims, counter claims, and damages. This is nothing new, unfortunately. It happened with the steel 

mill here in Regina, the local cement plant, and even the Squaw Rapids Power Plant built under the CCF 

back in the '50s. But what is unbelievable is that the Leader of the Opposition would jump in, seize on 

unproven statements made in connection with these lawsuits and try to smear the Government's very 

successful deal in obtaining the pulp mill in Prince Albert. 

 

At the same time as Mr. Blakeney tried to pretend these unproven claims were new evidence, he cried out for 

full disclosure of all the details of the pulp mill financing. Mr. Speaker, the truth is the Government has 

made public all documents pertaining to the establishment of the pulp mill, and Mr. Blakeney has had these 

in his possession since 1966 as tabled in this Legislature in April of 1966. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The documents I tabled a few days ago had absolutely nothing to do with the 

establishment of the mill, they were concerned with its operation. On top of this, audited annual statements 

of the Prince Albert pulp mill are on file in the Registrar of Companies office in the Legislative Building, 

one floor up from where Mr. Blakeney has his office and they are there for anyone to examine. The facts are 

in the documents he admits having, as well as statements made in the Legislature by the late John 

Cuelenaere, former Minister of Natural Resources, proven by the audited statements on file in the Registrar 

of Companies office, and I shall again place these facts before this Legislature later in this speech. 

 

I would also point out that the claim by the Foundation Company on which the Leader of the Opposition 

based his claim was, within a few days of his outburst, unconditionally withdrawn from the courts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, it also was noted that the Foundation 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

285 

Company is being sued by nine sub-contractors . . . 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon-Riversdale): — Right. 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . and that they have involved . . . Right, Mr. city slicker lawyer. Tell your little 

friends this next year. It is also worth noting that the Foundation Company is being sued by nine 

sub-contractors and they have involved the Parsons and Whittemore Company in these lawsuits. It is also 

worth noting that as of September 23, 1970, only one of these suits has been tried, and in this case, the 

Foundation Company's claim against Parsons and Whittemore was dismissed as an abuse of the process of 

the courts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Right again, Mr. lawyer. Mr. Speaker, I point out these facts to show that Mr. 

Blakeney, as an experienced lawyer, at least he pretends to be an experienced lawyer, knew he was basing 

his charges on the most questionable and unproven evidence imaginable. In fact, if you read his statement 

closely, you can see how he used dozens of weasel-words to keep himself from being accused of contempt of 

court and still try to please his radical, unthinking followers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let's examine some of the actions of these NDP followers who have 

never stopped trying to sabotage the pulp mill from the day it was first announced. NDP supporters caused 

strike after strike during the construction of this mill, in spite of the no strike clause in the union agreement. 

The month long strike at the Prince Albert mill last year was largely engineered by NDP supporters, led by a 

Mr. Geise who was an unsuccessful candidate in that convention they held up in East Prince Albert when 

they tried to grab poor Bill Berezowsky's Prince Albert East constituency seat. Then we even had a report 

from the Norquay North Star paper that Adolph Matsalla, MLA for Canora — he is the teacher — has joined 

in the Socialist chorus chanting their anti-American hatred and calling for a government takeover of both the 

Prince Albert pulp mill and the Meadow Lake pulp mill before we even got it going. This was on January 17, 

1971, and it was obvious that Adolph hadn't received the word that the base for his Leader's anti-pulp mill 

charges had disappeared. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert pulp mill is the largest single industry in Saskatchewan. It stands as a 

monument to the success of the Thatcher Liberal Government's Industrial Development Program. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It stands equally as a monument to the NDP Socialist Government's 20 year failure to 

attract major industries to the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

286 

MR. STEUART: — In 1964 Ross Thatcher invited every Canadian pulp mill to build a pulp mill in our 

province. Unfortunately, not one Canadian firm accepted the challenge. He then turned to the United States 

and began negotiating with the Parsons and Whittemore Company of New York. This great firm has built 

and successfully operated pulp mills in more than a dozen countries throughout the world. After long 

negotiations in which the Government sought and used the advice of national and international experts in 

every phase of pulp mill construction and operation, a deal was agreed upon. The essential facts of this 

agreement are as follows: 1. A feasibility study was carried out that proved there was enough wood to keep 

the pulp mill in production in perpetuity. 2. The Government hired consultants, experts in the pulp industry, 

as well as top corporation lawyers, to protect the Province's interest in this great project. 3. The Government 

and Parsons and Whittemore formed a new company called the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited. 

Parsons and Whittemore invested $7 million in cash in the company. The Government invested $1.5 million 

in cash — $1.5 million — and that's all they invested, and they were given another $1.5 million worth of 

shares for guaranteeing certain loans made by the new Prince Albert Pulp Company, making a total face 

value of $3 million worth of shares for the Province of Saskatchewan. Thus, the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company is owned 70 per cent by Parsons and Whittemore and 30 per cent by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 4. Parsons and Whittemore then agreed under contract to build a complete mill capable of 

producing 650 tons of top quality pulp a day for the fixed price of $54,793,200 for the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company Limited. It is a fact this contract was adhered to and the mill was successfully completed. It 

actually cost Parsons and Whittemore more to construct the mill, but neither the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company nor the Government of Saskatchewan paid them one cent more than the contract price. 4. The mill 

was financed by the investments of Parsons and Whittemore and the Governments of Saskatchewan and 

Canada, plus a $50 million loan. This loan was guaranteed by the Government of Saskatchewan for which 

they were given a first mortgage on the pulp mill and were also given $1.5 million worth of shares as a fee 

for making this guarantee. Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason the Government guaranteed the loan was to keep 

the interest rates as low as possible, and in fact, the money was borrowed at 5.2 per cent, one of the reasons 

that the mill is able to operate at a profit. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — 6. The cash investment in the Prince Albert Pulp Mill Company is as follows: $63.5 

million, made up of (a) the loan of $50 million; (b) investment by Parsons and Whittemore $7 million; (c) 

investment by the Provincial Government $1.5 million; (d) grant from the Federal Government under the 

Designated Area Program $5 million, for a total of $63.5 million. 7. This money is invested in the following 

way: the cost of the mill, guaranteed price $54.8 million; yard equipment and small tools $1.3 million; 

interest during construction, start up losses, debt issue expense and working capital, $7.4 million; making a 

total of $63.5 million. 

 

There was not excess profit. If there were any overruns, the Government of Saskatchewan didn't pay a cent. 

Parsons and Whittemore lived up to their contract, to the letter of their 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

287 

contract, we got a good mill, the mill did what we said it would do, and it's there for anyone to see. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Like all pulp mills, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Company lost money during its first 

year of operation while it was coming up to full production, but it is now operating at a profit. 

 

8. Parsons and Whittemore Company built a good mill. They say they actually lost $4.3 million due to 

inflation and contract overruns. In fact, they purchased 85 per cent of all equipment in Canada. Out of the 

total cost of the mill, less than $2 million worth of equipment was purchased from companies owned by 

Parsons and Whittemore. So much for their great rake-offs. 9. The benefits to the people of Saskatchewan 

from this pulp mill are tremendous. For example: (a) over 1,000 high paying jobs during construction; (b) 

production guarantees were fulfilled in under half the time required under the contract; (c) the mill employs 

419 people in the mill, another 500 people are employed in the forest operations. Six per cent of the 

employees in the mill are Indian and Metis. 13.2 per cent of the employees in the woods operations are 

Indian and Metis; (d) the mill has annual sales of $47 million, all of which goes to the export market, which 

makes a positive contribution to Canada's balance of payments; (d) the mill has provided stimulus for 

development of service industries such as motels, restaurants, shopping centres, etc. in the city of Prince 

Albert; (f) the mill each year spends in this province, in our Province of Saskatchewan, $25 million. For 

example: they purchase chemicals manufactured in Saskatchewan worth $3.5 million; purchase of 

maintenance materials and supplies, $1.5 million annually; purchase from Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

$400,000 worth of power every year, and $1 million worth of gas, at the same rates given to other industries 

by the NDP when they were in power. Again, so much for this giveaway of our resources, giveaway of our 

power and gas. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Exactly the same rates as given by the NDP when they were in power to some of the 

potash mines, and Mr. Blakeney, there for you to see in the original contract, and you have tried to 

misrepresent this time and time again to the public though you knew full well the facts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — If anybody accused anybody in this House of playing with the truth, let's put the gloves 

on and see who has really been playing with the truth. 

 

The mill pays the Department of Natural Resources annually, stumpage fees of $250,000. They pay more 

than $7 million annually for freight. They pay $325,000 for license fees and Education and Health tax. They 

paid $1.4 million in Education and Health tax during construction. The annual payroll, all in Saskatchewan, 

is $9 million. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

288 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — As a result of these expenditures, the standard of living in the city of Prince Albert has 

gone up dramatically over the past four years and the per capita income of that city if now one of the highest 

of any city in the Prairie Provinces. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what about reforestation? What about the woods? The pulp mill, by agreement and by 

law, has embarked on an extensive reforestation program. Over a million trees have been planted and this 

program will be stepped up dramatically in the years ahead to ensure the continued renewal of our forest 

industries. 

 

In addition to planting trees as part of the reforestation program, scarification and controlled burning of slash 

has been started to assist natural regeneration. Thus we have a major reforestation program which costs 

hundreds of thousands of dollars each year to ensure perpetual growth in our forests. In fact, the forest will 

be in much better condition 10 years from now than it was before the mill started. 

 

Pollution control: listen to the great fish expert over there groaning, from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman). If 

you didn't know anything more about fish when they hired you in the Department of Natural Resources, than 

you know about trees, you should pay them back all the money they paid you for the five years you did 

nothing there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Pollution control. The pulp mill put in a primary sewage control unit at the time of 

construction. The mill has now done a thorough study that will serve as the basis for a comprehensive 

secondary pollution control system to be built in this year, 1971. This will coincide with the sewage disposal 

unit to be constructed and put into operation in 1971 under the orders of this Government with assistance 

from this Government, by the city of Prince Albert. The result of these two sewage control facilities will be 

to bring the North Saskatchewan River to its cleanest level in over 50 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This major pollution control is the direct result of actions by the Saskatchewan Liberal 

Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the pulp mill story is a success story, and it has brought great benefits to 

thousands of Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Our Government is now negotiating for another pulp mill for the Meadow Lake area. 

When this mill goes into production, a new era of prosperity will come to the north-west section of 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

289 

this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) knows these are the facts and so do those of 

his followers who know the difference between a balance sheet and a bed sheet. That's not too many of them, 

I'll admit. The public knows that during their 20 years as the government of Saskatchewan, the Socialists 

promised pulp mill after pulp mill but failed to produce one. They offered giveaway deals to unproven 

promoters and to one American mill after another, but they met total failure. Even before the 1956 election, 

they went so far as to take an option on a piece of land 10 miles east of Prince Albert in an effort to make 

their latest pulp mill more believable. 

 

But ever since the Prince Albert pulp mill was announced, the NDP have misrepresented the facts, 

downgraded it and encouraged their followers to sabotage the mill. The rank and file of the NDP have 

worked against the mill for a variety of reasons. For some it is sour grapes. Couldn't get one themselves, so 

we will wreck this one. Other NDP Members feel it is a way to defeat the Liberals, and there are some, a few 

who sincerely believe we should be better off with no pulp mill or at least one run by the Government. 

 

What about their new Leader? What about Mr. Blakeney's motives? In trying to discredit the Prince Albert 

pulp mill and stop the proposed pulp mill for Meadow Lake — does he really believe we made a poor deal. 

Nonsense. He knows we made an excellent deal for the people of Saskatchewan. Does he really think as he 

now lets on that there's not enough wood and as a result we are raping and ruining the forest? Again, 

nonsense. He can go to the Department of Natural Resources foresters, the same ones who worked for the 

NDP when they were the government, and they will tell him that both the cutting plans and the reforestation 

programs are more than adequate to maintain and actually improve our game and forest reserves. If he is still 

in doubt, all he has to do is look up the Stanford Report commissioned by the old CCF government which 

stated, after a study of our forest resources, that we have enough wood to keep four pulp mills going in 

perpetuity. 

 

Does he really believe we are not concerned with pollution? All he has to do is look at his own record as a 

Member of the last Socialist government and he will have to admit we are doing far more than they ever did, 

in fact, we are among the leaders in Canada. 

 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has to take his anti-American, anti-development, 

anti-pulp mill stand if he is to keep his hold on his radical supporters to keep them in line and maintain his 

hold on the New Democratic Party. It is the price he is paying for power. 

 

When I first read the NDP election booklet, I said the reason Mr. Blakeney brought it out in such a rush is 

that Don Mitchell and his Wafflers were yapping at Allan's rear end and he had to move fast. Well, he 

survived that crisis, but he will soon face one that is even more threatening to his anatomy. If you read this 

unbelievable mish-mash called a new deal for people, it soon becomes clear that Mr. Blakeney is trying to 

please the old guard conservative element in his party and the way out radicals at the same time. He's got a 

foot in each camp. One camp is moving a shade to the right, and the other 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

290 

is moving to the left as fast as it can, and I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, if little Allan doesn't soon get both feet in 

the same camp, he may save that end but he'll sure split himself right down the middle in the process. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — These bleeding heart Socialists can mouth all the pious hopes for the unemployed or 

the disadvantaged in our society they want, but the people of Saskatchewan will be watching to see if they 

put their actions where their mouths are in regard to the new mill. If the Socialists or anyone else kills this 

new mill they are saying to the people of Buffalo Narrows, they are saying to the people of La Loche and 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and Meadow Lake, they are saying rot on social aid. Rot on social welfare, we haven't got the 

guts to risk building an industry that can possibly make it in that area, namely, a pulp mill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Let there be no mistake. We are not talking about the tourist industry in 10 or 20 years 

from now, Mr. Blakeney. We are not talking about some "pie-in-the-sky" Socialist enterprise that might 

happen some day but hasn't happened in the 66 years we have been a province or the 20 years they were the 

Socialist government. We are talking about a pulp mill now. We are talking about something for that area 

now to give those people betters jobs at high wages now, today . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . to give them a decent life and a decent life for their kids in this generation now, so 

that they will have a better chance for a better life. This is our problem and I hope we have the courage to 

take the action, practical action, to bring about a solution. I ask the Members of this Legislature to remember 

we tried to get Canadian investors and they turned their backs on us. Let's not stop and delay this great 

project from petty motives or a false sense of nationalistic price. 

 

The easiest thing our Government could do is turn our backs on these people in the North and play it safe. 

That would be the easiest thing. The right thing is to face reality and get the best deal that we can, as 

Province, to bring real development, real hope and real prosperity to the people of our North so that they can 

have the same opportunity as the rest of us enjoy in the south of the province. 

 

I will support the motion, I'll oppose the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.B. HOOKER (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I think I 

feel somewhat like the Hon. Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) when he had to rise and 

follow the Premier. Following the Deputy Premier is not an easy job. I should first like to add my words . . . 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

291 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — It's your time you are using fellows, go right ahead! May I add my words of 

congratulation to my colleague, the Hon. Member for the Assiniboia Bengough constituency (Mr. Mitchell) 

for the fine job he did in moving the Address-in-Reply. Also to one of our younger Members, the Hon. 

Member for Watrous (Mr. Schmeiser) for the excellent manner in which he seconded that Address. 

 

I must also add my congratulations to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) on being successful in his 

bid for leadership of the NDP party. I understand the Hon. Member came to Saskatchewan at the request of 

the old CCF party. 

 

AN. HON. MEMBER: — Yeah, that's right! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — He has held various positions as a civil servant and at least three cabinet portfolios as 

an elected Member under the former administration. Yes, Mr. Speaker, he has moved around considerably 

but he has finally found his lot in politics — Leader of the Opposition. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — My colleagues join with me in wishing him many successful years in his present 

position. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — The Throne Speech itself is a document that I am pleased to support. It is a document 

that one would expect from a responsible government. A document not full of promises and platitudes but a 

document that sets forth legislation and programs which will allow the Government the latitude and 

flexibility it requires to deal effectively with the problems of the day. This Government does not claim to be 

infallible. If solutions can be found at a provincial level that will assist in more industrial and resource 

development, we shall find them. If capital risks are required to industrialize our province to create 

employment especially designed to help our native people, we are prepared, after thorough study, to take 

them. Never let it be said, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has not got the intestinal fortitude to stake its 

political future on programs which we feel are in the best interests of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Mr. Speaker, in the short time I have in this debate I should like to report on some of 

the programs of this Government and how they affect the constituency I have the honor of representing, 

Notukeu-Willowbunch. 

 

Because of the record of this Government, Notukeu-Willowbunch re-elected a Liberal Member in 1967 as 

they will again re-elect a Liberal Member in 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

292 

MR. HOOKER: — First I should like to mention highways. I have said before and I say again that no 

constituency was as deliberately bypassed by the former government when it was involved in the highway 

expenditures as was the constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch. Six miles of oiled road. Six miles, Mr. 

Speaker. Find another rural constituency that had less and compare this with the Liberal record of today. 

Approximately 198 miles of oil surface completed to date. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — And when the highway program is announced in due course I expect we shall receive 

some further consideration. 

 

Approximately 40 miles of highway which had been removed from the highway system by the former 

government and tossed into the laps of the municipalities is now returned to highway status. Another 40 

miles of grid roads have been taken into the highway system. 

 

We appreciate what the Department of Highways has done in this respect. However, more miles of grid 

roads will have to be taken into the highway system if the east-west link between Val Marie on the west and 

Minton on the east is to be completed. I contend that the people living in the southern portions of 

Assiniboia-Bengough, Notukeu-Willowbunch and Shaunavon constituencies are as entitled to an outlet to 

the east and to the west as are people in other parts of Southern Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — I do hope that in the not too distant future this situation will be rectified. 

 

What did those great humanitarians opposite do for our people in the field of communications? Not a thing. 

They turned a deaf ear to the requests of our people for assistance in getting telephone service to our rural 

areas. It was this Government, with the Hon. Alex Cameron, then Minister of Telephones, as the architect 

who devised a program to bring telephone service to the unserved areas of the province. Mankota, because 

they had an active working organization, was chosen as a pilot project and I am pleased to say that the 

remaining three areas in our constituency have now had their service completed. 

 

What better way to preserve the family farm than to bring a service that is not only desirable but essential if 

we are going to stop the exodus of the people from rural Saskatchewan. Which government, Mr. Speaker, 

puts people before dollars? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Us! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Mr. Speaker, this Government has done more for rural Saskatchewan by their programs 

of assistance to local governments during the last seven years than the NDP did in the previous 20. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

293 

MR. HOOKER: — I was amused to read where the coalition NDP-Waffle group had as one of their 

platform planks a program to revitalize rural communities. A very noble thought but a hollow promise 

coming from that same group who only a few years ago tried to force the county system on the people of this 

province without a vote. They said there would be no more unconditional grants to municipalities, as the 

government of the day knew better how to spend their money than the elected officials. Why all the sudden 

interest in rural Saskatchewan? Our people will remember and they will not be intimidated by these hollow 

promises. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Let us look at the record of this Government's assistance to local governments. First, to 

the rural municipalities. We continued the grid road program instituted by the CCF and we expanded the 

program to include the reconstruction and regravelling of grid roads and the construction of farm access 

roads. We increased the equalization payments to municipalities. In 1964 equalization payments to the 

municipalities wholly or partially within the boundaries of Notukeu-Willowbunch were less than $10,000. In 

1970 these payments have been increased to close to $90,000 or an increase of 900 per cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Grid road maintenance grants, and a new program instituted by this Government, is 

estimated to cost over $36,000 in our constituency this year. Snow removal assistance of over $10,000 is 

another new program. Grants for construction of air strips of over $10,000 have been received and 

legislation will be presented this year to assist in the installation of lights. 

 

The farm water and sewage program is being continued. We all realize that there has been a decline in the 

number of people living on farms but probably not to the extent our friends opposite try to make us believe. 

Research into the Family Farm Improvement Branch program reveals some interesting facts in our 

constituency. In 1964 there were 71 grants paid out totalling $11,000. In 1970 there were 27 grants paid out 

amounting to $5,600. If the people are continuing to install water and sewage projects on the farm at the rate 

just mentioned even if the number is less than in 1964 it indicates to me that people are moving back to the 

farms. They are moving back because of the programs of assistance by the Department of Municipal Affairs 

and the Department of Agriculture. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: —What about the urban centres in our constituency? Sewer and water grants to towns and 

villages since 1964 of $160,000. Shared cost for the oiling of streets $17,000. Gravelling of streets and lanes, 

a new program last year, which cost over $7,000. New programs to assist in the cost of police protection on a 

per capita basis. 

 

As tax-free gas for farm trucks is of major assistance to rural Saskatchewan, so the Homeowner Grants are of 

major 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

294 

assistance to many people living in our small towns and villages. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — It is not uncommon where the Homeowner Grant pays as much as 50 per cent of the tax 

load to the people who are in need of that extra assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we became the Government of this Province in 1964 our constituency had been and was 

still overrun with hawkers and peddlers selling everything from worthless promotional stock to building 

materials of doubtful quality. Thanks to our Attorney General and the consumer protection legislation that he 

has initiated and placed on the Statute books of this Province by this Government, we are now rid of the 

fast-buck artist. 

 

Too many of us remember hearing of people who invested their life savings in worthless stock, who spent 

their hard-earned money on goods they never received or that were of inferior quality, who found themselves 

bound to contracts they knew nothing about, and who would have lost the money they had paid for their final 

resting place had it not been for this Government's intervention. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Mr. Speaker, our citizens today enjoy the protection of the most comprehensive and 

up-to-date consumer legislation in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should be remiss in my duty as a representative f the constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch if 

I did not pay tribute to the Department of Natural Resources and the regional parks program for the 

assistance we are receiving. Admittedly, The Regional Park Act was passed by the former government and 

the Thomson Lake Regional Park was the first park established under the new Act. But we like to feel that 

we had because of the numerous representations made to the government something to do with having that 

Act placed on the Statute books. 

 

Prior to the Act coming into force the centre of our constituency would have been well over 200 miles to the 

nearest provincial park. Consequently we had many people who had never had the opportunity of enjoying 

the many outdoor facilities that we have in our parks today. Many of our young people grew up without 

having had the opportunity of learning how to swim. Today we have five regional parks in our constituency 

all with facilities for swimming and various types of recreation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Regional Park Act is a cost-sharing program between the Government and the contributing 

municipalities, both urban and rural. We have found the Department of Natural Resources willing to assist in 

all aspects of park planning and management and their officials have been most co-operative. The 

Department has lived up to its commitments. It is up to us as local board members to live up to ours. If we 

fail, we may find that we have been bypassed in favor of the parks whose officials do the jobs they have been 

appointed to do. Since 1964 the Department of Natural Resources has spent in all its grant structures over 

$164,000 in our constituency on regional parks. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

295 

The contributing municipalities have contributed over $94,000. Attendance in our parks is increasing year by 

year. This past year it is estimated that 190,000 people attended these parks. This gives some indication of 

the public acceptance of this program and the use they are making of the facilities. I say Mr. Speaker, that his 

has been tax dollars well spent. 

 

I should also like to thank the Historical Sites Branch for their contribution to restoring a portion of the 

North West Mounted Police barracks at Wood Mountain and erecting a monument to the memory of Jean 

Louis Legare at Willowbunch. Mr. Legare, a fur trader, and the Old Post at Wood Mountain are truly 

symbols of early Saskatchewan history. 

 

In the remaining few minutes I have I wish to say a word about the proposed Grassland Prairie Park that the 

Federal Government would like to establish in Southern Saskatchewan. The area involved was largely in the 

constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch and extends into the Shaunavon constituency, involving an area of 

over 600 square miles. The original proposal was to fence off the entire area and move all the ranchers and 

cattle off the land. 

 

My objections to such a proposal are well known to my colleagues and to my constituents. I now wish to 

thank our Premier for assuring our people and our ranchers that no prairie park would be established unless 

the grazing rights of the ranchers are protected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — With the assurance that the grazing rights would be protected, I am sure our ranchers 

would accept, however not too enthusiastically, the principles of establishing a prairie park utilizing those 

unique and picturesque sites for tourist attractions. With proper planning and communications a policy could 

be worked out that would be acceptable. 

 

In conclusion I should like to say a word about another proposed plank in the NDP platform which I think all 

farmers in Saskatchewan should study. That is the plank to prohibit foreign ownership of farm land and 

restrict corporate ownership to family groups or co-operatives. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Prohibit foreign ownership of farm lands — what really does this mean? Does it mean 

that only Saskatchewan residents could own their own farm land? One must consider that this would be a 

Saskatchewan law and foreign to me could simply mean anyone not a resident of the Province. If not, does it 

mean that a landed immigrant could not buy land until he became a citizen which would be a minimum of 

five years? Does it mean that if a resident landowner wishing to retire and move from Saskatchewan would 

be forced to dispose of his farm land? Or does it mean that no resident of the United States could own land 

in Saskatchewan? If so, why don't they spell it out? This, in my opinion, could cause some serious problems. 

What about corporate ownership of farm land? Does it mean that the Hutterite farms would have to disband 

as they could hardly be considered a family group. If so, the NDP would have to alter their former position, 

as the first permit issued to establish a Hutterite 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

296 

colony in this province was issued by the former CCF party. 

 

It all boils down to this, Mr. Speaker. The young NDP are advocating nationalization of farm lands. The 

Wafflers are advocating the prohibition of foreign ownership of farm land and restricting corporate farms. If 

these groups are powerful enough now to dictate policy, are they not powerful enough to take over complete 

control should an NDP government take over? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Mr. Farmer, I would ask you all to beware. It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will 

support the motion and vote against the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks will be those of congratulations to the 

mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I also want to congratulate my colleagues, the Hon. Member for Regina Centre, Mr. Allan Blakeney, for 

being elected as our leader, and the Hon. Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale, Mr. Roy Romanow named as 

deputy leader. In them, Mr. Speaker, we have a combination of youth and experience, and with them we 

have a good sympathetic understanding of the problems that presently face the small businessman, the 

worker and the farmer. 

 

To our retiring Leader, Mr. Woodrow Lloyd, the Hon. Member for Biggar, I want to express sincere 

gratitude, for his time and sacrifice to many years of public life. I want to wish him well in the future. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make some observations on the documents that were 

tabled in this House yesterday respecting the pulp mill issue. Upon examining the documents tabled by the 

Premier yesterday afternoon, I can't read in them anywhere anything that indicates in the statement of the 

Premier in this House and to the people of Saskatchewan, on Friday last, that Premier Schreyer of Manitoba 

was begging to have Parsons and Whittemore take over the Manitoba pulp mill, and that the Ministers and 

officials of the Manitoba Government were sent to discuss and negotiate the deal. Mr. Speaker, from the 

documents tabled there is no evidence of any begging, "day after day and week after week." The only 

evidence we have before us, is that Premier Schreyer received one phone call from Mr. Condon, Vice 

President of Parsons and Whittemore, as referred to in the letter of January 21, 1971. There is no further 

evidence of any telephone communications between Premier Schreyer and Parsons and Whittemore. Yet the 

Premier of this Province says that Mr. Schreyer was on the phone day after day and week after week. 

 

Let us look at the letters written by Premier Schreyer to Parsons and Whittemore respecting the pulp mill. I 

find there is evidence of only one letter, dated February 21, 1971. That letter is in reply to a letter from Mr. 

Condon of Parsons and 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

297 

Whittemore. The reply is of a general nature acknowledging the letter of January 19 from Parsons and 

Whittemore. The January 19th letter, Mr. Speaker, was not included in the tabled documents. I wonder why? 

Nevertheless, it would appear that as a courtesy Mr. Schreyer indicated he was interested in receiving the 

letter. At the same time he requested information on management and marketing fees. From this document 

there is no evidence of any telegrams from Premier Schreyer to Parsons and Whittemore. The documents 

before us provide us with no shred of evidence that there were any Ministers or officials of the Manitoba 

Government who discussed the pulp mill with Parsons and Whittemore. 

 

It is very obvious, Mr. Speaker, that what the Premier is attempting to do is to mislead this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan through deliberate misrepresentation and through exaggerated statements, and just 

to slur and degrade Premier Schreyer and the Government of Manitoba. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this 

kind of performance by the Premier of Saskatchewan with lack of adequate evidence is most disgraceful, and 

certainly may prove damaging to the friendly relationship that presently exists between this Province and our 

sister Province of Manitoba. It also weakens the position of the Prairie Provinces in making representation in 

a united way to the Government in Ottawa. In the best interests of Saskatchewan and its people, I suggest 

Premier Thatcher should offer an apology to this House and to Premier Schreyer of Manitoba, for the 

misleading statements made by him on Friday last. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, it is sad to witness Saskatchewan's rural way of life being degraded to a 

point most discouraging to the rural communities, and particularly so to the young people. We see small 

towns and villages declining, businesses are going bankrupt and closing up and people are moving out of the 

province. In the last 12 months, Mr. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), over 30,000 people left this 

province. What is wrong, Mr. Speaker, is that the two governments have deliberately set a course of change 

in the agriculture industry based on what they and their expert economists call economic efficiency. The 

course I might say, is leading to the take over of Saskatchewan farming by big agri-business. 

 

If the Government opposite was at all interested in formulating federal policies for Saskatchewan people, a 

strong representation should have attended the policy making conference held in Ottawa last November. I 

ask this House, Mr. Speaker, how many of the Government MLAs and Cabinet Ministers attended this 

Conference? A total of one Member, only one Member, and at that he came late. He got there on the last day 

of the Conference. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Government opposite in its complacency and apathy has sat idly by while 

Saskatchewan farmers were going broke. It has neglected to participate and use its influence in the 

developing of the policies, and speak in the interests and welfare of Saskatchewan people. What hope has the 

Premier when he states, "We would like to think that the Liberal Party is the friend of the farmer." That 

hope, Mr. Premier, who is not in his seat, is lost and will not return. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

298 

This Government is guilty of deliberately creating conditions to destroy small communities. In the case of 

selling out timber rights to the Simpson Lumber Company and closing out of the Saskatchewan Timber 

Board operations in the Reserve area, community life in the little town of Reserve is disappearing. 

Neighboring communities of Endeavour, Preeceville, Sturgis, and others are being directly affected. There is 

unemployment for mill workers, loss of income and investment to small sawmill operators, loss of the much 

needed supplemental income to small farm operators, and a drastic cut in income to local businessmen. The 

people in these communities will remember the dictatorial and inhuman policy of this Government and its 

belief that dollars should come before people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish we had a few more Members on the right side of this House to listen. They are not in the 

House; there are only about 10 Members. Mr. Speaker, this Government has accepted the Federal Operation 

LIFT program, the Task Force on Agriculture report and agrees to the proposed Income Stabilization Plan. In 

the eyes of the public, the Premier and the Members opposite have been making an effort to divorce 

themselves from the Federal Agriculture proposal and the Federal Liberals. But if we refer to an article 

appearing in the Regina Leader-Post of February 15, 1971, it is obvious that the Premier of the Province and 

Prime Minister Trudeau are friendly bed partners. The headline of the article quotes Premier Thatcher as 

saying: 

 

I am convinced he (referring to the Prime Minister) is the right man at the right time in 

Canadian history. 

 

I believe the Premier's statement here is significant because it reveals very clearly that Thatcher Liberals are 

no different from the Trudeau Liberals. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The fighting front created by the Premier against the Ottawa Liberals is all a pretence 

and only to deceive the public. 

 

The time has come, Mr. Speaker, for a new government to get Saskatchewan out of the slump and back on 

the road to prosperity. It is time for a progressive government with new ideas and with a new and realistic 

approach to grapple with the problems of the day. 

 

A New Democratic Government in its program for progress will give high priority to stabilizing agriculture 

and revitalizing rural community centres. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — We strongly believe in family farm operations, Mr. Speaker, it is out intention to 

restrict corporate ownership to family farms and family co-operatives. We will provide low cost credit with 

loan forgiveness to young people wanting to enter farming. We will press on the Federal Government for a 

system of guaranteed price supports on farm products and for a realistic two-price system for wheat. We 

believe that price supports are most essential to give our farming industry the security it now seriously lacks. 

We firmly believe that by protecting the viability of the family farm we can restore Saskatchewan's rural 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

299 

way of life and stop the rapid decline of small rural communities. 

 

In this short time allotted to me, Mr. Speaker, I wish to now deal with taxes, particularly school property 

taxes. But before I do this, I want to remind this House and the people of Saskatchewan of the Liberal 

promises of 1964 to reduce the property tax, to reduce the sales tax of 3 per cent, to reduce personal income 

taxes, and to reduce power and gas rates. It is apparent, the Premier was going to be a real bear at reducing 

taxes! But if we look at the record of this Government, Mr. Speaker, there is no need to tell you that taxes 

today are the highest and at the most oppressive level. The Provincial per capita tax has increased from $129 

in 1963-64 to $238 in 1969-70 — an increase of $109, or 84 per cent. 

 

The per capita property tax during the CCF Government from 1960 to 1964 increased by $20, but under the 

Liberals, from 1964 to 1968, the increase was $48 — an increase of nearly two and one half times. The 

average mill rates during fives years of CCF Government from 1959 to 1964 increased by only two mills, but 

under this Administration from 1964 to 1968 the increase was eight mills. An alarming increase of four 

times under the Liberals. 

 

No matter which way you look at it, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are paying the highest taxes 

ever — the highest in the history of the province. The Homeowner Grant was far from enough to cover the 

high increased taxes. Do you know, Mr. Speaker, many taxpayers found themselves unable to pay their 

taxes, and hence did not receive any grant. The Administration regulations under which this grant is paid are 

wrong since the poor delinquent taxpayer in financial difficulty who needs it most, does not receive it. 

 

The records will prove, Mr. Speaker, that education costs have continued to climb year after year. And yet up 

until 1964, we find when the CCF Government was in office that mill rates for school purposes were held at 

a reasonable level. The Government of that day recognized the limits of the school tax burden on property. A 

grant system was set up to cover and keep pace with rising costs. In this way school boards were able to 

operate on a fairly stable mill rate. But records will prove, Mr. Speaker, that school property taxes since 1965 

have jumped over 60 per cent. And where lands have been re-assessed, school taxes have doubled and 

tripled and more. Local school boards were forced to increase mill rates to a high level in order to meet the 

ever-increasing education costs. And this, Mr. Speaker, for the reason that government grants were starting 

to slip and did not keep pace with rising costs. 

 

Let us just for a moment, Mr. Speaker, examine the tax mill rate increases in three school units situated in 

the Parkland area in the northeast central part of the province. In the Kamsack School Unit No. 35, from 

1959 to 1964 under the CCF, there was a one mill increase; from 1965 to 1970 under the Liberals, there was 

a 13 mill increase. The Yorkton School Unit No. 36, from 1959 to 1964 five mills of increase, from 1965 to 

1970, 20 mills of increase. The Canora School Unit No. 37, from 1959 to 1964, no increases, from 1965 to 

1970 up to 17 mills of increase. 

 

The Government to your right, Sir, elected on the promise 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

300 

to reduce taxes has completely failed and betrayed the citizens of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, property 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan are looking forward to a new tax base structure to finance education costs. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — A new deal for people! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — During the six years this Liberal administration has deliberately shifted taxes onto 

local property forcing mill rates upwards, and having local taxpayers bear the financial load which the 

Provincial Government should have borne. The tax shift cannot be continued and should be stopped! 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities speaking on behalf of the rural people proposes a 

plan of dedicated tax on basic income. The object of the plan, Mr. Speaker, is to relieve and transfer the 

heavy tax burden of school taxes on local property on to a broader tax base with the ultimate result of fair 

taxation for education purposes. I believe, Sir, that this is a step in the right direction. The plan has merit in 

that it embodies the principle of benefit and ability to pay. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the SARM proposal 

is a new one and as such may require further study particularly in the area of application and administration 

of the tax. 

 

The New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, recognizes that local property is presently overtaxed for school 

purposes. The tax shift that occurred during the last few years must be made in reverse — from property on 

to a new and broader financial tax base. 

 

The New Democratic Party believes that education can no longer be considered a local service and be 

financed to the extent it is out of local property taxes. Education is a service that benefits the entire nation, as 

such it should be paid for to a greater extent through finances of provincial and federal governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our new deal for people, a New Democratic Government will sharply reduce property tax 

mill rates for basic school purposes by assuming up to 75 per cent of the costs. This could well mean a 

reduction of up to $100 for an average home owner, farmer and small businessman. The monies may be 

raised through increased resource royalties, increased taxes on higher incomes, corporation taxes and other 

taxes related to the ability to pay principle. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that lowering school property taxes is 

one way of fighting this Liberal depression that we are in. Lowering property taxes will particularly benefit 

those least able to pay, the home owners, the farmers and the young people and the businessman. 

 

The Throne Speech in this time of depression does not have the answers to adequately deal with the crisis in 

agriculture, the unemployment situation and the plight of the local property taxpayer. Mr. Speaker, I will not 

support the main motion but I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, before proceeding with the intended text of my 

speech, I want to make some reference to the speech of the 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

301 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) who began the debate this afternoon. He doesn't know what he is talking 

about. The Provincial Treasurer has a penchant for personal remarks which in my opinion do this House no 

particular credit. He takes facts out of context for the purpose of smogging up the atmosphere instead of 

casting light on the real issues. The other day the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) in this House, 

gave a reasoned, sharp and telling analysis of the pulp mill and the pulp mill operation. But when the Deputy 

Premier (Mr. Steuart) had sat down this afternoon, we had seen a lot of smoke and not a few pyrotechnics 

but no answers whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, to the disturbing and the thoughtful questions that the Leader of the 

Opposition had raised in the debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — It is not my intention this afternoon to take the time to deal with these questions. I am 

sure that those who will follow me will be dealing with them. It seems to me that the heat and quality and the 

style of his speech displays his uneasiness and the uneasiness of his Government, over the questions laid 

bare by my Leader the other afternoon. There is, however, one question that was raised by the Provincial 

Treasurer that I want to deal with. 

 

He made the very sly suggestion that there were a number of strikes attempted in the pulp mill operation that 

had been caused by political operations of this party. I say, Mr. Speaker, and I say flatly and categorically, 

that the statement is false. I say that there is not one of the unions that had to do with the construction of the 

pulp mill that is even affiliated with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, nor with the Party of which I 

am a Member. The Member knows that his statement is false and he should not have made it in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate this afternoon I want to make some reference to the fact that 

I shall not be entering the next Provincial election contest whenever that is held. As the House knows, my 

friend, the very competent Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) will be the candidate for the Moose 

Jaw South constituency which I have represented. I am sure that he will continue to do the fine job for my 

constituents that he has done so well for his own in the past. 

 

I want to tell the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer that they can rant all they want this afternoon, but they 

are going to have to listen to me and I am always heard. 

 

My purpose in mentioning my retirement from provincial politics, Mr. Speaker, is mainly to express to many 

Moose Jaw friends and citizens my thanks and deep appreciation for having given me the privilege of 

representing our city for so long. There is no better community in Canada than Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw 

people are well known for their friendliness and their personal kindness and for their dislike of formality and 

stuffed-shirtism. They are supporters of progressive ideas and public programs. They have endured the trying 

times brought about by railroad dieselization and industrial technology, with courage and with energy. I want 

to humbly acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the honor that has been given to me by Moose Jaw people in 

permitting me to act for them, both at the local and provincial government levels, over 25 years. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

302 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Mr. Speaker, I much regret that the Liberal Government of this province has chosen to 

divide the two Moose Jaw constituencies in the manner revealed in last year's gerrymander. There is no 

excuse whatsoever for ramming through changes which mean that more than 13,000 voters in Moose Jaw 

South will elect one MLA, while little better than 6,000 in Moose Jaw North will elect another. It would 

have been quite easy, Mr. Premier, and I wish that Government Members would listen, as it would have been 

fair and just, for the Government to run the dividing line between the two constituencies at say, Fairford 

Street in Moose Jaw, or any other street that would have assured an equality of votes in the two ridings. It is 

obvious that the Government wants to thwart the desire of Moose Jaw people to elect two NDP Members. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Because they did not succeed in 1967 with another unfair gerrymander, they hope to 

accomplish their purpose by an even worse division of the two ridings in the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even as the tortuously carved and contorted constituency lines now stand, I now repeat what I 

told the Government in 1967 that they will fail in the next election as they did in 1967, to elect anyone in 

Moose Jaw because of our citizens' indignation and resentment over what has been done. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw are wage earners in the large majority. At the 

same time, we have a considerable section of farmers and ranchers, many of them retired. A perusal of this 

Throne Speech shows little in the way of assistance. I come from a farm background, Mr. Speaker, although 

I represent a basically urban area. I am not going to attempt to describe, this afternoon, the shortcomings of 

the Throne message from the point of view of the basic producer. I shall venture one comment and it is this: 

the Saskatchewan Liberal Government has provided no solution to the crisis in the farm economy that stems 

to a large degree from the actions of the Liberal Trudeau administration. Moreover, our Saskatchewan 

Liberal Government, in its heart, really believes that no solutions are required. When the Premier spoke in 

this debate last Friday he epitomized this belief. He suggested that droughts in various parts of the world 

such as Argentina would solve our farm problems. As a result, he said, and I think that I am quoting him 

quite accurately, that: "The farm economy will be staggering back to normal by early summer." 

 

Mr. Speaker, how graphically this puts the kernel of Liberal policy! A total reliance on the weather and upon 

good old supply and demand to "stagger back to normal"! 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the farm situation is bad and almost wholly unprovided for in current Liberal provincial 

policies, the Throne message is equally disastrous with reference to the problems of city people. Proposals 

for remedying unemployment are especially deficient. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

303 

It is an ironic commentary that our jobless figures would probably yield the highest rate in Canada were it 

not for the fact that total Liberal labor policy has caused or encouraged a melancholy migration of thousands 

of people who would otherwise appear on our unemployed rolls in Saskatchewan. We all know the 

distressing bad figures of these truly massive and terrible manpower losses. Summed up, Mr. Speaker, the 

Province's population should be well over one million people with only modest annual population gains. But 

instead we are sliding back rapidly to the 900,000 population point. 

 

It is very significant, Mr. Speaker, that some of the heaviest of the people drain has occurred during the last 

year or two. This was the period when state interference and compulsion in collective bargaining were at 

their worst. There is no doubt, whatsoever, that the province has lost untold millions of dollars bound up in 

the training and experience of skilled workmen and their productivity, who have left Saskatchewan because 

of the hostile posture and actions of this Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Even with the reducing effect worker migration has had on Saskatchewan jobless figures, 

everyone knows that the jobless rates are only a small fraction below Manitoba and not a great deal lower 

than those of Alberta. 

 

I also point out again, Mr. Speaker, what is well known to the economists who compile the jobless figures, 

that these very badly underestimate the actual number of unemployed, particularly in Saskatchewan, because 

thousands of people in our smaller communities are not included in these totals. As well, our labor force 

includes a much higher proportion of self-employed — that is professionals and farming people and so forth 

— so that consequently our jobless rate is calculated from a base which includes perhaps 121,000 persons 

not subject to the vagaries of unemployment. This group is very much smaller in other provinces, including 

Alberta and Manitoba. If the jobless rate was figured on the actual wage earning group, our situation would 

be far worse and would raise our rate beyond Manitoba's. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of a wholesale worker migration to other provinces and because of other 

factors, Saskatchewan unemployed percentages are actually little different, if not indeed, higher than both 

Manitoba and Alberta. 

 

With this background it is hard not to be disturbed by the statement in the Throne Speech that unemployment 

is less severe than in other provinces. 

 

Now, has the Government met the crisis of unemployment? Well, we heard in the Press and through radio 

and television, as well as in the Throne Speech, of the Government's self-styled "crash program." Much 

publicity has been given to it. A number of quite small projects are given great prominence. Overall, any 

examination of elements in the crash program scarcely inspires enthusiasm. Even if $15-$17 million is 

involved in the total cost — and this I suggest remains to be seen — the amount won't make much impact in 

providing jobs. Also, Mr. Speaker, the Government has again, as was the case a year or so ago, been 

unpardonably late in even announcing a program. Much of the 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

304 

"Crash program" won't be operative until most or all of the winter months have passed. Even then, any very 

decisive effects are questionable. 

 

Although the Government must have been aware, as was every other government in Canada of the expected 

high jobless numbers this winter, we find again the Saskatchewan Liberals belatedly admitting that its crash 

program was inadequate by the announcements in the Throne Speech of what they term "dozens of new 

projects." In fact, I think the other day, the Premier was talking about 200 new projects. 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Public Works): — What did you do, Bill? 

 

MR. DAVIES: — You will hear in a few minutes, Mr. Minister of Public Works and I wish that you would 

just contain yourself, because you might learn something to your own advantage. But if the dozens of new 

projects do emerge like the crash program of last fall, Mr. Speaker, their helpful assistance to any community 

is very doubtful indeed. 

 

You know that Saskatoon's Mayor Buckwold — and I think that his opinion as a prominent member of the 

Liberal Party might be respected by this Government — apparently saw little or no relief to be provided for 

his community. Now he is quoted in the Star Phoenix of January 26, 1971 as saying: 

 

Unless construction work is available, workers will go looking elsewhere for work as they 

did last year. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

The value of construction this year will not materially improve unless there is significant 

spending on government projects . . . 

 

This, of course was said at least two months after the announcement of the crash program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mayor Buckwold should be at least as well informed as any other urban official. He plainly 

sees there is no room for optimism created by either Liberal Federal or Provincial action to help construction 

programs. Added to this, the Star Phoenix of December 31, 1970, published a Canada-wide survey which 

found that 41 per cent of all Saskatoon firms contacted said they would be laying off workers during the first 

four months of 1971. Saskatoon was the worst off city in this respect of any city in Canada. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, with a good Liberal mayor and the important economic stimulus of the Canada Winter 

Games, if Saskatoon is in this position, other Saskatchewan cities can hardly be faring any better. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — It all adds up to this in any case, Mr. Speaker, the crash program of the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Government is proving to be extremely ineffective and inadequate at a time when programs of a 

genuinely forceful effect are urgently required. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

305 

MR. THATCHER: — We are doing better than Mr. Schreyer. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — I am coming to Manitoba later on, Mr. Premier. Again, I invite you to exercise a little 

uncustomary patience. 

 

I am always amazed, Mr. Speaker, and really often entertained by the way in which the present Minister of 

Public Works, the former Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) presents statistics to the House. He has a real 

flair for presenting a list of unrelated facts joined together with his own erroneous conclusions. But one has 

to admire his audacity if one must deplore his dashing disdain for reality. 

 

Yesterday, he used this method in an effort to befog the principal issues facing the province on 

unemployment. First, he suggested that Saskatchewan's unemployment position had improved considerably 

last year, whereas Manitoba’s and Alberta’s had not done so well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is evident that at this moment the unemployment rates in the Prairie Provinces are very much 

the same. They don't vary substantially. Manitoba’s and Alberta’s are up slightly. It isn’t hard to see why and 

I’ve explained some of the reasons for this. 

 

At the beginning of 1970, both provinces were well behind the high Saskatchewan unemployed rate which 

reached 24,000 in mid-winter. But afterwards, when the lack of jobs in Saskatchewan had created a 

disastrous migration of workers to neighboring provinces, the jobless rate of Manitoba and Alberta started to 

climb sharply. Let's look at what happened to their labor force. We heard something from the Minister of 

Public Works yesterday. From September, 1969 to September, 1970 Manitoba and Alberta had respectively, 

labor force increases of 16,000 and 19,000, but the Saskatchewan labor force fell 7,000 in the same period. 

 

Last year’s Saskatchewan jobless figures were much higher than her Prairie Province neighbors and it is easy 

to understand that any relief that Saskatchewan has had since has not been through new jobs but through 

forced migration of our worker population to other provinces. 

 

Both the Premier and the Minister of Public Works claim that Saskatchewan under the CCF had a higher 

unemployment rate. Well, Mr. Speaker, whatever that rate was, it was then still the lowest on the Prairies 

and the lowest rate in Canada. It must be recalled, of course, that 10 years ago we were experiencing a very 

deep recession in Canada. Also, Saskatchewan had in 1961, the most difficult drought year since the 1930s. 

The problems in agriculture were more natural than the political causes we know today. It should be 

emphasized the unemployment then was not deliberately created as it has been in 1970 by the policies of a 

Liberal Federal Government at Ottawa, aided by its ally, the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, for the record, the comparison of unemployment levels for the years 1961 

and 1970. The comparison is as follows: in 1961 a very bad year for unemployment as I have said, 

Saskatchewan had a jobless rate of 7.1. Both Manitoba and Alberta had jobless rates at that time, Mr. 

Minister of Public Works, above the Saskatchewan rate. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

306 

But in 1970, the situation for the whole year is as follows: the jobless rate for Saskatchewan was 5.5 per 

cent; for Manitoba 4.4 per cent; for Alberta 4.2 per cent. So even an elementary study will show that the 

Minister of Public Works when he turns his mind to some statistics should really repeat all of them and not 

superficially glance only at those that seem to please him. 

 

I want to point out to the Minister of Public Works and to the Premier, because he too has been guilty of 

uttering a number of these misleading statements on statistics, that there has been a change in the method of 

recording unemployment statistics since 1965, so that a direct comparison of the rates of the present day with 

the rates of 1961 is not fairly possible. But I am saying that whatever basis you take, the 1961 level does not 

indicate that Saskatchewan had not done her best to eliminate unemployment. 

 

But to go on to the question of Manitoba — I believe an aside from the Premier a few minutes ago indicated 

a question in this regard. The Minister of Public Works (Mr. Coderre) yesterday said that the CCF 

Government had spent only $2 million on public works in 1962 to combat unemployment. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — Check Public Accounts. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Lionel, you just better look at your records again because the budget of 1962 included 

capital investment of over $85 million for construction. Of this $16 million was for new public buildings. 

Now, how much better was this record than that of the present Liberal Government in 1970 and 1971. 

Remember, Mr. Speaker, that the total Provincial Budget in 1962 was $172 million, compared with last 

year's of $405 million — two and one-half times higher. I suppose we may also expect that this year's budget 

will be higher than $405 million. The effort of today's Liberal Government, in fighting unemployment is 

certainly not commensurate with these vastly increased figures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this Session we have heard some pretty disparaging comments from Government 

Cabinet men about the Manitoba Government, including those of the Premier, who by the way I notice refers 

to Premier Schreyer — some 16 years his junior — as "Old Ed." This House should be interested to know 

the able way that young Mr. Premier Schreyer and his Government functions. Last April, the Manitoba 

Government created a capital supply fund of $32 million. In October of last year, Manitoba announced a 

massive $74 million capital works program to create 5,200 jobs. On December 1 of 1970 Premier Schreyer 

announced another program for 3,600 housing units, low-cost housing units, for a further $56 million — part 

of a five-year plan for 21,000 low-cost housing units. Now, I would say we could use a little more of the 

brand of planning and action shown by the Manitoba Schreyer Government in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — It is again, to me, a bit ironical that many of our own unemployed and others who will 

leave if we don't provide meaningful work programs in Saskatchewan may be recipients of the benefits 

conferred by the Schreyer program in Manitoba. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

307 

The other day, Mr. Speaker, we heard from the Premier on how he would protect Saskatchewan from the 

alleged misdoings and abuses of labor organizations and labor bosses. I want to say more about this later. I 

couldn't help reflecting you know, on the better results we might achieve in alleviating unemployment 

brought about by deliberate Liberal policies, if the Thatcher Government would spend even a fraction of its 

oratorical rantings on the real villain in the piece - unemployment. 

 

Over the most recent ten-year period for which figures are provided by the Department of Labour, less time 

has been lost in the entire average year because of strikes, than was lost by one day of unemployment in 

Saskatchewan last year. For each day of 1970 we had 15,500 people jobless, whereas the average strike loss 

yearly from 1958 to 1968 was under that, 14,500 man-days. Even in 1970, which showed the largest amount 

of man-days lost by strikes on record in Saskatchewan (this almost entirely because of a strike provoked in 

the construction industry by this Government) there were 54,400 days lost by strikes, compared to 3,800,000 

days lost by unemployment. The long-term average for Saskatchewan has been a ratio of 190 days lost by 

unemployment annually, for each one day lost by strikes. Even last year, when strike time losses were the 

highest ever, the ratio was but 1.5 days lost by strikes to every 100 days lost by unemployment. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is high time that this Government adopted a positive labor policy. It could begin by 

attacking the real problems of labor and the community, such as unemployment, rather than staging an 

annual charade in which it pillories labor people and confuses the real problems. 

 

Last year, on the Dominion bureau of Statistics figures I have quoted, and using the most conservative 

figures on weekly wages, workers in Saskatchewan lost $92 million in earnings because of unemployment. 

Assuming that the value of their production had they been employed, would have amounted to at least three 

times the value of wages, another $276 million would have been lost to this province. In other words, Mr. 

Speaker, a combined total loss of wages and production of $368 million. The same attention might be 

conscientiously applied to other losses of time in industry. Last year, I appealed to this Government to make 

reforms in compensation legislation and administration. I appealed for a sound policy of accident prevention 

in industry. Members even on the other side of the House joined in deploring the lack of progress in this 

connection. Because you know, there is from 10 to 13 times the time lost in strikes, lost because of accidents 

in industry. These are only the ones that are annually reported to the compensation board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken about ways and means by which a Saskatchewan Government can create 

work-making projects in periods of heavy unemployment. But there are other aspects which I think we have 

to consider. Lost purchasing power, low wages, including low minimum wages and long hours of work, are 

other areas where enlightened policy needs to be concentrated. It has not been so applied by the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Government. Let us look briefly at the minimum wage. It is 20 and 25 per cent 

respectively below the rates of Manitoba and Alberta. The Saskatchewan Government says it is going to go 

up. So it should! Why has the Government waited so long? Once Saskatchewan led the whole country with 

the highest minimum wage. Now we lag behind every major province. The effect is that our low-paid 

workers, that is, those who are unorganized in industries where 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

308 

the minimum wage or close to it applies, lose every week close to $300,000 because our minimum wage 

levels are under those even of our two prairie province neighbors. 

 

This is a very grave loss in buying power to the people who are most directly concerned and to business and 

employment everywhere in the province. Surely, no one can say, no one can argue, that higher minimum 

wages are inflationary. Why has the Saskatchewan Government waited so long? Why does the Government 

wait until the Legislative Session to announce that increases will be made? The message in the Speech from 

the Throne for example. This Legislature, Mr. Speaker, has not the slightest authority to deal with the 

minimum wage. This authority belongs to the Cabinet. The Cabinet's procrastination in acting to institute 

even a modest increase, which I am sure it is going to be, which I am sure it is contemplating, is completely 

irresponsible. It has contributed to the hardship for the workers directly concerned on the one hand and to 

provincial unemployment through the lower purchasing power it has engendered, on the other. 

 

Under a CCF Government this province led Canada with respect to minimum wage rates. This was during a 

time when there was no federal minimum wage, as there is now, of $1.65 per hour, and when provincial 

governments everywhere had rates far, far below the Saskatchewan minimums. Mr. Speaker, a higher 

minimum wage never hurt this province. Rather, the reverse is true. We should restore the leadership in 

minimum wages that Saskatchewan once gave to Canada. This Government should at the very least, 

immediately institute the minimum standard of the Federal and the Ontario governments of $1.65 an hour. 

We should not stop there. We should move on to a living minimum wage. Again, I suggest to the 

Government that the Canadian Welfare Council should be asked to make a study of all the factors concerned 

and recommend what is a fair and just rate for a minimum wage in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we haven't had basic reforms in hours of work laws since 1947, 24 years ago, almost a quarter 

of a century. It is time to move to a legal 40-hour week, and it is not too early to consider schedules of 36 

and even 30 hours weekly for workers, especially for those who are being decimated by automation and by 

technology. If we do not have the courage to take this kind of action, unemployed ranks in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, will swell to an unprecedented degree. We have got to get moving, we should be moving, we 

should be doing it at once! 

 

I have previously pointed out to the House that since World War II, North American society has moved 

increasingly to a stage where larger numbers of our wage earners are members of the so-called service 

industries. Such has been the development of the goods-producing industries that applied technology permits 

vastly greater production with fewer people. Without the service industries we should have a tremendous 

army of unemployed. A great part of this group is unorganized. The employees need superior hours 

protection to that which is provided at present. Equally important, society needs lower hours in the service 

industry to create employment, just as we need lower hours for the same reason in the goods-producing 

industries where automation has displaced so many. 

 

I want to say categorically this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that New Democrats are prepared to move decisively 

on improved hours and on minimum wages. I say that our record substantiates 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

309 

our intention. The meagre attention given by the Liberal Party in this Province to this vital protection is yet 

another reason why they cannot command or cannot appeal for support, among wage earners in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A few months ago, Mr. Speaker, the Premier stated flatly that the big issue in this Legislative Session would 

be labor. He made it plain that this wasn't assistance to labor, but further restriction on labor. He was 

evidently still on the trail of trying to make working people the scapegoat for ills which the Liberal Party 

Governments in Ottawa and Regina have either caused, or stimulated, or permitted to grow. The Premier 

now apparently says that compulsory arbitration through Labour Courts, another form of Bill 2, I presume, 

will not be proceeded with. But the Throne Speech does suggest that Bill 2 will be changed to enmesh other 

workers than are now embraced in its wide coverage. 

 

I was interested last Friday to hear again the Premier declaim and thunder about the dictation of labor bosses. 

He also charged that labor troubles were politically inspired. 

 

I want to deal with other aspects in just a moment, Mr. Speaker, but may I first say that if any labor boss is 

striving to intimidate the Premier, it would be revealing if he would name him and the occasion for which 

the abuse that he claims in this House can be proven. I had the impression during the construction dispute 

(the work stoppage of last year) that the hard statements and the many warnings and the eternal threats were 

a pretty one-sided proposition, emanating mostly from Government circles. 

 

The veiled charge, Mr. Speaker, that strikes are caused by people for political gain or position is completely 

untrue. The Government often likes to mention or allude to the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour in this 

context. Well, the other day we had an answer tabled in this House by the Labour Minister. It reveals very 

clearly, better than I can say, that most of the time loss in strikes last year came by reason of disputes in the 

construction industry. None of the unions that were concerned in those disputes, Mr. Speaker, were affiliates 

of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. The very great majority of time loss, in fact, came from disputes 

involving unions who either were not affiliated, or had no affiliation with any political party, let alone the 

New Democratic Party of this Province. 

 

The idea that disputes are caused by political manoeuvering is quite false except with respect to one factor, 

that is the one bound up in the political stance of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. They have been 

working to, they have been prepared to, hamstring collective bargaining and hurt wages and working 

conditions in the interest of catering to prejudice, cultivating political advantage and satisfying the demands 

of those who favor the discredited ideas and theories on modern-day collective bargaining and industrial 

relations. 

 

What was the occasion for the large strike time losses of 1970? Of course as I said, it was the work stoppage 

of construction workers. The kernel of their dispute with employers was their striving to get parity with 

counterparts in other prairie centres — like Medicine Hat, Calgary, Edmonton, Red Deer, Brandon and 

Winnipeg. We know that the Liberal Government invoked Bill 2. But first of all the Government flatly 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

310 

declared that a 6 per cent guideline must be observed regardless of parity, and contractors, employers, 

owners, were warned not to exceed it on pain of Government recrimination and retaliation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is altogether likely that collective bargaining would have settled the dispute, if the 

Government hadn't entered the field. Regardless of what anyone thinks of the merits of the construction 

workers' requests, there is no doubt at all that true collective bargaining became absolutely impossible after 

the intervention of the Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Mr. Speaker, there are many people who believe — and I think wrongly — that 

compulsory arbitration is a good idea. Most of them also feel that the construction workers were not entitled 

to equivalent wages with their fellow workers in other prairie centres. But the significant thing really, in the 

whole exercise, was to see a process in operation about which I had previously expressed fears regarding Bill 

2. This was that the Government not only appointed an arbitration board to adjudicate in the dispute, it went 

on to appear before the board to demand that its own guidelines be adhered to. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that such pressure is dangerous when a government uses it on its own employees. But it 

is even more alarming and even more dangerous when a government seeks to impose its ideas and its will 

upon private parties. This is the kind of corporate state setup that we saw in Italy under Mussolini and indeed 

in Germany under Hitler. 

 

In its whole counterfeit action against inflation, the Government did not once move to ensure that the 

earnings of non-union management people in the construction industry, be controlled or those of any other 

industry for that matter. This was not made part of any arbitration. The Government did not move to restrain 

prices of building materials or of housing. Indeed, in the larger spheres of consideration the Government 

centered only on the wage question. The Government studiously avoided any direct attempt to control prices 

or interest rates, or profiteering, or rents, or the like. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that this highly biased and vindictive attitude and policy has perhaps been the biggest 

single reason behind the mass exodus from Saskatchewan of thousands of our artisans who have been trained 

at considerable pains and expense in this province. 

 

Whatever brand of justice in our social relationships is to be administered it should be done, Mr. Speaker, 

fairly and evenly. The Government's wage guidelines and the employment of Bill 2 in the case of hospital 

workers as compared with the granting of $3,000 increase to doctors (18 times that provided on the average 

to non-professional workers) are scarcely examples of equity and of justice. It is difficult to see how even a 

supporter of compulsory arbitration could agree with the way in which hospital workers were treated. 

People, Mr. Speaker, I say again, whose incomes are at, or very close to, the poverty line in many instances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say the Government moved to control employees' wages in the province without attacking 

prices or any other cost 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

311 

element. In the circumstances the action was, to say the least and to put it mildly, ill-advised and 

discriminatory. The unhappy results are continuing to mount. For example, wage differences between 

Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada have widened. This has spurred the widespread movement of 

Saskatchewan people to other areas of the country. Five years ago the average weekly wage in Saskatchewan 

was less than $6 below the national average. Today it's about $13 below. We used to be about $5 under the 

weekly wage in Alberta. Now we are about $14 a week under. In 1966 we led Manitoba by a little more than 

$5 weekly. Today, our average wage is less than the average wage of Manitoba. 

 

The Premier in this debate said that his party was not anti-labor. He said that he wanted — and I quote him 

directly — "a well-paid labor force makes for a healthy Province." And who can disagree. But the actions of 

this Government have deliberately been to lower wages and to increase earnings inequities. His statement in 

this debate directly contradicts the willful and the studied course of his party in which compulsion and 

restriction have operated to the detriment of either good management-labor relations or a prosperous 

Province. 

 

Over the past six months, a torrent of unreliable and complete nonsense has issued from the mouths of some 

Government leaders about labor courts. They have even urged, you know, the Swedish labor court as an 

example, although it is instantly apparent that what the Premier wants is ongoing forced arbitration of all 

labor disputes. Mr. Speaker, for the record let me state again, what anyone in this House can find out who 

wants to invest just 30 minutes of his time. That is, the Swedes' right to strike is virtually complete. The 

Swedes' right to strike exceeds our own anywhere in Canada. Their Labor Court operates only to determine 

disputes arising during the lifetime of a union contract. It doesn't touch contract negotiations. Negotiations 

and collective bargaining are highly centralized but government interference as such is practically 

non-existent. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — No wildcat strikes! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — And if anyone looks at the Swedish system he will see that the government operates to 

expedite, to help the people concerned get the facts. It does not interfere. It does not coerce. And close 

studies of the industrial relations background and system in Sweden has already been accomplished by a 

number of Canadian studies, such as that of Mr. Justice N. Nemetz of the British Columbia Superior Court 

in 1968. He makes clear everything that I have said and adds to it. He points out significantly, for example, 

the mediation procedures, research and information — gathering machinery and the decisive place of trade 

unions in the Swedish community, are the vital reasons why Swedish work stoppages have been so few in 

the last 15 years. These are the fundamentals which the Liberal Government in Saskatchewan refuses to 

implement, which the Liberal Government refuses to encourage and refuses to assist. 

 

The main reason why there has been comparative labor peace in Sweden over the last three decades is 

because the Swedish labor movement, the Swedish labor people, have really been treated as partners in the 

national system. What a difference! What a change to that situation that exists in this province! 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

312 

During the past year I noted that some Government leaders have made reference favorably to Australian 

arbitration. Well, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Frances Bairstow, who is Associate Director of the McGill Institute of 

Industrial Relations, a body which I think commands the respect of everyone in Canada, spent all of 1970 on 

a bursary, studying Australian methods. She has concluded — and she had a number of articles running in 

this vein in the Montreal Star not so long ago — that compulsory arbitration — and I quote her: 

 

Does not work well in Australia and would work less well in Canada. 

 

In fact in one of the articles in the Montreal Star she made the outright remark that the Australian 

compulsory system is sick. 

 

So, in spite of compulsion in Australia, it is revealing to note that proportionate strike time losses in terms of 

man-days, have exceeded both the Canada and the Saskatchewan rate. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Australia is currently going through a lot of soul-searching about its 

machinery for industrial relations. It is very evident that Australians are not at all happy with what they have 

a present. It is also evident that they have fewer work stoppages than they would have had, perhaps, because 

they do have a system of codes and regulations which provide wage floors, vacations and other benefits for 

hundreds of thousands of their workers, an omission, by the way, which I think is very notable in Canada. 

 

We have minimum wages here. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) might be interested in this comment. But 

we do not have this system of wage floors in different occupational classifications which I think we should 

look at a great deal more in Canada, including Saskatchewan, where we have the authority to institute them 

under The Minimum Wage Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I earlier made reference to The Workmen's Compensation Act and problems relating thereto. I 

want, at this time to renew the recommendations that I have consistently made in the Legislature to revamp 

and to improve our present Act, and the regulations and the administration that are pertinent to it. 

 

I here want to remind the House of the excellent and thoughtful speech that was made in the Legislature last 

year by the now Leader of our party, Mr. Blakeney. He appropriately pointed out at that time among other 

things that we needed to sharply revise our concepts of workmen's compensation to confirm with 

modern-day needs and to changing ideas and practices. I think that we have not kept pace with this modern 

outlook. I believe this has undoubtedly been a prime cause for increasing unrest and what I think is 

legitimate discontent of workmen with compensation law and administration. 

 

Last year, you know, this House had an excellent discussion on compensation problems. There was a 

measure of real agreement on the need for decisive changes. I should hope — I address my remarks 

particularly to the Minister of Labour (Mr. MacLennan) — that the Government amendments should try to 

take genuine account of these aspects. I should hope that when the Minister introduces legislation to amend 

The Compensation Act that it would cover the more vital, the more significant and principle matters, 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

313 

and not small and insignificant items. I look forward to hearing from the Minister in this regard. 

 

Could I also commend to his attention the recommendation that has been made by myself and others for a 

Review Board to hear grievances and complaints on Workmen's Compensation Board matters and decisions 

affecting injured workmen. I note that the Injured Workmen's Association has been formed in Saskatoon. 

They are urgently pressing this idea. I think consideration should be given to it. I want to make it clear that I 

do not myself favor a superior board that would overrule the decisions of the Compensation Board. I think 

there is a genuine place for a review body, however, that would act as the conscience of the Compensation 

Board — that would help it to bestir itself from what I think is a moribund position that it has for some time 

occupied. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the issue for the Province's 240,000 odd wage and salary earners in this debate is 

bound up in the inadequate treatment of issues like unemployment, the minimum wage, workmen's 

compensation and the like. It is also concerned very vitally, with the proposal for amendments to Bill 2. The 

entire issue of Government labor policy, including compulsion, is reflected in all of these questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Liberal Government has implemented restrictions and compulsions destructive of the 

bargaining process. It has acted to prevent fair wages and salaries for employees commensurate with other 

provinces. It has not maintained or attempted to maintain, leadership in labor standards. Above all it has not 

kept its promises to labor. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — It has not provided 80,000 new jobs. Rather it has lost us population. It has not provided 

better wages. It has increased inequities. The clear course for the largest section of our Saskatchewan 

population — wage earners — is to reject this Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because the Throne Speech has failed the needs of labor and the needs of Saskatchewan, I shall 

vote for the amendment and against the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Hon. Member would 

care to answer a question. He mentioned a moment ago something like in 1962 — I think you mentioned it 

after — you said in 1962 we had a major crop failure, etc. etc., and that that year you had spent $70 million 

in capital projects. Is that correct? 

 

MR. DAVIES: — I think I said this, Mr. Speaker, that in 1961 — as everyone knows in the House — we 

had a major drought and therefore the effects of a crop failure. The following year — in 1962 — the 

Legislature and of course the Government, had to cope with this situation. It was in that year, however, that a 

major budget of some $74 million was proposed, I think, at that time by the Provincial Treasurer, my friend, 

Mr. Blakeney. Included 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

314 

in that, was some $60 million for the Department of Public Works. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — Therefore, I should like to raise a point of order because the records of the House 

indicate that they are definitely wrong. I am referring to Public Accounts, Page 498 where in 1962 . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! We can't have a second debate here. The Member has already spoken if I 

remember correctly. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, and I haven't had the chance to speak. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — That's not a debating point and if it's a debating point, it's not a point of order. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — Mr. Speaker, but I haven't had a chance to state my point of order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! If the Member has a point of order I will listen to the point of order. Now 

what's the point of order. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — My point of order is, Mr. Speaker, that the Public Accounts are incorrect then. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Now, it's not for the Chair to verify the Public Accounts and everything else that goes 

on. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.J. CHARLEBOIS (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am having a great 

time to get up on my feet but I should like very much this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to speak in tribute to the 

people of Saskatchewan about a national event in which the people of our province were directly involved. 

 

Les Jeux D'hiver du Canada mil neuf cent soixante et onze. 

 

ALL HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — The 1971 Canada Winter Games, one of the most thrilling spectacles ever to take 

place in Canada. The Games represent one of the greatest voluntary achievements in the history of this 

province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — It started with the enthusiasm of a few dedicated and public spirited citizens and 

through their efforts the Games were awarded to Saskatoon in competition with ten other cities. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

315 

The undertaking was rather a fantastic one in scope for a city of 130,000 . . . 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — . . . and going down! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — You know, little Davey used to say, "Wiggle, wiggle little Al," you'll never get out 

of Saskatoon being the greatest city in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — By Games time more than 2,000 voluntary workers were involved. The 

professional staff was kept to a minimum for the size of the operation but they were certainly a very 

dedicated staff and at Games time numbered about 40. The three levels of government were involved. The 

Canada Department of Physical Fitness is to be commended for initiating the idea of the Canada Games and 

the concept of community involvement is certainly one of the keys to success. The fact that the Canada 

Games are for our youth, and for amateur sport, means that through them Canada will soon take its proper 

place in international competition. The Canada Games is one of the finest programs for youth ever conceived 

any place. 

 

The part played by the Province of Saskatchewan is really a commendable and interesting one. The Youth 

Agency of Saskatchewan under the Hon. C. MacDonald played a very vital part from start to finish. Just the 

playdowns throughout the province for the 16 sports — this alone was a major undertaking. On top of this, 

of course, was the organization and supervision of the teams during the Games. 

 

The part played by the Department of Natural Resources under the Hon. Ross Barrie was one of real 

involvement and co-operation. Because the ski facility, Mount Blackstrap, is in a provincial park — many 

hours of detailed organization were necessary. Every member of the Department who took part did so in a 

completely enthusiastic and dedicated manner. Other departments of this Government were also involved; 

SaskTel in the communications; the Saskatchewan Transportation Company; the Attorney General's 

Department — all of these played a very important role. 

 

So, many, many people were responsible for this great event, an event which was not only a display of 

Canadian unity but an outstanding example of what can be achieved in a province and in a community 

through a spirited joining of effort toward a common goal. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — In our organization in Saskatoon we had roughly 40 committees — 16 sports 

required 16 committees plus the technical advisory committee. Close to 20 committees were required for 

administration for such things as feeding the athletes, accommodation, the facilities (the sports facilities), 

transportation, communication, security, and medical. Medical alone had 200 volunteer doctors and 300 

nurses. At every sports venue while the Games were underway they had two doctors in attendance and two 

nurses at every venue at all times. The 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

316 

medical staff and the volunteer staff were on a 24-hour basis. By this I don't mean at all the venues but they 

were on call for the full time of the Games. 

 

These committees worked endless hours in preparation but the result was completely gratifying. We have 

received many compliments that our sports events under Mr. Hugh Tait were the best run of any ever held in 

Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — One executive of the Bombardier Ski-Doo Company, Mr. Tremblay, said that our 

skiing competitions were the best run of any he had ever attended and he has been involved in a great many. 

And I think that this is a tribute because this is a brand new thing in the Saskatoon area. 

 

And the spirit of competition of the athletes was a thrilling thing for everyone. A young 13 year old gymnast 

from British Columbia will certainly become an Olympic champion. The same could be seen in figure 

skating and in many of the other sports. And Mr. Berezowsky's granddaughter was a medal winner in the 

figure skating. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — I think that here we should like to congratulate Bill Berezowsky (Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland) on this because he can be very proud indeed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — The accommodation of the athletes was a most imaginative scheme with our 

Games Village at Eaton's old store accommodating close to 900 athletes, with a 16-bed infirmary and having 

a whole floor for recreation. The meals were served on our convention floor at the Centennial Auditorium 

and we served approximately 1,500 at each sitting because this took in some others besides the athletes. The 

Centennial Auditorium was also our Games headquarters and here with reference to meals we received many 

compliments about the quality of the food and the manner of serving. 

 

The transportation was a very large undertaking and it was extremely well handled. The communications 

included the largest switchboard in Saskatchewan as well as very complete two-way radio system, a part of 

which involved the Armed Forces. Many other committees such as the ceremonies and protocol had equal 

responsibilities. Our ceremonies, especially the opening and closing were simply magnificent and completely 

thrilling and we were proud to have such a great number of dignitaries, including the Governor General of 

Canada, the Prime Minister, our own Premier, the Premier of Nova Scotia and many, many others. But 

particularly to see the young athletes marching proudly in their colorful uniforms behind the flag of their 

province or territory, made us thrill to be Canadians. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — Now in order to have 2,200 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

317 

athletes completing in the Games, playdowns were required at the Provincial level. This involved in total, 

some estimate, up to 500,000 athletes in some stage of competition for the Games across Canada and 

including the Yukon and the North West Territories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had Eskimos as participants in our Canada Winter Games. Now every province and the two 

territories were represented at the Games. The Games were financed in this way: from the Federal and 

Provincial Governments and the city of Saskatoon $200,000 each for a total of $600,000 towards capital 

expenditure. From the Federal Government $900,000 for operational expenditures including transportation 

of athletes and officials to the Games, feeding of athletes, housing and so on. And included in this figure was 

a requirement on our part as a society to raise $105,000 through ticket revenue. When you think that the 

tickets ranged from 50 cents for students to $1 and $1.50 for adults, this was quite an undertaking. We raised 

more than $172,000 . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — . . . from the friends of the Games, that is the national companies, the local 

companies and individuals. Gifts in kind $375,000; cash donations $60,000 and from the Lucky Dog lottery 

(and thank God for the Lucky Dog lottery) $300,000. 

 

This means a total of $2,235,000. I might say, Mr. Speaker, this of course is not an audited figure it is a 

round figure at this time. The reports will be made at the windup of the society. The reports of the committee 

including the financial reports are underway at this time. 

 

When we consider the accelerated spending this generates I think that it is fair to say that a conservative 

figure as an estimate of the financial impact of these Games here in the Province of Saskatchewan, would be 

something in the neighborhood of $7 to $8 million. 

 

Now naturally some question arises about the original budget and the necessity to raise money through 

friends of the Games and the lottery. Well, the answer is that in order to do the kind of job that we, as proud 

citizens of Saskatchewan would want to do, we simply required more than the budget allowed. Our capital 

budget of $600,000 was designed to give us a proper speed skating oval and a ski facility which we are now 

proud to call Mount Blackstrap. Now none of the governments involved were asked to exceed their original 

commitment. 

 

In order to put on the Winter Games, night lighting, permanent public address systems and many other items 

were essential. But, we of the Canada Winter Games Society, are leaving as a legacy to the Province and the 

city of Saskatoon a speed skating oval complete with very adequately furnished and comfortable dressing 

rooms, night lighting, PA system, without any question the finest speed skating facility in Canada today and 

declared by many as the finest in North America. 

 

So too, with Mount Blackstrap we have achieved for the Province of Saskatchewan in a provincial park a 

very thrilling ski complex, night lighting, telephone communication from top to bottom, a lovely ski lodge, a 

pro shop, a T bar tow with a 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

318 

terminal building, a judges' stand for the 50 metre jump, two rope tows, snow making equipment with a 

complete underground system, hill grooming equipment. That ski facility has the works. You name it and it 

is there, everything. It is a beautiful thing for this province. 

 

This has turned Blackstrap Park into a year-round playground for our people. There we shall have, not only 

skiing, but tobogganing and ski-dooing on the lake. In the summertime, of course, we already have the 

boating, water skiing, the sailing and so on. The Mountain was put to use in December and one of the 

problems with the rope tows is that they are designed for 350 skiers per hour and they are averaging, or they 

were averaging before the Games, 745 skiers per hour. 

 

Now Buffalo Pound is justifiably proud of its White Track but our last comparison check showed their daily 

high was 550 skiers for one day, at Blackstrap the high was 711. And I say this only to point to the picture of 

the future recreational benefit to all the people. 

 

The revenue at Blackstrap Mountain to January 24, 1971, was $11,500. We closed down, of course, prior to 

the Games and during the Games there was no public skiing. Now the number of people participating up to 

the same date was 8,890. The total spectators up to that time were 24,000. The weekend before the Games 

commenced there were 1,000 cars parked on the ice below the Mountain representing about 4,000 people. 

During the Games on one day we had the largest crowd of spectators ever to witness a skiing competition in 

Canada. Close to 3,500 cars and 14,000 paid admissions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — To give you some idea of the enthusiasm and excitement last Friday, the arena 

was jammed to the rafters for hockey. The gymnastics was completely sold out as was wrestling, and our 

2,000 capacity Centennial Auditorium was completely sold out for Ernie Chan's Folk Festival. This was an 

ethnic festival that tied in beautifully with the Games. It was completely sold out and this was the same day 

that the skiing had its largest crowd. 

 

In order to cover the Winter Games we had the largest gathering of news media ever assembled to cover a 

sporting event in Canada, more than 450 news media people. This means that it tops the Grey Cup, it tops 

the MacDonald Briar or any other event held in sports in Canada. 

 

These were not only the top people in the business from Canada, but it included one from Russia, one from 

Czechoslovakia, one from Sweden, one from Finland and two from Switzerland. Besides the benefit of their 

publicity the average spending of the news media people is estimated at about $30 a day. The spending of the 

athletes totalled between $85,000 and $100,000. I see someone laugh about the news media spending that 

much money, but I think that you will agree that when they get out of town they get to be great swingers. Our 

night spots were really swinging. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I apologize for interrupting the Hon. Member from Saskatoon 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

319 

City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois). 

I draw to the attention of all Hon. Members to the fact that Rule No. 13 in the Legislature calls for the 

Speaker to put the vote on the amendment at 30 minutes before the ordinary time of day of adjournment. 

Accordingly I put the question before the House on the amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 22 

Blakeney Bowerman Kramer 

Messer Wood Romanow 

Lloyd Davies Dewhurst 

Meakes Berezowsky Thibault 

Snyder Michayluk Brockelbank 

Baker Pepper Matsalla 

Wooff Kwasnica Kowalchuk 

Byers   

 

NAYS — 31 

Thatcher Howes McFarlane 

Boldt Cameron Steuart 

Heald McIsaac Guy 

Barrie Loken MacDougall 

Grant  Coderre MacDonald 

Estey MacLennan Gallagher 

Hooker Heggie Breker 

Leith Radloff Weatherald 

Gardiner Coupland McPherson 

Charlebois Forsyth McIvor 

Schmeiser   

The debate continues on the main motion. 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — Mr. Speaker, I was mentioning about the spending that was involved in regard to 

the Games, the estimated spending, and I mentioned that the spending of the athletes would total $85,000 to 

$100,000. The revenue to local hotels for rooms, that is outside of athletes completely, was at least 

$165,000. The spectators over and above the local people at an average of $10 a day would exceed $500,000. 

I cite these figures, Mr. Speaker, only to remind those who think that the Canada Winter Games are a waste 

of money and that they more than carry themselves financially. The impetus that they have given to our 

province and to the city of Saskatoon is simply an amazing thing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — I should like to say a word about the contributors to the Games — those to whom 

we are extremely grateful for their generosity and their realization that they have contributed to something 

that will have a very lasting effect. Without any attempt to name them all, I am going to give you a few 

examples; the Xerox Corporation who donated the use of three very large machines and supplied literally 

tons of copy paper. Each one of these machines copied at the rate of one copy per second. The General 

Motors Company supplied 65 vehicles including trucks, 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

320 

panels and cars. The Underwood Ollivetti Company — 150 typewriters. The Longines-Wittnauer people 

brought in and donated the use of one ton of electronic equipment that was flown in from Switzerland. This 

equipment was worth more than $1 million. The equipment at Mount Blackstrap was identical to that used 

for the Olympics at Grenoble in France. That for speed skating was of the same calibre. It was suited for 

world competition and had timing to the one-thousandth of a second. Besides this they supplied their three 

top timing technicians from Europe as well as Mr. Ross Jenkins, their top man for North America. Mr. 

Jenkins said that it was not only one of the best run meets, but what impressed him most was the warmth of 

our people. I think it was a great tribute to our people from this gentleman who has his headquarters in New 

York. The chartered banks provided the lighting for the mountain; the Co-ops joined together to furnish the 

ski lodge; Labatts donated full time one of their executive people for the Lucky Dog lottery; Eatons donated 

the use of their vacated store for our unique Games Village. The list is one that goes on and on, boxing 

gloves, the underlay for the gymnastics mat. One individual donated the Volley Ball nets. 

 

I should like to tell you some of the things that will be left in Saskatoon besides the Mountain and the speed 

skating oval; $35,000 worth of portable bleachers; a world competition type gymnastics mat and two 

complete sets of gymnastic apparatus — this apparatus by the way is what they use in world competition — 

the finest boxing ring that you ever saw, plus boxing mitts, wrestling mats, two of the very finest wrestling 

mats, judo mats, electronic fencing decks, a weight lifting platform and all of the necessities for top level 

weight lifting competitions. Every sport involved in the Canada Winter Games has benefited in some way. A 

complete set of tennis tables will be left right here in the province. Figure skating in Saskatoon was changed 

from a deplorable sound system to one of the very best. Saskatchewan sports have all benefited in some way. 

Most of all in the Province of Saskatchewan we have a new spirit of competition that has never been seen 

before. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — Due to the Games we have a great spirit of comraderie and unity across our 

country that only amateur sport can create. Besides our great competitions in a completely Olympic-type 

atmosphere we had the thrill of a tremendously impressive display of Canadian unity at our opening and 

closing ceremonies. 

 

I have a little note put here not to forget that this was a great kickoff for Homecoming '71. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — I must say this in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that we can be very proud that here in 

Saskatchewan we have had the privilege of being hosts to the 1971 Canada Winter Games. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.R. GUY (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to take part in this Throne Speech Debate I should 

like to congratulate my colleague, the Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan), on his appointment to 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

321 

the Cabinet as Labour Minister. In spite of the fact that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) and 

other Members opposite had some rather harsh comments regarding this appointment I am sure that he will 

prove a valuable addition to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I should like to congratulate the mover (Mr. Mitchell) and the seconder (Mr. Schmeiser) of the Speech from 

the Throne, for the excellent job they did in presenting the Government's position on many of today's 

pertinent subjects. I should like to congratulate both the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) and the 

Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Romanow) for their success in obtaining those positions. Someone 

has to be elected or appointed to those positions in the Opposition and I am sure that they are as capable of 

fulfilling them as any other Members in their party. In fact the leadership convention last summer was 

watched with considerable interest by the people of Saskatchewan. It was generally conceded by many that 

any change would be an improvement for the NDP but subsequent months have shown that this might not be 

the case. We recognized the former leader to be honestly and sincerely a left-wing doctrinaire Socialist. He 

did so from conviction rather than from convenience. During the campaign speeches by three of the four 

candidates stated they were moderates and the Wafflers were no issue in Saskatchewan. That seemed to 

assure that the new Leader (Mr. Blakeney) would be a middle-of-the-road Socialist. Only Don Mitchell, the 

Waffle candidate was preaching the true Socialist doctrine. It was only after the strong showing of the 

Waffle candidate and the subsequent election of Mr. Blakeney with the declared support of the Wafflers that 

the future direction of the NDP became doubtful. For as former leader Tommy Douglas said, "He who pays 

the piper plays the tune." Since that time we have seen a steady move to the left by the Saskatchewan 

Opposition party and a complete sellout of the moderates to the Waffle group in return for their support at 

the leadership convention. 

 

The farmers in their party were concerned that three of the four candidates were city lawyers that knew 

nothing about farming and they became more concerned when the labor-lawyer leader overlooked several 

farm oriented members to choose a slick labor lawyer as his deputy. The farmers are saying what was wrong 

with the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) what is wrong with the Member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst), 

what is wrong with the Member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk). These are farm people, why weren't they 

appointed as deputy leader? And the truth, of course, is that labor and the Wafflers had complete control 

over who the Leader picked as his deputy. The farmers in this province are concerned about the NDP. It was 

bad enough to have their original farm-oriented party taken over by the labor unions but now to see the 

combination of labor and Wafflers allied against the farmers is more than they can stand, with the result that 

many rural NDPers have left the party and are seeking asylum elsewhere. We have been saying, and we have 

for many years, Mr. Speaker, that there is no place in Saskatchewan, which is still a farm and rural oriented 

province, for a political party that is completely controlled by international labour unions, Marxists, radicals, 

revolutionaries, and who are being led by a Maritime lawyer and former civil servant completely unaware of 

our rural way of life. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the performance of the new Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) has been less 

than spectacular to say the least. He has been proven wrong more often than he has been right. He has fallen 

into the negative approach 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

322 

of his predecessor, has adopted the Socialist tactic of trying to destroy rather than create. He and his party 

have had the happiest year in their life watching the economic difficulties that the Saskatchewan 

Government have bravely faced. In fact, they have been willing to stand by, and in fact they have done even 

more than that, they have gone the length and breadth of this province spreading gloom and doom, spreading 

untruths, and they have done everything in their power to make matters worse than they were. 

 

The far left Socialists among whom our new Leader of the Opposition appears to be a strong follower, have 

always recognized that before they can gain power the present system and structure must be destroyed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like for just a moment to refer to some of the comments the Member from 

Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) made yesterday. I think that there are several comments that he made with which I 

can agree. It is true, unfortunately, that mistrust and suspicion does still exist between our Indian people and 

all governments no matter what their political stripe may be. It is true that they are concerned over their 

treaty rights. However, I cannot agree that that is a reason to abolish our Indian and Metis Department. In 

fact that is the most negative approach I have ever heard from any government or any Member. We are the 

only Government in Canada that is concerned enough about the problems of our Indian people to set up a 

special department solely for looking at Indian problems thus making it possible, for the first time, for our 

Indian people to meet and discuss programs with us. The statement that there are only white men in this 

department is completely false but like all Members opposite they would rather spread untruths than take the 

trouble to find out the facts. It so happens that out of a total staff of 46, 28 are people of Indian ancestry or 61 

per cent. We recognize that there is still a lot to be done but thank heaven we haven't adopted the negative 

attitude of the NDP. We are prepared to work with our Indian friends until progress does result. Our 

assistance in providing employment opportunities, educational programs, housing when needed, services to 

reserves in co-operation with the Federal Government and with the Indian Bands has been well received. I 

know the Indians who have benefited from these programs will take great exception to the NDP program of 

abolishing the Department and the assistance it provides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to make it perfectly clear here today that our Government does not agree with the policy 

of the NDP Government of Manitoba whose approach to Indian problems was expressed by the Hon. Joe 

Borowski, the NDP Minister who is in charge of the Indian and Metis programs of Manitoba. His assertion 

that Indians are lazy and drunk every fourth week does not fit our experience with Indian people. I should 

like to tell the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) that it is statements like this, made by members of 

his own party, that create much of the distrust and suspicion that he referred to yesterday. However, that is 

another NDP example of their negative approach to our native people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not wish to take too much time replying to statements on pollution made by the Member 

from Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) last night as I shall be covering them in detail when I introduce our new 

Clean Environment Authority Act, but it was obvious from the outset that he knows little about his topic. 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

323 

I should like to suggest to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) that if we are to have a rational 

debate on our new Clean Environment Authority Act, that he assign the responsibility to a more mature, 

more knowledgeable Member. However, Mr. Speaker, I did take time this morning to find out why he knew 

so little about his subject because I had expected much better from the Member after I had heard that he had 

been holding pollution meetings among the high school students in his constituency. However, on contacting 

several of the students I found that this was the excuse he used to get them to attend a meeting. When they 

got there all they talked about was the NDP program. As in so many cases in the NDP they use serious 

matters of public concern for their own political purposes. 

 

There is no question that environmental pollution is the concern of everyone today, but it must be 

approached rationally rather than emotionally in order to get anywhere. Before we became the Government 

in 1964, I should remind this House that there was no provincial pollution policy, there was little 

co-ordination between departments, few regulations and less money to inspect, enforce or regulate the ones 

that we did have. Since then through legislation, co-ordination, provision of staff, agencies and funds we 

have developed a pollution control program equal to any in Canada. After the legislation proposed is passed 

and the new Authority is established this Session we shall be leaders in control of our environment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — I intend to have some comments about the NDP's election program tomorrow but I should 

like to make one reference to it at this time. When one reviews this amazing document, 'Waffling Allan's 

Manifesto', there was one aspect of his program that is the most frightening of all. We all recall when they 

were the government from 1944 to 1964, the large number of commissions, authority boards, departments, 

that were established for the most part to provide a haven for their defeated candidates and friends. The 

people of Saskatchewan are well aware that every time you set up an agency you have to staff it and to staff 

it costs money. Secondly, the people of Saskatchewan recognize that the more government bureaus, 

commissions and agencies, the more interference with an individual's rights and responsibilities. It was for 

that reason that the Liberal Government when they came into office reduced or eliminated all unnecessary 

agencies which the former government had established to do their planning and political organizing for 

them. We kept only those essential to carry out government programs. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is with 

great dismay that I went through the proposed platform of the NDP and found out that if elected to power 

they would establish 19 new agencies. This would mean 19 new directors of Socialist philosophy. This 

would mean several hundred new civil servants of Socialist persuasion and above all it would mean many 

millions of dollars of taxpayers' money going to support this new form of relief for the Socialist unemployed. 

 

I should like to list some of these agencies for you so that you can see what the Socialists have in mind 

should they become the government: 1. A special department of economic development. 2. A Saskatchewan 

development corporation. Mr. Speaker, past experience shows that for all the economic development that the 

NDP were able to get, the Premier could have done 

 



 

February 24, 1971 

 

 

324 

it himself before breakfast. 3. A lands bank commission to take the farmer's land away from him. 4. A 

machinery testing branch. We threw that out years ago. 5. Sharply increase the Department of Labour. The 

labor bosses have decided on that platform being in the program. 6. An environment department, 

unnecessary now because of the work of the Liberal Government. 

 

Now here is a good one, 7. A board for the approval of new industries. Mr. Speaker, do you know how often 

that board would have to meet? Once every 20 years, if then. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — 8. Number eight is a dandy. A new Central Planning Agency. This is where the political 

action will be — in this agency. 9. There is a Zoological Advisory Council. This is a council that will tell the 

Environmental Department what to do. 10. Now listen to this. Special Division of Government to promote 

small business. 11. Lending Agency for small business. I'm sure you will agree with me, Mr. Speaker, that 

any business the NDP get in this province will be small all right. 12. Provincial Housing Authority. We 

already have one and it is getting results, so they will throw that one out and establish a new one. 13. 

Consumer Affairs Agency. The work of the Attorney General is taking care of anything that needs to be done 

in that regard. 14. A Rent Review Board. 15. Health planning councils, plural, and they didn't say how many. 

One in each constituency, I suppose, to look after the health of the Socialists. 

 

Now 16 and 17. Human Rights Commission and an Ombudsman. You know in the past, Mr. Speaker, we 

had never seen the need of that because of the good government the Liberals are providing. However, I 

would admit that if they are ever returned to office these might be two agencies that would be needed to 

protect the individual in Saskatchewan from the Socialists. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Now, 18. This is a dandy. A hot line to Government Information and Referral Centre. I think 

this should be changed to a hot line to propaganda spreading centres if past experience is any example. 19. 

Finally number 19 — an Electoral Boundaries Commission. They didn't need one for 20 years but all of a 

sudden now they decide they need one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think if we need one example of the difference between fuzzy-headed Socialism and 

down-to-earth Liberalism we have it here. Can't you just see the kooks, the hippies and yippies all flocking to 

Saskatchewan to help the NDP plan, and do their thinking and argue their theories in these agencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this provinces does not need are any more Socialist agencies. Their record when they 

were in government the last time was shameful and a disgrace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since I have more that I wish to comment on, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


