



















































Hansard: March 03, 1971


580 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

12th Day 

Wednesday, March 3, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to introduce the following groups of students 

seated in the galleries; from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana Centre, represented by Mr. Estey, 85 

students from the Brevoort Park School under the direction of their teacher, Mrs. Henderson; from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair, represented by Mr. Brockelbank, 43 students from the Estey School 

under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Demers; from the constituency of Arm River represented by Mr. 

McIvor, 50 students from the Loreburn High School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. D. Jackman; 

from the constituency of Regina South West, represented by Mr. McPherson, 33 students from the 

Athabasca School, under the direction of Mr. W.J. Cawley; from the constituency of Regina North East, 

represented by their Member Mr. Smishek, 37 students from the Dr. George Ferguson School, under the 

direction of their Principal Mr. Nicol; from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana South, represented by Dr. 

Forsyth, 32 students from the Alvin Buckwold School, under the direction of their teacher, Mrs. Haddock. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members will wish to join in extending to these students an extremely warm welcome and 

to express the very sincere wish they will find their stay here educational and will help them to take their 

proper place and play their parts proudly and well, in the light of a free governing nation. 

 

HON. MEMBERS  Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

BY-ELECTION IN MELFORT-TISDALE CONSTITUENCY 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 

like to direct a question to the Government. In view of the fact there is now a motion in the Premier's name 

requiring a committee to report at a subsequent session of the Legislature, thereby I suggest, indicating that a 

subsequent session is likely to be held, I wonder if the Premier can indicate when a by-election will be called 

in the Melfort-Tisdale constituency. 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — When such a decision is arrived at I will be very happy to 

announce this to my hon. friend. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart (Provincial 

Treasurer) that this 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

581 

Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee of Finance; and the proposed amendment thereto, moved 

by Mr. Romanow. 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned debate last night I had 

discussed the economic conditions in Saskatchewan and I had talked about the Trudeau-Thatcher economic 

depression that has been created, a depression that has been man-made and deliberately created by 

governments because of their failure to take economic measures to deal with the problems of unemployment, 

the problems of the wheat crisis, the problems and plight of our farmers in Saskatchewan and throughout 

Canada. 

 

I pointed out that in the province some 15 per cent of the non-agricultural labor force is presently 

unemployed and that there appears to be little hope for the unemployed workers to be able to find 

employment in the near future. I pointed out that retail sales in Saskatchewan have dropped by 30 per cent in 

the last three years. And that the drop in sales continues. I demonstrated the number of business closures 

throughout the province and in Regina in particular. 

 

I told this House, yesterday, that the Government's main pre-occupation has been that of talking about the 

pulp mill in Prince Albert and talking about the proposed pulp mill in Meadow Lake. They tell us that they 

made a good deal. They tell us that the pulp mill which is to have cost $117 million in Meadow Lake is 

going to solve many of the economic problems in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was interested when the Premier talked about inviting Canadian corporations to undertake 

this project. He said that numerous Canadian companies have been asked and invited to undertake this 

project. Interesting enough however the Premier didn't mention the name of one Canadian company that he 

had approached. If the facts are as he says, I should suggest that the Premier table in this Legislature all the 

correspondence, all negotiations, all documents that have been exchanged between the Government and the 

Canadian companies about the proposed pulp mill. Until, Mr. Speaker, the Premier tables these documents 

and provides proof conclusively that Canadian companies have been invited to build the pulp mill, I shall 

remain very doubtful that any approaches have been made to Canadian corporations and to Canadian 

companies to build the proposed pulp mill at Meadow Lake. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, we are told that the proposed deal is even a better deal than the one in 

Prince Albert. I admit that it is a better deal but not for the people of Saskatchewan. It is a better deal for 

Parsons and Whittemore. 

 

Let us examine it briefly. Parsons and Whittemore's equity is supposed to be $16.8 million, not in cash but in 

profits and fees that they will be making. The Government of Canada is supposed to contribute $12 million. 

So far the Canadian Government is not committed to contribute the $12 million. In fact, it is interesting that 

the day that the Premier announced that the Federal Government would be making a contribution of $12 

million it was only on the day previous 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

582 

that Ottawa received the request. He is telling us that we are to act very quickly on this proposal otherwise 

construction will be delayed. I ask the Premier: why didn't he make the application for a grant to Ottawa 

sooner? 

 

Then we see the Provincial equity is to be $7.2 million and there is $3 million in road construction. As I 

assess this situation, Mr. Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan will be contributing direct equity into road 

construction and will be underwriting the loan, or guaranteeing the loan of $107 million. It appears to me 

that of the total project which in the final analysis is to cost $177 million, the people of Saskatchewan and 

the people of Canada will either contribute or assume the liability for 90 per cent of the project. Now if the 

people of Saskatchewan assume the risk of 90 per cent of the project, I say that the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve to own 90 per cent of that mill. There is nothing special about a 70 per cent company and 30 per cent 

Province ownership formula that has been negotiated in the case of Prince Albert. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, if we as Canadians, are going to develop this nation, and if we as Canadians are going 

to own this nation on a long-term basis, then I say that we as Canadians have to start taking action now to 

repatriate our nation from the foreign domination. This is one of the key issues that Canadians from one end 

of the country to the other are concerned about and talking about regardless of their political persuasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say a word about nursing homes. I am keenly disappointed in the pittance the 

Government is providing in the form of construction grants for nursing home facilities. The Liberals 

promised in 1964 to build a 600-bed geriatric centre in the city of Regina. There is a desperate need for a 

home of at least this size or larger in the city of Regina. Hardly a week passes that I don't get an inquiry as to 

where nursing facilities can be found for some elderly lady or gentleman. Pioneer Village in Regina has a 

waiting list one mile long. 

 

I should also hope that the Government during this Session would take action to stop private enterprizers 

from building nursing homes. Their prime motive is profit, pure and simple. If they can't make a profit at the 

expense of the senior citizens and the infirm, then they try to make it at the expense of their employees. 

These private nursing homes and extended care groups, ought to be stopped. Only charitable organizations, 

non-profit groups and publicly owned institutions should be allowed to operate in the nursing field and to 

provide the citizens with the lowest cost facilities and the best services. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to the subject of taxation. Let us look at this Budget and 

what it proposes in terms of taxes. The Premier, when he was in Opposition, used to say, "Saskatchewan's 

taxes are oppressively high." He continued in the same vein immediately after he became the Premier and 

Provincial Treasurer. In his first 1965 Budget he said, "Taxes in Saskatchewan are dangerously high." 

 

During the 1964 election campaign, Liberals promised to 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

583 

reduce both Provincial and municipal taxes. It promised to reduce the sales tax, first from 5 per cent to 4 and 

then to 3 per cent. It promised to eliminate the sales tax from children's clothing and shoes and from all 

municipal tax purchases. It promised to find means of reducing personal income taxes and to greatly reduce 

taxes on farm lands and property. 

 

Let us examine what has happened. But first let us look at the population question. In his first Budget 

Address the Premier said and let me quote: 

 

During 1964, Saskatchewan's population reached an estimated total of 949,000. In the near 

future, the Government will endeavor to take action which will retain the natural increase of 

this province, and attract other citizens from Canada and other parts of the world. 

 

Not only has it not attracted people from other parts of Canada, not only has it failed to retain our natural 

population growth, but we lost 23,000 people since 1964. Our population has been reduced from 949,000 to 

926,000 and the exodus continues. Including the natural population increase it means that in a period of six 

short years some 100,000 people left the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to make these remarks first, since it is people who pay taxes and not things. And 

regardless of conditions and the size of population, certain basic costs have to be met, except that those costs 

must now be paid by a smaller group of people. 

 

Let us now examine the present Liberal tax load and how they were increased — percentage increases and 

the amount of increases per head — since the CCF Government held office. Let us look at the consumption 

taxes. In the 1964-65 Budget, the last Budget introduced by the CCF Government, the education and 

hospitalization tax, the sales tax, was $44.7 million — this year $68.8 million; gasoline tax was $30.7 

million — this year up to $51.4 million; tobacco tax, a new tax introduced — $6 million; liquor taxes in 

1964 $16.2 million — this year $26.6 million. So in 1964 consumption taxes stood at $91.6 million — this 

year $152.8 million, an increase of 68 per cent in consumption taxes alone, Mr. Speaker. On a per capita 

basis each citizen will be required to pay $165, Mr. Speaker, or $68.37 per year more. And because of the 

population drop, it means that each person will have to pay 71 per cent more in consumption taxes in 1971 

than he did in 1964. But these are not all the tax increases, Mr. Speaker. Let us look at the motor license 

fees. 

 

In 1964 $9.3 million — this year $14.6 million, an increase of 57.5 per cent. I shall concede that we had a 

16.5 per cent increase in the number of motor vehicles registered but the fact remains that the cost of motor 

vehicle licenses has gone up by more than 40 per cent since this Government took office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, let us now examine what has happened to the income tax. The Liberals 

promised and let me quote, in their election platform: "Establish means of reducing 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

584 

personal income taxes." 

 

The rise in personal income tax has been phenomenal. In 1964 $19.3 million — this year $69.3 million, an 

increase of 260 per cent in personal income tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us now take a look at the way it treats its corporation friends. The corporate income tax in 

1964 was $11.8 million — this year $15.3 million, an increase of 30 per cent only. Personal income tax up 

260 per cent, corporate income tax only 30 per cent! But again these are not all the taxes that have been 

loaded directly on the people. Medical and hospital premiums went up by almost 25 per cent — up from $52 

to $72 per family; almost $9 million imposed in hospital and medicare deterrent fees — almost $10 per head. 

There are more increases. Every premium, every license, every fee that the Government could point its finger 

at has been raised — insurance tax, gasoline tax, liquor tax, most of these have been increased several times. 

 

The result is, Mr. Speaker, that by October 1970, the Liberal Government has raised or imposed 1477 taxes, 

since it took office in a little more than six years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1964 the Budget was under $215 million, this year it is to be $451 million, more than 

doubled, Mr. Speaker. But perhaps the people would not mind paying higher taxes providing they saw some 

real benefits. But the fact is that as this Government was increasing taxes it was emasculating programs at 

the same time. 

 

Benefits under medicare and hospital care have been reduced. Deterrent fees were imposed. Our mental 

health programs have been carved up, with estates required to pay costs incurred by patients. Our education 

system is steadily being eroded. Unrealistic teacher-pupil ratios were introduced. Programs were cut. The 

university student loan fund was robbed to finance other programs. Bureaucratic control of welfare was 

instituted. Ask the average person what has this Government done to improve his standard of living, his 

quality of life or what it has added to the security of his livelihood and he can't answer. Other than providing 

the tax-free purple gas, what else has it done for the farmers? Nothing, Mr. Speaker. Other than a small 

increase in minimum wage — now the lowest in Canada — the only thing wage-earners get from this 

Government year after year is more restrictive and oppressive labor legislation. Nothing for the old or the 

young or the poor. The sick got deterrent fees and increased premiums. 

 

More money has been spent on the University but this is mainly due to Federal participation. The 

Government has established an Indian and Metis Department but we know that native people are not happy, 

not satisfied, with either the programs or the approach of the Government. 

 

Larger school grants have been provided — true. But what's new, Mr. Speaker. That's been the case since 

Saskatchewan became a province. Year after year school grants have been going up and up and this is the 

case all across Canada. But the grants have not kept pace with the rising education taxes nor have they been 

large enough to reduce the mill rates. 

 

The Government is proposing this year to raise the 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

585 

Homeowner Grant by $10. Remember it promised, in 1967, that the Homeowner Grant would be raised to 

$100. On a per capita basis, Mr. Speaker, this means that the Homeowner Grant equals $13.82 per head but 

remember in consumption taxes alone it increased taxes by over $68. In other words the people are still $55 

per person behind. In seven years this Liberal Government more than doubled the Provincial taxes on people 

and no new programs introduced for our citizens. It promised a drug care plan. It promised 80,000 new jobs 

and many other things but we haven't got them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I invite the Members opposite to examine their own consciences by rereading the Saskatchewan Liberal of 

April 10, 1964. It promised to reduce electric power and natural gas rates. During the debate in this House in 

1964 the Premier was outraged because the CCF Government took $3.8 million of profit from Government 

Telephones into general revenue. This year it proposed to take $16.1 million from those Socialist Crown 

corporations to finance the affairs of the state. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Since the Liberals took office we have not had a single reduction in telephone, power 

or gas rates. The Premier is very glib when he talks about the Socialist enterprises and their failures. If it 

were not for them he would not be able to balance the Budget or run this Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, let me say a word about those Socialist business failures and losses and 

point out that in a period of two short years Saskatchewan Pulpwood Limited — an enterprise created by this 

Government — lost more money, $629,000 in 1968 and 1969, than all the losses incurred by the Socialist 

enterprises in 20 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — This is what the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) perhaps means when he says, "We 

promised a common sense business-like approach to government and we delivered it." He delivered it all 

right — thousands of dollars of provincial taxpayer's money has been delivered to subsidize his New York 

friends and when we get the reports for 1970 and 1971 there will be more money that's going to be taken out 

of the public funds to subsidize his New York friends. 

 

Let me give you another example of this business-like approach. Let me refer you to the 1970 Budget. We 

were told that the Government would realize $3,660,000 from potash royalties. This is listed under the 

revenue items of Privileges, Licences and Permits. Look at the annual report of the Department of Mineral 

Resources. The amount is $2.3 million. This is all the money it received from rentals, royalties and fees out 

of eight potash mines in production and two under construction. 

 

In 1964 out of two mines in production, Mr. Speaker, the CCF Government realized $900,000. On the per 

mine basis the revenues to the Province are cut by one-third. It is 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

586 

interesting though that in the Public Accounts of 1970 the Government takes almost $500,000 of mineral tax 

and includes it in the royalty item to make the receipts from that source look more attractive — a 

business-like approach to try and fool the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know this Government promised to reduce municipal taxes but the reverse has been true, because it has 

failed and refused to provide municipalities with adequate grants. Mill rates have been going up and up year 

after year. The major part of the problem is in education. In Regina the Liberals promised to assume 50 per 

cent of the local school costs. We are still waiting. Regina citizens have to assume a larger share of the 

education tax now out of property taxes than they did in 1964. In the city of Regina between 1964 and 1970 

mill rates have increased by 30 per cent for general purposes and 36 per cent for education. And what about 

the prospects for the coming year. Well, here is what the Regina Leader-Post has to say on February 12: 

 

Empty stores in the business section of the city and vacant office space in new high-rise 

buildings are part of the problem Regina's civic administration faces in setting the 1971 mill 

rate in the next two months. 

 

Regina enters the second year of the ’70s with the unpleasant prospect and almost certain 

knowledge that come tax time the citizens will have to be told they will be paying more 

residential tax this year because there just hasn't been enough growth in the commercial and 

industrial fields to take up the slack between what was raised in 1970 and the increase in 

costs. 

 

Certainly the Budget offers little relief. While we are grateful for the small mercies in that the Government 

will increase snow removal, police protection, health and library grants, all that they will amount to is $1.25 

per capita and it will only amount to $175,000 for the whole city. This is not going to stop the mill rate from 

rising nor is the proposed increase in the school grants going to eliminate our problem because it is not 

adequate. Because Provincial grants to municipalities are inadequate, municipal taxes are going to rise again 

this year. For example in the city of Saskatoon preliminary tax estimates show that the mill rate for this year 

is going to rise 4.8 mills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a solution to halting municipal tax increases and we have already recommended it to 

the Government. That is for the Province to assume at least 75 per cent of the education operating costs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I am deeply disappointed that again such a small amount of money has 

been appropriated for the Department of Labour. This Department continues to be under-financed and 

understaffed, particularly in highly skilled positions. I had hoped that with a new Minister there would be 

some improvement and that the Province would provide a larger budget for staff and needed services in the 

Department of Labour. For total services including apprenticeship and administration the Government 

proposes to spend only $797,000 and to provide a staff of 69 only. Back in 1964 the budget for these same 

items and services was $684,000. There was a 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

587 

staff of 78. In seven years the Department of Labour has increased its budget by 16 per cent only while at the 

same time the total Government Budget has gone up more than 100 per cent. During the same period the 

Department of Labour staff has been reduced by 13 per cent. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) say, 

"We have been accused of an anti-labor bias but this is not true." Examine this Government's record, Mr. 

Speaker, and try to persuade the workers to think otherwise. All they have to do is to look at the budget of 

the Department of Labour, check the labor standards' laws, look what has been done to free collective 

bargaining rights, the Trade Union Act has been emasculated, Bill 2 enacted, and virtually nothing is being 

done to help create new jobs. Is it any wonder that you have gained the reputation of being anti-labor? Even 

Members of your own caucus are publicly admitting this to be true. No government in Canada compared to 

this one has demonstrated more clearly and continues to do so of how viciously anti-labor it is. 

 

If you are interested, Mr. Speaker, in changing your anti-labor image we are prepared to help you. Stop 

attacking labor in each of your speeches. Increase the Department of Labour budget so as to upgrade the 

number of employees and levels of skills required to make the Department more effective. Improve skills in 

industrial relations and research. Provide for better enforcement of labor standards and safety. Increase the 

minimum wage to $1.75 per hour. Reduce the legal work week to 40 hours a week. Provide for three weeks' 

annual vacation after one year and four weeks after 10 years of service. Modernize the workmen's 

compensation legislation. Reorganize the workmen's compensation administration. Increase pensions and 

benefits. Establish a meaningful appeal procedure for the workers and introduce new safety and 

rehabilitation programs. Restore free collective bargaining. Repeal Bill 2, The Essential Services Emergency 

Act. Restore The Trade Union Act to its 1964 form and appoint a fair labor relations board and remove the 

political interference in the area of industrial relations. 

 

Until this Government accepts these recommendations it is going to continue to be labelled as anti-labor 

because its actions have proven it to be so. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — May I tell the workers of Saskatchewan that a NDP Government will give the workers 

a new deal. It will put into effect the recommendations I have just mentioned. We will restore industrial 

peace and labor-management harmony to what it was during the 20 years of CCF Administration. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I was interested in the Government's proposed student-employment 

program. It finally realizes that a problem exists. Last year a majority of Saskatchewan university students 

and those trying to get higher education were unable to find employment. And many of them as a result of 

this were unable to return to university or other higher education particularly the sons and daughters of 

farmers and 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

588 

wage earners. But look at what it is proposing as a solution. It says it will create 2,000 jobs for a six-month 

period. It sounds as if the program is primarily designed for university students. It has earmarked $1.5 

million for this purpose. It says 1,000 of these jobs will be made available in the Government service and 

Crown corporations and 1,000 on farms and in private industry. In this latter case the Government will pay 

one-half the wage cost. 

 

If it is intended that the total wage bill for these 2,000 students comes out of the $1.5 million, they will be 

the lowest paid workers in North America, Mr. Speaker. Presumably the 1,000 workers for the Government 

and Crown corporations would get the $1 million and the 1,000 for farmers and businessmen would get 

$500,000 since the Government would pay only half the wage bill in this case. 

 

Based on a 40-hour work week in a six-month period there are 1,040 working hours. It would mean these 

students would be paid less than $1.00 per hour. Less than the present minimum wage, Mr. Speaker. On this 

kind of wage they certainly will not be able to earn enough money to return to university in the fall. In fact 

after paying board and room and a few incidentals, they will have nothing left over. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

this is not the intent of the Government to try and get students to work for substandard wages. If it is, it is 

inviting trouble. 

 

I shall be looking forward to the Minister giving us the details of how the proposed program is to work. In 

the meantime may I suggest that since it is a Government program designed to help students earn money 

during summer months to enable them to return to university or to take other higher education courses that a 

minimum wage floor of no less than $2 per hour should be established. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, this Budget will not lead out of the doldrums nor is it going to restore 

people's confidence or is it going to take us into any prosperous time. This Budget offers nothing for the 

farmers. It will not provide much needed jobs. It offers nothing for the sick or the poor, the aged or the 

young. In the Throne Speech as in this Budget the Government has proven to be callous and indifferent to 

the needs of the people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — What is needed is a bold new approach. Saskatchewan needs a new government, a New 

Democratic Government to give a new deal to people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — We need a meaningful program of financial support and other assistance to preserve 

our family farms, a comprehensive program to revitalize our rural communities, beautification and 

reconstruction of towns and villages, new community centres and services, a massive rural and urban 

housing construction plan. This the NDP Government will do by immediately 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

589 

establishing a housing authority to do the job. A program of construction of — say 10,000 — homes a year 

would create 25,000 new jobs. A New Democratic Government will launch a meaningful pubic works 

program including construction of technical schools, education centres, new university facilities, hospitals, 

nursing homes and other needed public projects. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — We will extend and improve parks and outdoor facilities. A New Democratic 

Government will establish a Saskatchewan development corporation to mobilize capital of at least $100 

million for economic development of this province. The sellout and the giveaway of our natural resources 

will stop. Our resources belong to the people . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — . . . and should be developed in the interest of the people. Business and industry, both 

private and public, will be required to adhere strictly to the policies so as to protect our environment. Small 

business needs protection and government assistance. The New Democratic Government will establish a 

business representative service. We will provide technical services. We will provide loans to small business 

at the most reasonable interest rates. We will undertake a program of urban renewal and redevelopment, 

particularly in the cities. Every advantage will be taken of Federal funds and services to do the needed job. 

We need to examine the public transportation systems. We will effectively control pollution in the cities. A 

low-cost housing plan must be undertaken. Here again we will take advantage of the national housing 

legislation for land assembly, mortgage loans, and so on. 

 

In the area of taxation we propose to sharply reduce property taxes for basic school costs. The property 

owner can no longer carry the burden. Mr. Speaker, we will eliminate the deterrent fees so as to reduce the 

taxes on the people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — We will establish a new deal. We will give a new deal to the people. We have a 

program for university students, a meaningful bursaries plan as well as a provincial student loan fund. In the 

area of health we will provide for a prescription drug plan as well as other needed health services for the 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget before us has failed to deal with the farm economic crisis. It has failed to deal with 

the problem of unemployment. It offers nothing new for the less fortunate of our society. This Government 

has lost the confidence of the people. It has no plan to stop the mass exodus of people from Saskatchewan. 

 

I will not support the motion, I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

590 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, this is the first opportunity I have had to 

extend good wishes to the new Leader of the Opposition and his Deputy. They certainly have youth and 

energy on their side and hair on the top but even these attributes, I feel, will not be sufficient to lead their 

faithful over to this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have never had the dubious honor of sitting to your left and don't plan on doing so. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — However, I do recognize the necessity of having a strong Opposition so because of this I 

wish the gentlemen a little success but not too much. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that if they just keep on 

rehashing that old Regina Manifesto that they will be wandering in the wilderness for many, many years so 

that I won't have to worry about joining the ranks over there. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — The new deal. 

 

MR. GRANT: — I particularly want to welcome the Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) as a 

new Minister. His age and his Government experience will certainly assist him effectively in this portfolio. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to send a couple of newspaper clippings over to two Members 

opposite, namely the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) and the Member for Regina North West (Mr. 

Whelan) because I am sure they will find them interesting. Since I only have the two copies I shall explain 

what it is. Actually it's a picture of the rapidly rising steelwork of a South Saskatchewan hospital . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — . . . which is taking place in the southern part of Regina. This is the one that they thought 

they were pretty clever on when they pictured a hospital bed standing in the pastures out there and said that 

this building would never be built. The building, the Leader of the Opposition said that he was so 

disappointed in because he thought his last born would be able to use the facilities there for his arrival into 

this rough, tough world. 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Too old for that already . . . 

 

MR. GRANT: — No that's not the only concern. In case any other Members are having ideas along these 

lines, I should warn them that there is no maternity department planned for it, so you 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

591 

had better act accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this again was another example of the Opposition doing a lot of talking and we're building it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — It's the same as the pulp mill. They did a lot of talking about pulp mills, but who's 

building them? The Liberal Government. 

 

I can recall back in 1958, the Members opposite were talking about a base hospital. So they didn't act too 

quickly, and now we are on the job and we'll build a good one. The construction of this major project at this 

time is an excellent provider of jobs and will be until late 1972. At that time it will become a big employer of 

personnel and will contribute much to the economy of Regina and the southern part of the province. Of main 

significance though, is the fact that it will give the delivery of health services in Southern Saskatchewan a 

real boost. Mr. Speaker, I'm not only pleased with the timing but particularly with the quality of this hospital, 

only possible through proper planning. 

 

I want to thank the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) for his announcement last week of the start of the 

Applied Science Centre to be built adjacent to the Base Hospital. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — This $8 million much needed centre will fill a real need for the people of this area. It will 

provide educational facilities for those young people who cannot or do not wish to go to university. In this 

technological age more and more technically trained people are needed. It will fit in well with the hospital 

and University and is another big provider of jobs and continuing employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Financial Critic opposite (Mr. Romanow) said on television last Monday that he doubted 

very much if even a dollar of the funds allotted to this project would be spent in the current year. Mr. 

Speaker, let me assure him and the other Members opposite that the start is going to take place, that money 

will be spent and jobs will be provided in 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Let us travel a little father north now and take a look at Saskatchewan's other medical 

training centre, namely Saskatoon. Some time between 1944 and 1955, give or take a year or so, the Party 

opposite built the University Hospital. While the building itself was well built (this is one they didn't 

overlook the necessity of putting in adequate footings as they did in the Moose Jaw Training School), it was 

poorly planned even though it took them 10 years to build. This building is completely inflexible, no 

provision for expansion, lack of adequate ceiling heights, sadly lacking in public areas, and I could go on and 

on. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

592 

We have heard the Members opposite say, "If we had been the Government, the South Saskatchewan 

Hospital would have been a reality by now." Well, Mr. Speaker, thank goodness that they were not the 

Government. We in Regina do not need another inflexible pile of concrete and rock as they bequeathed us in 

the northern part of the province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — I am pleased to say that good progress is being made on planning and design for a $19 

million upgrading and expansion program for the University Hospital. While this is a very costly 

undertaking, it will modernize this complex, providing clinical and educational areas for the new dental 

school and expanded medical school. There will be no significant change in bed numbers. I am particularly 

pleased with this because of my activity with the Cancer Society. Because in the contracts will be a new 

$450,000 betatron purchased by a wheat barter transaction. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Actually there are very few of these machines in Canada. I believe they number fewer 

than 50, and the first was located in Saskatoon. Thousands of our citizens will benefit from the treatment of 

this machine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn briefly to another major undertaking of this Government reflected in the 

Budget Speech. Our Government is doing something to retain payrolls in centres other than Saskatoon and 

Regina. I am referring to the beginning of a new direction for the former mental hospital at Weyburn known 

as The Saskatchewan Hospital. During the past decade there has been a dramatic change occurring in our 

handling of our mentally ill. Let's look at 1963. The Weyburn building at that time housed 1,478 patients, 

Battleford 1,613, a total of 3,091. Today, in those two institutions there are 932 patients. Twenty years ago, a 

person committed to an institution had little or no chance of ever being released. Today the odds are that 

only one out of every 200 will be confined more than three months. I refer to this change as dramatic. I 

should also say it is probably unique in its degree in any province or state on this continent. While it is 

dramatic and unique, it hasn't been without its problems. One of these is the future use of the Weyburn 

buildings. Largely through planning by the Health Department personnel, as of April 1 approximately, the 

Saskatchewan Hospital will be known as the Souris Valley Extended Care Hospital. This hospital is 

currently under a provisional board of management and the Board will become fully operative and constitute 

a regular board as soon as the hospital is officially established, as I say, shortly after April 1. 

 

An extended care hospital is geared to handle patients known as 4A, 4B and 4C — those not requiring acute 

hospital care but requiring more than nursing care level. Initially most beds will be occupied by current 

patients in the Saskatchewan Hospital. As this population drops, general admissions will be made from the 

southeastern part of the province of level 4 patients. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

593 

During the current year approximately $1 million will be spent on upgrading and renovating wards and 

facilities. Approximately one-third of the building space will continue to be used by the Department of 

Education. Other areas will be improved to provide excellent quarters for the Weyburn Psychiatric Region. 

 

In the northern part of the province, another transformation is occurring, namely in Battleford. With the 

development of the Saskatchewan Community Plan, the opening of the Prince Albert Psychiatric Centre and 

a general shortening of the length of stay, the population of the Battleford hospital has been reduced to a 

figure in line with its approved capacity to handle. Wards have been renovated, dietary facilities have been 

rebuilt, and today this institution is providing top service in top surroundings. Its patients are receiving 

professional care in uncongested buildings. 

 

The age of change we are experiencing will catch up with the Battleford Psycho-Geriatric Centre next year. 

A good portion of this building will be converted to a much needed nursing home under the direction of the 

Department of Welfare. 

 

The advances, Mr. Speaker, are further evidence of this Government's concern for our mentally ill and our 

senior citizens. Our 1971 Budget is further evidence of action on these concerns. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Mr. Speaker, I do hope that the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) was 

misquoted in a news item dated February 25 in The Leader-Post. If he wasn't, it was another demonstration 

of completely irresponsible statements. I quote the statement attributed to him as follows: 

 

In 1965, 1,000 mental patients, many of them in their senior years, were discharged from the 

Weyburn Mental Hospital. In many instances, the family was not consulted or even notified, 

and many of these aged and mentally inform people were thrust into inadequate half-way 

houses under the care of unskilled and untrained people. 

 

MR. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw North): — Right! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Just wait, I'll get to you. What were the facts? Just to show you how irresponsible this 

particular Member is in some of his statements, how misleading he is to the people of Saskatchewan. He said 

1,000 people were discharged in 1965. Well actually there were 692 and 109 of these died, they didn't have 

any choice, they died and I don't think you'd criticize us for letting them out of the hospital. One was 

transferred to another institution. So the 1,000 figure he referred to was down to 582, not 1,000. I think the 

people of Saskatchewan should know how inflated some of his statements are. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: —They're half right, they're pretty close. 

 

MR. GRANT: — This wasn't just a slip of 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

594 

his memory. These correct figures were available to him in the annual report, but he chose to double roughly 

the number of people discharged. He also chose conveniently to forget to mention that the former CCF 

Government started the discharge program in 1963. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — He seems to wish to leave the impression that things were better under the former regime. 

Well just how much better? Now just let's see how much better. And he's not the only one who has been 

referring to this. The Hon. Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) has made reference to it, and the Hon. 

Member for Kelvington (Mr. Byers). Let's look back to 1963 under a CCF Government. In Weyburn a set of 

buildings rated to accommodate 950, how many did they have in there? 1,478. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, overcrowded. 

 

MR. GRANT: — I'll admit that this is a considerable improvement over what the situation was in the 1950s. 

They had 2,000 people shoe-horned into those facilities. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame on them! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Housed in the basement, beds were so close together there was no privacy whatsoever, 

and now they're making out that back in their regime things were so much better and we're doing such a 

terrible job. This was not restricted to Weyburn. Let's look at North Battleford, up in North Battleford, an 

institution with accommodation for 765 — how many did they have there? 1,613. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh shame, shame on them. 

 

MR. GRANT: — The approved rating was 765, less than half the number that the Hon. Member and his 

colleagues opposite chose to shut their eyes to. I ask him, Mr. Speaker, did he ever see the inadequate dietary 

facilities he and his government asked 1,613 people to be fed from? Bad enough for these unfortunate souls, 

but even worse, even worse for the staff, working in dark, dank, bug ridden, outmoded facilities. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Terrible, terrible. 

 

MR. GRANT: — These sanctimonious statements from the side opposite just irritate the people of 

Saskatchewan, and I ask him to visit Battleford now and enjoy a meal in the finest of facilities provided by 

this Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Not by your Government. And to satisfy you a little bit more, and the Hon. Member from 

Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) probably should join you, ask the staff how they like it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

595 

MR. GRANT: — The Hon. Member did some crepe hanging at the same meeting and I quote him further: 

 

He also condemned the Government for the recent amendment to the Saskatchewan Mental 

Health Act which provided that the Government may seize the estate of a mental patient to 

pay for institutional care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he cannot produce a single case where a spouse has been required to lose his or her interest in a 

small farm or a modest house as he indicated in that release. This provision has been administered with 

discretion. Let me, Mr. Speaker, remind this House, that it was the CCF Government that put the legislation 

on the books in the first instance . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — . . . whereby collections could be made from the estates of former patients with certain 

exemptions for survivors living in Saskatchewan. I don't know where they get their information over there, 

but here are three of them including the Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper), the Member for Kelvington 

(Mr. Byers), Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) and also the Member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder), are 

all wrong in their statement of facts. The Hon. Member from Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) yesterday, he's off the 

beam also, so they must be getting their information from the same source. 

 

Let's just look at the facts about mental patients and their estates. Prior to January 1945, a person admitted to 

an institution under The Mental Health Act, was personally liable for the cost of care and maintenance. This 

was prior to January 1, 1945. The charge was generally 75 cents or $1.00 per day. At that time, a lien could 

also be filed against the property of the patient or the husband or the father. But what happened in January 

1945, by these humanitarians opposite? Well, the rate was raised to $3.50 a day. One of the Members 

opposite yesterday stated that the care of the mentally ill was free in Saskatchewan until 1968. Well, I refute 

this argument because the above practice has been in existence for a long time. What happened on April 1, 

1959? $3.50 wasn't enough, so they raised it to $5.00 a day. These humanitarians who claimed such an 

interest in the welfare of the sick. Yes, they were really getting selfish. Now, what is the rate today in 1971? 

$5.00 a day, the same as it was in 1959. It hasn't been changed one iota. The change that we did make was 

that we felt that the only exemption should be to the spouse living in Saskatchewan, and a minimum of 

$10,000 was placed in this regard, and I urge the Member opposite to produce any case where this has not 

been administered with discretion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — Further help for the emotionally disturbed was a highlight announced by the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). Our friends opposite did little or nothing in this area. Only those on welfare or wards 

of the Government could receive the services of sociologists, psychologists or psychiatrists, and these are 

very, very costly services. 1970 saw a good start by the Health Department to aid these unfortunate families 

with 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

596 

one or more emotionally disturbed children. One must have personal contact with these distraught parents to 

appreciate the value of this service to our citizens. The inclusion of $120,000 in the 1971 Budget is most 

welcome and will materially help a previously neglected segment of our population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is almost amusing when the Members of the Opposition accuse us of destroying our health 

plans. I have covered only a couple of areas of improvement, there are many more: increased hospital 

allowance for out of province care now up to $50 per day, the previous Government gave $20 a day. Special 

consideration for professional services not available in Saskatchewan — we pay 85 per cent of the 

recognized fee in the area where the service is rendered. What did the CCF do? Nothing. Another 

catastrophe area to many families is the problem of cleft palates. What did the Members opposite do? 

Nothing. What did they do for eye refractions? Nothing. Another added service last year of $1 million. 

 

All these and others, along with escalating hospital costs, have resulted in an overall health budget increase 

of $12 million or 7.5 per cent, to an all-time high of $171 million, compared to a 1963-64 budget of $88 

million. 

 

One of the encouraging happenings in 1970 was the introduction of global budgeting for our larger hospitals. 

Eight out of 13 contracted for a three-year test of this form of budgeting. In 1969, the eight incurred a net 

deficit of $295,000. I am pleased to say that in 1970, these hospitals accumulated surpluses of $220,000. I 

am satisfied, Mr. Speaker, that the introduction of incentives under global budgeting gives hospital boards 

and administrators what is needed to produce better results. We are currently studying the question of 

extending this incentive plan to other hospitals. 

 

While total deficits for 1970 are below 1969, there are far too many hospitals under 50 beds with deficits. 

The Budget provides $88 million for 1971-72 hospital costs — up $5.6 million over last year. A 6.8 per cent 

increase, compared to 10 to 16 per cent in recent years. Everything possible must be done to control these 

costs so that they will not interfere with other important services being rendered by your Government. 

Saskatchewan cannot afford to continue using hospital beds at a cost of 30 per cent more than the average for 

Canada. Saskatchewan cannot afford increases of $5.5 million per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government is prepared to plough new ground where necessary to bring about delivery of 

better health services in a more economic manner. An example of this is our offer to two major hospitals in 

Regina. Both the Regina General and the Grey Nuns' are desirous of upgrading and improving their facilities. 

We agree this is highly desirable. We have indicated to them a willingness on our part to participate to the 

tune of $8 million on a $12 million program. Our Government has suggested that such a development 

program should involve the integration of these two hospitals so as to reduce duplication of services and gain 

possible economies. This House will be asked to pass the Integration of Hospitals in Major Urban Centres 

Act in order to make possible this amalgamation. While there have been unions of smaller hospitals in 

Canada, I believe this may be a first in Canada where two major hospitals under different ownership are 

considering amalgamating. I am pleased to report that a joint committee of the General and Grey Nuns' 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

597 

are currently studying the pros and cons of the proposal. It is my sincere hope that agreement may be reached 

at an early date so that much needed improvements can be proceeded with speedily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was quite interested in the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) announcing recently that 

the wholesale closure of small hospitals would be stopped. I am sorry he is not in his place because I 

particularly wanted him to hear this. The Hon. Member for Regina Centre, in my opinion, is being less than 

realistic if he thinks that this kind of political unreality will elect his party. He was Minister of Health when a 

Hospital Report of 1961 recommended a reduction in the number of hospitals. He did not have the fortitude 

to do anything then. Ten years later he refers to the reduction of hospitals from 144 to 133 as "wholesale 

closing." Let me point out that it is less than 8 per cent of the buildings and 1.5 per cent of the beds. The loss 

in beds has been more than made up since then with additional beds elsewhere. While the Leader of the 

Opposition was quite definite in his statement regarding "stopping wholesale closure of small hospitals," I 

note in the newspaper writeup outlining the platform of the party that there is a slight waffling — a term 

familiar to our friends opposite — they now say they will "re-examine" all proposals to close small hospitals. 

A far cry from the bold statement made by the Leader a short time ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Kelvington (Mr. Byers) yesterday made reference to utilization fees and 

the Hon. Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) also referred to it. They said if they were so good 

why are they not provided for in other provinces. Well, let me point out that utilization fees in one form is in 

practice in British Columbia. There is a fee for admission to hospitals in Alberta and I would say that many 

other provinces will be following Saskatchewan's example. The Economic Council has endorsed this feature, 

Sweden and Britain have been forced to adopt it and I might point out that the Hon. Member for Biggar (Mr. 

Lloyd) — and I am sorry he's not in his place — was advocating a utilization fee back in 1960. I quote from 

the Star Phoenix: 

 

The Hon. Woodrow Lloyd recently appointed as Provincial Treasurer spoke in favor of the 

proposal. He said the suggested fee would be called co-insurance, a method whereby a 

person would pay a small payment to make him eligible for medical coverage. The fee will 

deter people from claiming services not necessary and will be one of the ways to provide 

money necessary to pay for the plan, Mr. Lloyd said. 

 

Now, I should also point out when the Medicare Act was introduced in 1962, and I am sure that this will be 

information unknown to the Members opposite because they seem to ignore it, that provision was made in 

that Act for utilization fees. I think that is one concession that was made to the Hon. Member for Biggar (Mr. 

Lloyd). While they didn't endorse his idea they recognized the necessity of providing for this so that in 1968 

it was not necessary for us to amend the Act in this regard. 

 

In the platform writeup of the party there are numerous promises of new programs but I am particularly 

interested in the health programs. Let us put a dollar value on these proposals: abolition of utilization fees — 

$7 million; a drug program — $12 million; hearing aids — $.3 million; eye glasses — 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

598 

$1.4 million; braces, wheelchairs and other devices — $300,000; chiropractic services — $1.3 million; 

insuring nursing home care — $8.5 million. A grand total of $31.2 million. All, I presume, at no tax increase 

because the Hon. Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) made reference to tax reductions that his 

party would provide. Well, now, Mr. Speaker, just whom do they think they are kidding. Certainly not the 

people of Saskatchewan. Even Premier Schreyer is more realistic. On December 16, 1970, he said, "We've 

just about reached the limit as to what we can afford as a society in the areas of health, education and 

welfare." Now there is a practical Socialist just to the east of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the motion. I am sure many Members on your left will want to join the 

Members on this side of the House when the vote is taken. How can they possibly vote against major help to 

the emotionally disturbed; the largest dollar increase in history for hospitals; provision for mental health care 

increased from $11 million in 1963 to a staggering figure of $18.3 million this year; higher per diem rates 

obtained for out-of-province hospital care; help for those handicapped by cleft palates. How an they possibly 

vote against a Budget earmarking $153 million for health out of $450 million, approximately one-third. I 

urge them to heed their consciences and support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. BOLDT (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, one of the impressions that has been left in the 

Throne Speech Debate and in the present one by the NDP Members participating is that of extreme bitterness 

and hostility. Every speaker has spoken with hatred and malice in his heart. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Even those Members who have decided to retire from politics, the Hon. Member for 

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and the Hon. Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) had nothing good to say 

about their experiences in the Legislature or as Members for their constituencies. I can recall the speeches of 

1964 of Mr. Jack Horsman, Member for Wilkie, and the late Hon. Member for Cannington, Ross McCarthy, 

when they gave their farewell addresses to this Legislature. We were in the Opposition then. We were always 

in the Opposition, but they made some very fine farewell addresses applauded by all Members of this 

Legislature. No malice, no bitterness in their hearts. Their speeches were complemented by humor and 

friendliness. What a contract to those opposite, especially when they claim to have this better-than-thou 

attitude. Here, Mr. Speaker, you have a party that claims it will win the next election. They should rejoice 

and be happy if this is the case. One can hardly imagine the bridal couple walking down the aisle in 

bitterness. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I want to tell the Opposition that their behaviour in these debates is no way to win an 

election. There are too many fine people in this province, including people in their own 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

599 

party, who do not buy this type of name-calling. I know my colleagues in the Cabinet. I shouldn't be able to 

point a finger at anyone, nor would you, to indicate that some Minister isn't honest; that we are paying our 

friends off with public funds. I'll have something more to say later on after I have announced the program. 

The public just won't stand for this kind of nonsense in government. You know, you should do your own 

soul-searching, on some of your predecessors, and you might find not only splinters but boulders in some of 

your former colleagues. I want to remind this House that in the last two provincial elections in the 

constituency of Rosthern we had several NDP workers who worked the same method as you do. Telling the 

people in Rosthern that Dave Boldt was dishonest, that he made deals, why, Mr. Speaker, they even went 

around and told them that I had joined the Roman Catholic Church to get their vote! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Why, you know the NDP lost its deposit in Rosthern in the last election and it will lose its 

deposit again when the next election comes around. Some Members opposite, this Session, have even used 

the Holy Scripture and made a mockery out of it, going back as far as Genesis to compare it with the present 

Liberal Government. You know, my hope and prayer for the Hon. Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) is, 

"Father forgive them for they know not what they do." 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I shall have more to say to the Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer). He can't take it. 

I shall more to say about some of the uncalled-for accusations made by the NDP but for the moment I am 

sure that my audience will want to hear the largest and best-ever highway program in the history of the 

province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I must congratulate my friend and colleague, the Hon. Minister for Prince Albert (Mr. 

Steuart) for bringing down the largest, the most acceptable, the most humane Budget I have ever listened to 

since I have been a Member of this Legislature. When practically every Government in Canada has problems 

balancing budgets, including those bright intellectuals at Ottawa, when perhaps no province has been harder 

hit by the economic recession than Saskatchewan, this Government has been able to cope with its finances 

and come up with no tax increases. As a matter of fact, property taxes will be reduced by the Homeowner 

Grant. This must be an achievement envied by all other governments in Canada. 

 

The construction of roads in Western Canada and particularly in Saskatchewan, has become a large major 

industrial force in our economy. The construction industry has estimated that the road builders rank fourth in 

size in Western Canada. In Saskatchewan it might well rank as the third largest industry in the province. In 

this fiscal year, 1970-71, the Department will have spent close to $70 million. This has made a tremendous 

impact on the improvement of the total highway system in every sector of our province. It has created an 

untold number 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

600 

of jobs for our citizens. Highway contractors have co-operated wholeheartedly in the employment of our 

native people. We have asked them to hire a minimum of five per cent, and the latest report I have received 

from our officials indicates that not one contractor has defaulted on this agreement. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — In some instances the employment ratio was as high as 15 per cent. The roadbuilders in 

Saskatchewan have made an outstanding contribution to employment and to the economy and in particular to 

the local area where the work project was performed. And yet, Mr. Speaker, these contractors are considered 

by the Opposition Members as under-the-table dealers with the Government. As if they were the type of 

citizens they wished we didn't have! We know the philosophy of the NDP. They would like to kick every 

contractor and free-enterpriser out of the province and have the Government do all the road building. I just 

want to read one little excerpt later on, on what people think about the highways in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Saskatchewan contractors, and those from Alberta and Manitoba, are welcome citizens of this province 

as far as this Government is concerned. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn't for the work we are providing for 

the Manitoba contractors those people would be unemployed under the Schreyer Government. There is a 

place for Government involvement in highways. I believe it is absolutely essential that the Department stay 

in the maintenance of our system, and I am convinced our Department is doing a very commendable job. We 

have two highway construction crews, with equipment, in the Department, and we feel that this is about as 

far as we want to get involved in the production end of it. The administration of the Department of Highways 

in Saskatchewan is recognized as one of the most efficient in Canada. We have constructed some of the best 

highways on the continent and the total highway system in the province is recognized as one of the best in 

Canada by tourists and by our own citizens. Just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, I read in the Saskatoon Star 

Phoenix on the editorial page the headline, "Our roads amaze him." He writes like this: "Being a former 

Easterner and being transferred to Saskatchewan, I am absolutely amazed at our excellent roads. I find the 

roads well looked after and, in general, in superior condition to those that I am used to." 

 

The Saskatchewan Liberal Government and I as Minister of Highways do not make under-the-table deals 

with individuals for the purchase of right-of-way, or with the contractors, and I'll have more to say about that 

after the program. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — After the radio image. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Yes, after the radio image. In 1964 there were 39 miles of four-lane highways in the 

province. Today the four-lane highway system has increased from 39 miles to 207 miles. Since 1964, nearly 

200 miles of highway have been constructed to provide road facilities for hauling timber to the pulp mill at 

Prince Albert. These roads are not only constructed for the pulp mill, but also provide an increased level of 

road service to this area and to the people of Saskatchewan and to the tourist industry in general. The 

Member for Prince Albert-East Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) is apparently opposed to highway 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

601 

construction in his constituency. 

 

Our paved mileage in 1964 was 2,100 miles. Many of these roads have since been re-graded and re-paved. 

Our current paved mileage adds up to 2,750 miles, and this figure does not include the 207 double-laned, so, 

in total we have almost reached the 3,000-mile mark. 

 

In 1964, the oil-treated highway mileage stood at 2,600. This has increased to 4,600, almost double since we 

took office. 

 

One of the finest repair depots in the province was opened several months ago in the city of Saskatoon, at a 

cost of almost $800,000. Numerous storage shops were constructed throughout the province to help maintain 

our equipment and give better service to our people. Our main repair depot is now under construction in 

Moose Jaw at a cost in excess of $1 million. In 1971 an $800,000 repair depot will be constructed in the city 

of Prince Albert and a $350,000 repair depot will replace the old repair depot here in Regina. 

 

The Muskody Bridge southeast of Prince Albert was officially opened this fall. The two major bridges now 

under construction and already mentioned, represent part of a capital works program announced last spring 

to create jobs for our citizens. 

 

Hundreds of people have been employed on these projects and structures and much of the raw material such 

as cement, steel and crude oil are purchased from Saskatchewan suppliers. These expenditures are a thorn in 

the flesh to the NDP. They say they want us to provide jobs, yet when we act they are critical for the services 

we provide, fearing we shall get elected because of them, and of course they are so right! 

 

The capital investment in our highway system is nearing the $800 million mark. I believe it to be in the 

interests of our taxpayers and Government that this investment be protected. Overweight loads can be hauled 

legally on our highways by permit only. These permits are issued by the Department of Highways. I am 

asking the trucking industry, including farmers, to make sure that their vehicles are properly licensed and to 

check their weight so as to avoid embarrassment and penalties, for the protection of our highway system and 

structures. 

 

In announcing the Highway Program for 1971-72 I shall use a different format to that used in the past. I 

believe it will be more meaningful to the House if I announce the program on a regional basis rather than by 

the individual highways. 

 

I should like to start with the constituency of Athabasca which represents almost one-half of our province. 

No. 2 Highway, from La Ronge south: the grading contract has been let and it will be completed this year. 

This will then have completed a new road from Prince Albert to La Ronge. 

 

Improvements will be made on No. 102 to Reindeer Lake. 

 

Highway No. 135 will be completed to Sandy Bay, and this will give that native settlement, about whom 

those people opposite are so very much concerned, the first all-weather road in its history. 

 

The winter road to Wollaston Lake has been constructed for 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

602 

the second time this winter and heavy equipment is now moving to the Gulf Mineral Mine site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now come to that famous constituency of Redberry. A large delegation from the Redberry and 

Turtleford constituencies came to see me last fall, without their NDP Members, because they are against 

highway construction, requesting a highway from Spiritwood to Radisson. I am pleased to announce that the 

grid road from Radisson to Hafford will be taken into the highway system on May 1, 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Now yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) threatened, 

he even tried to blackmail me into announcing that the grid road would be built in 1971 and oiled. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that delegation didn't even ask for it. All they wanted us to do is to take the load of maintenance off 

the shoulders of the municipality. Mr. Speaker, I should like to tell the Hon. Member that I have never in my 

life been blackmailed by anyone, nor do I intend to be blackmailed by the screaming irresponsible Member 

for Redberry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — He can do all his announcing of the highway program after the next election but it won't 

be as a Member for Redberry. He will just have quietly faded away. I should guess, Mr. Speaker, that he will 

be feeding hogs for some free-enterprise farmer, like the prodigal son of old. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Continuing with the highways, the remaining gravel in that northwestern part of the 

province of Highway No. 3 from Glaslyn to Turtleford and from Junction No. 26 to the Alberta border, 

including the highway into Frenchman Butte, will be oiled. 

 

Highway No. 26 from Loon Lake to Goodsoil will be oiled and considerable grading and paving will be done 

in the Meadow Lake area, to the sawmill complex. 

 

Highway No. 40 west of North Battleford to the Alberta border will be oiled. 

 

Grading and paving contracts will be let on Highway No. 14 from Biggar to Wilkie to Unity and west. 

 

We shall oil Highway No. 30 from Kindersley to Glidden, Highways No. 321 and 371 and Highway No. 13 

from Junction 21 to Consul. 

 

Grading contracts will be let for the construction of a new highway north and south of the new Leader 

bridge. 

 

A grading contract will be let on Highway No. 46 from Bracken to Junction No. 4 and Highway No. 37 from 

Shaunavon north will be hard-surfaced. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

603 

In the Swift Current region a grading contract will be let on No. 1 Highway from Rush Lake to east of 

Herbert. All paving will be completed on No. 1 and No. 32 Highways, and Highway No. 332 from Junction 

32 to 12 miles west will be oiled. 

 

Highway No. 42 from Dinsmore to Beechy to Lucky Lake will be oiled and a new grade will be constructed 

from Lucky Lake to the Riverhurst Ferry. 

 

Highway No. 367 will be oiled from Eyebrow to Bridgeford. 

 

Highway No. 11 from Chamberlain to Hanley will be paved, completing the first set of lanes of the 

four-laned highway. Recapping of Highway No. 11 from Regina to Lumsden will be completed in 1971. 

 

Oh and I am not forgetting the constituency of Rosthern because what is good for Rosthern is also good for 

Redberry. 

 

Highway No. 12 from the 13-mile corner north of Saskatoon to Hepburn corner will be paved. 

 

Again on No. 11, grading will be completed this year from MacDowall to Rosthern and paving from 

MacDowall to Prince Albert. 

 

We shall pave No. 3 Highway from Prince Albert to Birch Hills, and oil No. 302 east of Prince Albert. 

 

No. 20 Highway will be oiled from Humboldt to Pilger, and regraded from Pilger to St. Benedict. 

 

Paving will be completed in early summer on Highway No. 14 east of Saskatoon. 

 

Highway No. 39 from Drinkwater to Corinne will be paved this year, and Highway No. 334 to Avonlea will 

be oiled, and the grid road from Avonlea to Briercrest will be taken into the highway system on May 1,1971. 

 

Highway No. 58 from La Fleche to Fir Mountain and No. 19 Highway from Kincaid to Junction No. 43 will 

be oiled. 

 

Highway No. 18 from Oungre to Lake Alma will be regraded and No. 18 will be oiled from Lake Alma to 

Junction No. 6. 

 

Paving of Highway No. 35 south of Weyburn will be completed this year. 

 

A grading contract will be let on Highway No. 33 from Kronau to Junction No. 35 Highway. And I want to 

say that a portion of this contract will be done this year. 

 

All grading and paving of Highway No. 9 from the U.S. Border to Stockholm will be completed this year — 

and this will ensure the re-election of the Members for Souris-Estevan, Moosomin and Cannington. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Highway No. 56 north of Indian Head will be regraded and oiled. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

604 

Another grading contract will be let on No. 1 Highway from McLean to Qu'Appelle, and work will continue 

on the Regina By-pass near the Base Hospital area. 

 

Highway No. 10 from Duff to Melville will be paved. 

 

Grading and paving of Highways No. 14 and No. 9 in the Yorkton area will be completed. Contracts for 

grading will be let from Saltcoats to Churchbridge and from Insinger to Foam Lake. 

 

No. 5 Highway will be paved from Watson to Quill Lake, regraded from Canora to Rama, and oiled from 

Togo near the Manitoba Border to Junction No. 57 Highway. 

 

No. 57 Highway, through Duck Mountain Provincial Park, will be regraded and hard-surfaced. 

 

No. 8 Highway north of Norquay will be oiled. 

 

No. 49 Highway from Kelvington to Okla and No. 314 from Preeceville to Junction No. 5 will be oiled. 

 

No. 35 Highway from Wadena to Junction No. 49 will be regraded. 

 

Highway No. 3 from Junction of No. 23 to Mistatim will be regraded. 

 

Highway No. 35 at Nipawin will be re-routed and regraded to align with the new Nipawin bridge, and 

Highway No. 55 will be regraded from Choiceland to Smeaton. 

 

There are numerous small projects, not mentioned in this report, that will be implemented this year, such as 

isolated highway safety programs or improvements, highway right-of-way beautification; a multitude of 

minor and medium-sized road projects related to the Department of Natural Resources Parks and campsites, 

and numerous accesses to smaller communities, that will be included in the highway system. 

 

This program represents a capital outlay of $45 million and $20.3 million for the administration and 

maintenance of our highway system. 

 

I should like to read, Mr. Speaker, a report by the former Minister of Finance, then the Hon. J.H. 

Brockelbank, of February 21, 1964. I had a great deal of respect for this old gentleman. This is what he said 

and I quote: 

 

Efficient transportation systems are also necessary for the economic development of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That's not what the boys say over there now. Now listen, now listen what he said here: 

 

Few people would have believed even just 10 years ago that Saskatchewan would have 

nearly 4,000 miles of dust-free highway at this time. But we do have them now. Mr. Speaker, 

I am willing to predict that within the next decade we will have 8,000 miles of dust-free 

roads in Saskatchewan. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

605 

Well you know, after six years we have 8,000 miles of dust-free roads. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — But this gentleman had a vision. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — You people don't want roads. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Mr. Speaker, I should now say that perhaps the time has come when we are going to have 

"lawyer's day." 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Careful about corporation lawyers. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — No, I'm going to talk about the Socialist lawyer leadership. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Mr. Speaker, may I have the floor. You know most lawyers have always intrigued me and 

I believe almost every farmer shares that opinion with me. I really had not intended to criticize lawyers and 

judges for their behaviour and performances but I am prompted to do so when I read the article by one of 

their own colleagues, the Hon. Mr. Justice MacPherson, as reported in The Leader-Post of February 24. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — He said this, and I quote: 

 

It will be a long time before I, as a judge, or any group of judges or disciplinary body in our 

society, can say to the defending lawyer — 'You put up a useless performance, you did not 

put up a proper defence. You did not do your homework, you shall not be paid.' I have a few 

cases, and major crimes, when I wish I had the power to say that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this quotation would certainly apply to the two labor lawyers who now are trying to 

lead the NDP. I'd call them the "Gold Dust Twins" — mostly dust, no gold. 

 

It is no surprise to me that the NDP elected the Hon. Member for Regina Centre as their leader over the 

supposedly bright young man from Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). 

 

I remember the news media had selected Mr. Blakeney to win on the first ballot. It must have been a real 

shock to him to find himself trailing on the first and even on the second ballot. So he quickly scrambled over 

to the Wafflers 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

606 

and made a deal with them and got their support on the third ballot. 

 

The Hon. Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale has a little more commonsense — not much but a little more. 

He would not deal with the Wafflers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I am convinced that he detests them just as much as I do. He dislikes the union leaders and 

his dislikes labor strikes. He would not make that kind of deal with these outfits, and you know it cost him 

the leadership. 

 

MR. STEUART: — But he had his pride. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — If Judge MacPherson is critical of the conduct of some of our lawyers, then I can assure 

him that there are tens of thousands of citizens in Saskatchewan who have been concerned for many years 

about the behaviour of some of our lawyers and some of the court procedures and sentences that have been 

handed down from day to day. 

 

Surely the people of Saskatchewan realize that we cannot permit the administration of the welfare of this 

province to fall into the hands of two unproven lawyers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — These professional people are completely unpredictable. Our good police forces 

apprehend the criminals and the law breakers and in many instances they are humiliated by the legal 

profession for "lack of evidence" and the charges are dismissed. The end result is, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

a permissive society that ruins our social and spiritual values and eventually will be the downfall of 

mankind. 

 

Why then did not the Leader of the New Democratic Party select a farm representative as his Deputy so that 

the farmer for whom they seem to have so much concern would have a strong representation within the 

Party? Why did he not appoint the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer)? Well that question is very easy to 

assess. You know, gentlemen and Members of this House, the Member for Kelsey is no more a Socialist 

than I am. No farmer is a Waffler, nor is he. He doesn't believe in state ownership of his farm lands. He has 

stated publicly that he has no confidence in the Leader or his deputy, how right he is there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Mr. Speaker, how he ever got mixed up in that group to your left is a real mystery. But he 

won't be there for very long. He strikes out every time he goes to the plate. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Go back and say that part again about the lawyers! 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

607 

MR. BOLDT: — I notice a great deal has been spoken in the past two debates, and I said in my opening 

remarks, that all the NDPs speak about is hate, envy and preaching that they are the saviours of the poor. 

Their message in this House so far as been, "Hate your enemies, call them crooks, Boldt deals under the 

table with the contractors, Steuart steals $500,000 and gives it to his friends in Prince Albert, and the 

Premier sells out to the United States." Such propaganda just doesn't get anybody elected. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Who said that? 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Mr. Speaker, if I have ever made a deal with anybody . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Do the Messer part again, he's just coming in! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — . . . if I have ever made a deal with anybody I have made it with one of your Members 

opposite. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — How about the old highway at Mortlach? 

 

MR. BOLDT: — And if he . . . 

 

MR. KRAMER: — How about the old highway at Mortlach? 

 

MR. BOLDT: — You can speak tomorrow, my dear friend, you can speak tomorrow. I have something to 

tell you afterwards. 

 

If I have ever made a deal I have made it with one of your Members opposite. If he is an honest man, and 

fair, and I hope he will be, he can tell your caucus what kind of a deal I have made and whether this was 

unfair. This deal costs a pile of money and yet he has the audacity to stand up in this House and say that we 

are spending money. I want to talk about the deal I am supposed to have made with a certain Mike Gabruch 

at North Battleford, as claimed by the Member for The Battlefords. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Let's hear it, this should be good! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I am reading from The Leader-Post, as reported in The Leader-Post: 

 

Mr. Kramer suggested that the present Government was using taxpayers money to line the 

pockets of his political supporters and friends and referred to a land owner near North 

Battleford who received $400 an acre for land for a highway which he said was not worth 

more than $50 bucks an acre. He said it was swamp land . . . 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I did not, I said it was sub-marginal land. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — You said it was swamp land. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

608 

MR. KRAMER: — Check the record! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — And you know I . . . 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, I demand that he checks the record. I said it was 

sub-marginal land, and it is in the records. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I heard him say that it was swamp land. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I have the records, and the records . . . 

 

MR. BOLDT: — He can't take it. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — You bet I can take it, you better take it too. The records speak for themselves. The 

record said that I said that this was sub-marginal land, it's a bloody gravel heap. It isn't swamp. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! That's a point of debate. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — No, no, Sir. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Members have a right to make the statements they see fit in this House. Then 

the House will make up its mind on the basis of the statements and counter-statements that are made. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, may I draw your attention to the fact, I am not debating, I want to draw 

your attention to the fact what he said I had said. I tell him to check the records, Mr. Speaker, and the records 

will clearly indicate, what I said. He denies it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It is not for the Chair to authenticate every statement that is made in this Chamber. One 

Member makes a statement in connection with this, the other makes a statement in connection with that. The 

House itself will make up its mind on the basis of the evidence that is placed before it as to who is correct 

and who isn't. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, there is another matter out of order! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — That will be all the interruptions right now! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — On another Point of Order, the Minister is also referring to a former debate. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I am quoting from The Leader-Post, and I'll table this if you want it tabled. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

609 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Member can't use a quotation from a newspaper commenting on this debate or 

quote words from a former debate of this Session that is now closed. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Well, Mr. Speaker, now that we have the Member for The Battlefords settled down, I 

want to just talk about this negotiation. I looked at the file and I never saw or heard of this fellow, Mike 

Gabruch. I see that the negotiations were carried on by a land appraiser by the name of Jack Warren, and our 

Chief Land Negotiator, A.S. Hawes. 

 

MR. E.I. WOOD (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, did you not say that reference 

could not be made to a former debate. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Now I'll settle the argument right here and now. The Member has no right to 

quote from a newspaper article which is commenting on this debate. Period! Whether he is commenting on a 

closed debate by editorial comment or by any other means, the Member has no right and he has no privilege 

to open another debate. He has however every right and every privilege to state what he knows to be correct 

within his own personal knowledge as being a fact in his own department. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — You can't pull that trick, Kramer! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — There is the truth now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the land appraiser, a man by the name of Mr. Jack Warren, who was in the Department long 

before I was there, and the Chief Land Negotiator for right of way, A.S. Hawes. We have an agreement 

signed, this is all the correspondence that there is, and I see no recommendation from the Premier and I see 

no recommendation from Dave Boldt, and it is signed by Mr. Warren, Mr. Hawes and Mr. Holmes. The 

agreement is signed by Mr. Mike Gabruch. This is top land. You wouldn't know the difference between 

sub-marginal land, swamp or good farm land. Let me put it on the record, and I want to put this agreement 

on the Table, I'll table it so that he can see it, and if he can read it and understand it he might get wise from 

it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Put the 'under-the-table' deal there too while you are at it. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — You know, Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge I have never met this farmer. I have 

never made an under-the-table agreement, nor did the Premier. It will prove but one thing, that the The 

Battleford Member made one of his worst 48-ounce cases I have ever heard of. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

610 

MR. BOLDT: — Last year, Mr. Speaker, Members will remember that I was perhaps the only one to 

criticize the Operation LIFT program and the Wheat Board operation. Not one Member opposite had 

anything constructive to offer but sang high praises of these programs. All they did was snicker. Oh, now the 

Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) thinks he knows it all. One was almost led to believe that Otto 

Lang came from their camp. Now all of a sudden the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) finds it 

necessary to criticize the Operation LIFT and the suggestions of the Wheat Board that more barley should be 

sown. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — That's not fair! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — You know, it takes a Rhodes Scholar lawyer about two years to wake up and make up his 

mind. Finally he realizes that Operation LIFT was one of the most ill-conceived programs ever to be forced 

on the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I must remind the Leader of the Opposition that this program was approved, endorsed and 

forced upon farmers of Saskatchewan by a very bright young lawyer, and it was wrong from the start to the 

finish. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — A Liberal corporation lawyer! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — The farm economy is still hard pressed, mainly because of the ineffectiveness of the 

Wheat Board and Federal Government policies, particularly through Operation LIFT. The LIFT program was 

initially introduced to put $100 million into the farmers' pockets, and we'll be lucky if we get $60 million. If 

the Wheat Board adheres to its early commitment of eight bushels of wheat quota on summer fallow this 

could mean that less wheat will be delivered this year from the farm than in the previous crop year, when the 

quota was based on cultivated acres, and when we had the initial unit system. Now the Federal Minister of 

Agriculture, and the Minister in charge of the Wheat Board have come up with the bright idea of the Farm 

Stabilization program. If this "stabilization" program will stabilize the farmers as did Operation LIFT it 

should be thrown in the wastepaper basket before takeoff. All they are attempting to do is to shift funds and 

in reality it will cost the Federal Treasury almost nothing. The farmers will be asked to contribute 3 per cent 

to the fund and about $45 million will be saved by not paying storage payments. 

 

MR. STEUART: — We have freedom of speech on this side of the House. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — If the Stabilization program is to be applied in the current crop year, then I must admit that 

the grain farmers will receive a $100 million welfare cheque, because we are not contributing to the fund at 

this time and our elevator companies will receive storage payments in this crop year. However, I predict that 

if this program is to be implemented the individual farmer and his organizations will be paying for it at great 

costs to the farmer in the long run. Can we farmers imagine 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

611 

how well our elevator companies will fare if we take from them $40 million in storage. I will wager that 

every company will be broke inside of two years, so what will happen? The grain companies will raise their 

handling charges, and the farmers will foot the total bill. I sincerely hope that every farmer and his 

organization will see to it that we are not manipulated into another program that we cannot afford to live 

with. 

 

If my criticism of the Wheat Board has led to the resignation of the former commissioner, then I think I have 

been rewarded. My only concern now would be that we get a free-enterpriser business-minded individual as 

head of the Wheat Board. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Ross Thatcher! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — How can a Maritime lawyer, hired by a Socialist in Saskatchewan as Securities 

Commissioner during the Tommy Douglas regime, expect to gain the respect and confidence of the 

Saskatchewan farmers? I am confident that the people of Saskatchewan would rather be governed by a 

successful hardware merchant and rancher . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — . . . and a successful furniture dealer and a long-time mayor of Prince Albert, Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, even if the Minister of Welfare or the Minister of Highways is nothing but a dirt farmer. This is a 

far more realistic combination than a matched set of labor union lawyers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one would not have imagined that the Socialist Opposition would dare to criticize the 

Government's announcement of the new pulp mill for the province. One could have expected every 

fair-minded citizen to agree that this type of industry, one that would generate the expenditure of about $175 

million, would greatly assist in solving the unemployment problem and put our economy back on its feet. 

 

Long before the Session began, the Leader of the Opposition made public that the debate in the coming 

Session, and the next election, would be fought on the issues of the farm economy and the unemployment. 

But by the tone of the Throne Speech Debate and Budget Debate thus far, it is evident that the election issue 

with the NDP will be the pulp mill and pollution. Scarcely are the farm issues and the unemployed 

mentioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not noted for becoming excited very quickly, but if the NDP think these issues can 

generate support for their Party, then it's going to be the dullest election ever held in Saskatchewan and the 

greatest Liberal victory in the history of the province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition cannot be that naive. The only support they can 

expect to get is from a few union labor leaders and the Wafflers. But somehow, some long-haired, ragged, 

foggy and fuzzy thinkers, and radicals, the hippies and the yippies and the draft-dodgers, have infiltrated 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

612 

into the ranks of the NDP, creating chaos within their own ranks. It is really pathetic when one considers that 

some 15 to 25 years ago, the Party, then the CCF, was led by some very respectable people. 

 

But some Federal NDP party leaders want no identification with the Wafflers. Premier Schreyer of Manitoba 

says that there is no room for them in the Manitoba NDP. But here in Saskatchewan, with the NDP, it's open 

house, first come, first sign up and we'll peddle your wares. 

 

I just want to make one more statement about the Hon. Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer). 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Why does your party want two out of three farmers . . . ? 

 

MR. BOLDT: — The Hon. Members opposite have a grave concern about the poor, and safety on our 

highways. I want to make a comment about the Hon. Member for The Battlefords who is extremely 

concerned about the safety of our highways. I share that concern with him. I want to read from the Debates 

and Proceedings as stated on page 597, in 1969, and I quote Mr. Kramer: 

 

We hear something about public safety, and insurance costs again from the pious Member 

from Rosthern. 

 

He goes on to talk about the dangerous intersection on No. 5 and the old No. 4 Highway where several 

accidents and deaths have occurred. He goes on to say: 

 

This callous disregard of public safety, this penny-wise and pound-foolish attitude of this 

Government in failing to provide the necessary overpass on the top of the hill, or at least a 

4-way stop of speed limit has resulted up to August of last year in accidents involving 40 

cars. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

I warned the Minister at that time once again of the dangers involved and was told that 

people would have to learn to obey the law. 

 

You know when you read his speech it almost sounds like the Sermon on the Mount. I say it is the sermon 

from North Battleford. He also goes on to say this about me. 

 

The Fuhrer (in German that means Hitler) . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — Get a record and we'll sing heil . . . 

 

MR. BOLDT: — He says "the Fuhrer has spoken, regardless of the consequences, and that was once again 

by the Minister of Highways." 

 

So the Hon. Member from The Battlefords decided on his own to erect signs, disobeying the laws of the 

Province. Well, Mr. Speaker, we removed the NDP signs and we made the necessary corrections officially at 

this intersection. You know, we even went one further, we have removed the impaired drivers and 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

613 

drunks from our highways, and I am pleased to report that not one single accident has occurred at that 

intersection since. I'll even go further. If the Hon. Member for The Battlefords wants us to build a bicycle 

lane alongside our highways for him and his pals, I shall consider even doing that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I'll build you a bicycle lane. 

 

In politics, Mr. Speaker, there are may rewarding moments and there are some real trials and tribulations. 

But one of the most punishing and frustrating times to me is when I am expected to listen to such utter 

nonsense and stupidity coming from the lips of those opposite, who, some people think, are intelligent. This 

is one area where Prime Minister Trudeau and I think alike. Mr. Speaker, I am sure it is obvious that I cannot 

support the amendment but I will support the main motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.H. WOOFF (Turtleford): — I should like to ask the Member a question. I understood him to say 

that the Member for Turtleford, along with some others, didn't believe in highways. Is it not true, Mr. 

Minister, that fall after fall, I have written to you asking that certain sections of the highway be considered? 

Is it not true that I have stood up in the House and thanked you on behalf of the people of Turtleford, year 

after year for the work that was being done? 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Mr. Speaker, I can recall that he has maybe written one letter in all the years that I have 

been here. 

 

MR. F. MEAKES (Touchwood): — Can I ask the Minister a question before he sits down. Is he intending 

to table the list of the highways like he has done other years? 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Oh, yes, Mr. Speaker, if I didn't he wouldn't be able to understand. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it has been a long time since I have been making 

speeches in this House. 

 

First of all I want to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) for his Budget. By the looks of the 

Budget it sounds as if the Deputy Premier and Treasurer is more interested in Schreyer and labor lawyers and 

so on. Before I go on with this I want to pay tribute to our retiring Leader Hon. Woodrow Lloyd, for the 

many years of service. Some of the most progressive steps, in Saskatchewan and Canada, were taken by one 

the greatest Leaders that this Province has ever had. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — I will say, may he long be remembered. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

614 

I also want to congratulate our new Leader and our Deputy Leader. They have already made their mark and 

have proven themselves in the past as very capable. The people of this province are waiting for an election so 

that this province can start moving ahead again with good, sound and sober leadership. 

 

I want to — I see the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) has gone out — remind him that when he talks about 

draft dodgers that I have a copy of a letter here dated December 15, 1969, from the Mennonite Central 

Committee of Canada and it reads in part: 

 

We also favor the admission of American draft dodgers seeking a Canadian refuge from 

militarism. 

 

I thought that he would be interested in knowing that they don't all agree with the Member for Rosthern. The 

letter was to The Right Honourable Pierre Elliot Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. 

Seeing that he is Mr. Boldt's hero, what does he think of him now? 

 

I want to go on and bring to the attention of this House, that the High School Soccer championship was 

brought to my constituency again for 1970, but instead of Yellow Creek it was the high school for Kinistino. 

They took out such teams as Hague, Willowbunch, St. Thomas College at North Battleford. They said that 

the toughest team to beat was another team in my constituency, the team from Yellow Creek. So you see that 

we are interested in sports and good healthy people in our part of the country. This team will be visiting the 

Legislature sometime in the near future and I hope that I shall have the opportunity to be able to introduce 

them to the Legislature. 

 

I should like to bring to the attention of this House, Mr. Speaker, some of the work that is being done in my 

constituency. We have a school for retarded children and also a farm home. The people in the Kinistino and 

the surrounding areas are to be congratulated for what they have given the retarded. I want to tell this House 

that it is a project that can well be copied by many other communities in this province. The success of the 

Haven of Hope in Kinistino was the result of a lot of hard work by dedicated people involved. Any help that 

this Government can give to the Haven of Hope in Kinistino will certainly be appreciated. 

 

I have about 900 Indians in my constituency. I should like to convey this message to the House from my 

Indian friends. I ask the Government to look into these matters. There is a community pasture that grazes a 

large number of cattle but because the fees are too high, the Indian people are unable to use it and therefore it 

is out of their reach. 

 

They also have dugouts that are not protected from animals and from humans as well. I should like the 

Government to look into these matters. 

 

Telephone service is very poor and could stand improvement. The Reserve office is an extension of a pay 

phone and has absolutely no privacy at all. The housing program should be speeded up. Fifteen houses a year 

for the next five years would catch up with the problem. For 1970 they only had 11 houses and, therefore, I 

suggest that in order to keep pace it would be wise to speed up the housing program on that Reserve. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

615 

The Indian people would also like very much to be involved in making decisions for the programs that are 

inaugurated on the Indian Reserve. They don't appreciate having things just shoved onto them. They want to 

be a part of it. 

 

We have heard a lot during the Session of labor, teachers, strikes and so on. It seems to me that the 

Government opposite is more interested in dividing people in order to rule. We have heard of teachers 

against trustees, hospital workers against hospital boards, farmers against labor, and lately, province against 

province. They are more interested in running Schreyer's business than running their own. He must have a 

good program because they are very much interested in it. 

 

After seven years of Liberals in this Province, what have we got? We have a Liberal depression, and believe 

me, the people of this province are waiting for that election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — We sometimes hear about labor paying into the NDP's fund. I am not ashamed of 

these lunch pail dollars that are coming to the NDP. I am not ashamed of the wheat dollars that are coming 

from the farmers for our campaign, but if the Liberals want to talk about party funds, they should read the 

Dorion Inquiry and see what they think about themselves. Let them clean their own house when they were 

dealing with the underworld. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Give it to them! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Oh, I have it all here and if they want it I will read it all to them, but they know all 

about it. St. James Street, Bay Street, and they say who pays the piper calls the tune. Well I should like to 

know who is calling the tune over there. 

 

They then say that we are dominated by labor lawyers and union men. I think that it is good for this province 

to know who are the candidates in the NDP for this province in the next election. We have 20 farmers, 

including one housewife. We have 13 teachers. We have two church ministers and that should match the 

Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt). We have one insurance agent, one rural municipality secretary, two 

machinery dealers, one railroad engineer, three lawyers — and they are not corporation lawyers, one doctor 

and that real bad buy, one union representative, one realtor, one instrument technician, one co-op secretary 

manager, one professor of economics, one auctioneer, one co-op insurance adjuster. Now if you call this 

labor domination, I want to say that the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) is a pretty good man if 

he can dominate the whole party. Perhaps we should have a few more. 

 

I should like to say a few words about taxes and I am going to try not to run this too long. I want to remind 

the Government of a speech made by the Premier who was Leader of the Opposition at that time, volume 4, 

page 24, of the 1963 Session, and this is what he said, and this, in part, tells us the story why the little people 

are so heavily taxed in this province. I am quoting from Hansard: 

 

What specific legislation will we introduce to attract new industry? First of all we will 

introduce the tax 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

616 

concessions to new industry or mines locating in the province. If necessary we will consider a 

tax holiday from five to ten years for new corporations. This formula has been very 

successful in other countries like West Germany, France, Porto Rico. If my hon. friends were 

not tied to a dogmatic theory maybe we would study what has gone on in those countries. 

 

Now, I want to say that by the looks of things big businesses have had their tax holiday. So how about giving 

the little farmer a tax holiday now? It is his turn. We have had seven years of it and you said five to ten and 

we can't stand any more. I want to point out what has happened to the mill rates since this Government has 

been in power in my constituency. 

 

The mill rate in the Flett Springs municipality for schools in 1960 was 26.7 mills. In 1964 it was 28.3 mills, 

but in 1969 it was 41.3 mills. Now you see where the big jump comes in? As soon as the Liberals got in big 

business got their holiday and the little fellow had to pay. 

 

In the Kinistino municipality the school mill rate in 1960 was 29 mills; 1964, 29.2 mills, this was just an 

increase of .2 mills, but in 1969 it was 37.5 mills. So there you go. Who is getting the tax holiday? It is not 

the farmers, I am telling you that much. Now I want to show you the Kinistino Post — a notice of tax 

enforcement. Almost three quarters of a page of tax enforcements. The date of the editorial is November 18, 

1970. Now we have to go back to the Dirty Thirties to see anything like this. And you can brag about a lot of 

little candy that you are handing out, but these people are in trouble. To be on the list they have to be at least 

two to three years in arrears. How long are they going to hang onto their farms? 

 

Then you take another paper: "Sheriff Sales." You have to go back to the Dirty Thirties for this. I don't think 

that I have to say any more as these papers speak for themselves. You just check in your local papers and you 

will find just about the same thing there. 

 

Let's talk about agriculture. I can remember when we brought power to this province. We were told to 

electrify with windmills. 

 

MR. MEAKES: — Who said that? 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Oh, Jimmy Gardiner, but he is gone. They are bragging about bringing power to the 

Reserves. I am going to tell you that if the Liberals had stayed in power the white man wouldn't have power. 

It wouldn't even be near the Reserves today. When the CCF were voted out in this province you could travel 

down highways and see the countryside lit up, farm after farm was lit up. And today you drive down the 

highways and what do you see? It looks like a morgue — black — the farmers have left. Dead towns, 

villages, hamlets are dying out. I have always said we needed sober direction but when you just go over the 

things briefly, you have heard, "grow more wheat," and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) was 

there when that was said. It was after a fund-raising banquet, they say. And they said, "Grow all the hogs you 

can." I remember that during the Estimates when I asked the Minister, 'How far do you intend to go?' He 

said, "Oh, you cannot hurt the price of hogs more than 2 cents per pound." They went down to 20 cents. And 

do you know at 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

617 

20 cents the farmer is only getting exercise out of it, moving the grain into the hogs and then hauling the 

manure out. That's what they get. Yes, it is a physical education program for the farmers! What we need is 

direction, but direction after the proper research has been made. It is easy to say, "grow more hogs" if the 

price is good, but if you flood the market you have ruined it. 

 

Later they came out with Operation LIFT, designed to put two-thirds of the small farmers out of business. 

Big deal! But the funniest part of the whole deal is this, this afternoon we heard the Member for Rosthern 

(Mr. Boldt) and he said: "This guy Otto Lang is a corporation lawyer." And Otto Lang, when he was going 

around my country, he would meet the NDPs and the moment they said anything against Thatcher he would 

say, "Put it here boys." 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Now there is a provincial election in the offing, so it is Otto Lang and Trudeau. Do 

you know what they remind me of? They remind me of my little boy when he was about two or three years 

old and he would come running to the house, out of breath, and say, "Daddy, the neighbor's cat was in the 

hayloft fighting with ours again." And do you know he wasn't very old before he found out that they weren't 

fighting. That is the kitten fight that we are having displayed between the Provincial Liberals and the Federal 

Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — The people of this province are catching on to it. We have had all kinds of LIFTS, 

Mr. Speaker. We had post office lift and that was a bad one. A lot of communities have died out because of 

the post office. When you take the post office out you lose the little store, now lose the filling station. Then 

the services are just 10 miles further away so more farmers have decided, "Well we can't take this anymore. 

We've got to leave." They move out and I want to thank the Save Your Post Office Committee in my 

community for the work they have done. I want to even thank the mayor from the city of Prince Albert who 

took up the cudgels in favor of the small communities. I want to thank the former mayor of the city of 

Regina who did the same thing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — But the mayor for the city of Saskatoon he shilly-shallied around as to whether he was 

going to hurt the Liberals or not and he played around with it. He was waffling. I'll put it this way, he was 

waffling. 

 

But after we had saved the post offices the Liberals had the little program on Prince Albert saying — well, 

without offending the Member from Lumsden (Mr. Heald) — how the Attorney General had saved the post 

office. And you know a lot of people would just sit back and say, "Well look, we did some work here too." 

That's what bugs a lot of people. So anyway if he did help us, I want to thank him for it. We saved three post 

offices out of seven but I want to say this, that some of the post offices such as Silver Park should be 

considered. Because post offices 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

618 

like that should not have been closed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Resources should not have been closed. Brancepeth should not have been closed but 

finally we wrote to Ottawa and said, "We have to accept but what can we do with people who haven't got the 

ability to understand?" Then we started breaking through a little bit — we saved three out of seven. 

 

Now, this is going to move a lot of farmers out. So what are you going to do about it? Are we going to fight 

for our post offices? And now this moving out of two-thirds of the farmers. We talk about our land bank. 

Well, it is quite evident to see that this society is winding up with a handful of land barons, and slums, and 

people on social aid in the cities. That's where we're ending. They criticize our land bank and they criticize 

our program. I want to remind them what they said in 1944 when the NDP was talking about saving the 

farmers. They said the big Russian bear is going to come out and squeeze you out of your property. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Tucker! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Oh yes, Tucker. You know since I've been in this House I think there are only 11 

people left since the first time I came here and I hope to come back once more. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — They said they will squeeze you out of your land. I want to put it to this House — was 

there a period where farmers owned their land more than they did between 1944 and 1964? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — How much do they own of the land today? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Corporation lawyers . . . 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Corporation lawyers are making money. I don't want to take too much of your time. I 

should like to read some letters that appear in papers like the Melfort Journal by a fellow by the name of 

Carlson. You know, these farmers put things pretty well and rather than read the whole letter I'll just read it 

in part. Quoting from the Melfort Journal of February 3. 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Read the whole letter! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Oh, you know you don't want to listen to me that long, time is getting on. We want to 

hear something about what you fellows have to offer. 

 

Why is it, Mr. Editor, we are bent on thinking of mass production which often results in the 

elimination of many useful members of our society? Haven't we lost all 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

619 

respect for the individual whose welfare should after all be the prime importance. It is 

thoughtless action such as this that has sent many of our people to the ranks of the 

unemployed thus increasing unemployment across the nation and to depressed levels and the 

deplorable figure. Thanks, Mr. Editor, respectfully yours, Carl Carlson, Melfort, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I could read the whole letter but all the way through his letter thoughts are expressed very well. You 

can read the letter. I have given you the date and so on. 

 

Now we hear about population. Well, we're given all kinds of figures on population as far as the province is 

concerned. I want to talk about my constituency. The two constituencies that were given to me, you know, 

Melfort-Tisdale, it's a great big one. One of the biggest rural constituencies in the province. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — How many people? 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Oh, I have about 13,140 voters according to the enumeration. It would swallow up 

about three constituencies like Last Mountain. You take the Rural Municipality of Kinistino. From 1964 to 

1970 it lost over 700 people. The Rural Municipality of InverGordon No. 430 from a population of 2,108 is 

down to 1,367. I've got them all here. A total loss in the rural municipalities in my constituency — after 

deducting the gain in the urban ones is over 4,000 people. That is almost the equivalent of one town like 

Melfort, short of 800. It is four towns like Wakaw, about seven towns like Birch Hills, seven towns like 

Kinistino. 

 

The only town that gained was Melfort. It went up by 700. The other towns have gained about 50, some have 

lost. The villages just held their own but where did 4,000 people go is the question that we ask today. Did 

they all go into the pulp mill? They haven't all gone fishing either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I want to depart from population and talk about the redistribution Bill which was passed 

last year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — This redistribution Bill — there is no need of going all over it — and I'd like the 

Attorney General just to wait. 

 

MR. HEALD: — I'm just going back here to . . . 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — I want to tell this Government that if an election is called on the basis of the 

redistribution Bill of 1970 — Bill 86 — whether the Government wins or loses it will be a scar on the 

history of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — It will also be a scar on the Liberal party and I ask the Government in all sincerity to 

reconsider its position 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

620 

on the question on redistribution. It is much better to lose with honor and dignity than to win and have to live 

with a foul conscience. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — I want to appeal especially to the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), the Hon. Member for 

Lumsden, who, I am sure, has won respect and confidence through his position as Attorney General of our 

province, and could be in line for an appointment as judge which I am sure would only be his natural goal. 

But I warn him that by supporting Bill 86, this last redistribution Bill, it has not only lost him this respect but 

it has proven to all people that justice doesn't always prevail, even when men in his position have an 

opportunity to act on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't want to take too much time. Another few minutes and I'll be through. I like to listen to 

our young people today and I'll put it this way that we are the custodians of this planet and I believe that we 

should take care of it so that the environment will sustain life for future generations after we are gone. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Some of us resent the young people for long hair, drugs, and you name it. But have 

we not provided the breeding-grounds for such conditions? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — The redistribution Bill is one that will create unrest. Have we not created the 

conditions? I sometimes go back to the time when I was 15. What were we faced with then? We were faced 

with the depression. We were faced with the war. But somehow there were blue skies beyond the clouds. But 

place yourself at the age of 15 or 20 years old today and what are you faced with — you are faced with a 

dying planet, black skies, dirty rivers, dying fish, and you name it, unemployment. And the people who are in 

charge of our resources are behaving like a bunch of hogs that have just discovered the slop-pail. So many 

people think only in terms of bucks and have forgotten human values altogether. 

 

What is wrong, Mr. Speaker, when God has given us the breadbasket of the world to look after and so many 

people are dying of starvation? Throughout the world they tell us two-thirds of the people are going hungry. 

What is wrong with people living in poor houses and so many people unemployed? What is wrong with the 

Government that hasn't got the ability to understand the needs of its people? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — What is wrong with the Government who cannot keep the environment clean? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

621 

MR. THIBAULT: — What is wrong with the Government that cannot give sober direction? What is wrong 

with the Government that foments hatred between trustees and teachers and students and hospital workers, 

hospital boards, between farmer and labor, between provinces? What's wrong with people leaving the 

province at the rate they are today? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Mr. Speaker, you have to go back to the Dirty Thirties to see anything near to what is 

happening today. Why don't we promote a little more brotherhood. How different things could be. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, this Government has a total disregard for human values. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — It is creating a society where the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting 

poorer. Polluted environment, dark skies, and dirty waters. Let us hope that Homecoming '71 will see new 

leadership for Saskatchewan. A new deal for Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — With what I have said you can very well see that I will support the amendment and I 

will not support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.R. BARRIE (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, first I wish to associate 

myself with the previous speakers in complimenting the Hon. Member for Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) 

on his appointment to the Provincial Cabinet. Also I wish to extend my congratulations to the Hon. Member 

for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) on his election to the leadership of his party and as Leader of the 

Opposition, and to the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) in his selection as deputy 

leader. 

 

Despite the criticism of the 1971-72 Budget by the Members opposite I consider it an exceptionally good 

one. I congratulate and commend the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) on his presentation. I am certain the 

majority of Saskatchewan people will appreciate the ability of the Treasurer in once again bringing down a 

balanced budget without increasing taxes or borrowing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BARRIE: — He has accomplished this in spite of certain problems we in Saskatchewan, like all other 

jurisdictions, have been confronted with in recent times. At the same time he has provided for substantial 

increases of expenditure for education, health services and highways. Increases are also provided for other 

departments of government so as to furnish the people of 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

622 

Saskatchewan with a high standard of service and expanded benefits. 

 

This Budget is aptly described by the Treasurer as a pay-as-you-go budget which is certainly a sound and 

generally approved good business principle. This Budget is just one more outstanding example of the good 

management this Government has consistently provided in administering the affairs of the Province for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BARRIE: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to turn for a few moments to the constituency I have 

the honor to represent. The residents of this constituency appreciate the benefits they, along with all 

Saskatchewan residents, have had and are receiving due to the efforts and realistic approach exercised by this 

Government over the last seven years. They recognize the substantial assistance given their municipal 

governments by way of equalization grants as compared to those of the former government. In addition, the 

assistance received in grid and farm access roads and in snow removal grants. The change in municipal roads 

and bridges, not to mention highways, in the Pelly constituency since 1964 is remarkable, to say the least. 

And we certainly have highways in the constituency at the present time that we didn't have prior to 1964. 

 

Our people appreciate the Homeowner Grant which is of importance to so many people in meeting their 

municipal tax levies, especially those on small fixed incomes. The farmers are most appreciative of the 

privilege extended to them in the use of tax-free fuel in their trucks. The increased grants to education have 

shifted a burden from the taxpayer on real property. The majority of people realize that high quality 

education for our young people is a must and also are aware that costs of education have increased sharply in 

recent years. Had the Provincial Government not increased assistance for education very substantially each 

year the tax rate for this essential service would have been of real concern to those owning taxable property. 

 

Again I say I am certain the people in my constituency recognize and appreciate the extra assistance which 

will allow the local authorities to hold the line or effect a mill rate reduction in 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BARRIE: — A number of the constituents in the Pelly constituency are native people who in recent 

years have made decided progress. On the Cote Indian Reserve a modern village has been established with 

modern homes fabricated in their own up-to-date housebuilding plant on the reservation. The village is 

served with power, natural gas and telephones. On the adjoining Keesekoose Reserve they too have 

established a modern village with a large number of attractive homes and other buildings and they have the 

benefit of modern utilities. 

 

These people, all registered Treaty Indians, are conscious and appreciative of the interest shown by this 

Provincial Government in regard to their problems and their needs, even though, 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

623 

technically they are a Federal Government responsibility. 

 

The Provincial assistance in bringing power, telephone and natural gas to their reserves was of great help to 

them. Incidentally the Cote Indian Reserve was the first Indian reservation in Saskatchewan to be served 

with natural gas. The recognition by the Provincial Government of their hunting rights under The Indian 

Treaties is also greatly appreciated by these people. The emphasis given and assistance rendered by the 

Province in upgrading academic and technical training and assistance in securing employment have been, 

and is, a great boon to these native people. They realize the change since 1964. Previously they were ignored 

by the Provincial authorities, receiving little or no attention until this Government took office. 

 

The Pelly constituency is composed of people of many ethnic origins. Most are hard working, thrifty 

individuals and good farmers. During the time of restricted grain quotas, they along with other rural 

residents, experienced serious problems. However, in many instances they diversified their farm operations 

and produced those grains more readily saleable as rape, malting and feed barley. Many returned to the 

production of livestock and poultry and dairy products. As a result, while they still have difficulties, they are 

not confronted with the same degree of problems as those farmers in other parts of Saskatchewan where 

wheat is the chief commodity produced. With barley quotas set at 30 bushels per acre and rapeseed at 15 

bushels, this allows disposal of sufficient of these grains and provides ready cash income to the farm 

population. Agriculture is the main industry in the Pelly constituency and I'm satisfied will continue so in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there is one achievement for which the present Saskatchewan Government merits 

recognition, it is the establishment of a political climate in the province which attracted interest in the 

development of our natural resources. For too long the benefits of additional revenues, large scale 

employment, were denied us due to lack of capital investment in the development of our renewable resources 

and in particular our forests, most of which were left untouched with a large percentage rotting and going to 

waste. The pulp industry is a prime example. The former Government failed to have a pulp mill industry 

established in Saskatchewan in spite of the fact that there were huge quantities of raw material available. 

 

Today we have a successful pulp mill and pulpwood industry in operation and a second mill project ready to 

enter the construction stage. The people of Saskatchewan own a 30 per cent equity in the Prince Albert mill, 

which could be disposed of at a tremendous financial advantage for Saskatchewan, if deemed advisable to 

sell. The Prince Albert operation has provided several hundred jobs at above average wages. The second 

proposed mill being larger will provide many more good paying jobs for Saskatchewan people, especially 

those in North West Saskatchewan, who have, to date, subsisted on low incomes with the resultant poor 

standard of living. Now there will be opportunity for many of them to obtain gainful employment and 

provide themselves and their families with a desirable living standard. 

 

It is very difficult to comprehend the reasoning and attitudes of the NDP as related to the mill at Prince 

Albert and the pulpwood industry. They have been and are so critical and vociferous regarding lack of job 

opportunities while at the same 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

624 

time are hypercritical of the pulp mill and woods operations, which industry and operations provide and will 

provide hundreds of permanent, good paying, jobs for the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Many ridiculous and absurd statements and charges have emanated from the NDP in recent weeks regarding 

the harvesting of our pulpwood resource. It is difficult to determine as to whether these utterances result 

from sheer ignorance or are designed to mislead the general public for purely political purposes in an 

endeavour to discredit this Government, which produced a viable industry where they failed. I'm inclined to 

believe it is possibly a combination of both ignorance and political motives. 

 

The former CCF Government engaged a group of experts from the United States to conduct a survey of the 

potential timber resources in Northern Saskatchewan. In 1959 their report was received — often referred to 

as the Stanford University Report. I believe it is agreed this was a good and extensive report. It stated that 

there was ample pulp timber in Northern Saskatchewan to maintain, not one, but several mills in perpetuity. 

Those who read this report, and I believe a goodly number on the opposite side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

have done so, should know and realize there is an ample timber resource in Northern Saskatchewan. 

However, they persist in expressing doubts as to the ability of our forested area to provide the necessary raw 

material to maintain the one pulp mill at Prince Albert. This of course, Mr. Speaker, is complete rubbish. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BARRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I propose to give this House some pertinent and documented facts to 

indicate just how wrong these gentlemen are. 

 

Prior to the completion of negotiations for the establishment of a pulp mill at Prince Albert, Parsons and 

Whittemore and the Department of Natural Resources for the Government, conducted independent, 

exhaustive surveys of the area covered by the eventual agreement. The licensed agreement area consists of 

18,000 square miles. Of this area there are portions covered by water and some unforested lands. The 

technical reports indicate there is approximately 15 per cent covered with water and 35 per cent 

unproductive or unforested lands in this licensed area or roughly one-half of the area is unproductive. On this 

basis, roughly 9,000 square miles of forest is available to harvest and produce. The forest inventory of this 

area shows 57 million cords of wood available. If used by the mill at the rate of 2,000 per day, which it is 

doubtful they will ever require, this available cordage would provide a supply for over 90 years, not 

considering natural regrowth and reforestation production. By another calculation and again being generous, 

if 60 square miles of forest per year were required to supply the mill, it would take 150 years to deplete the 

present stands — again not providing for natural and planned regeneration. The suggestion by my friends 

opposite that the supply for the mill is doubtful, thus downgrading this industry, is not only utterly ridiculous 

but is unbecoming in men in their position. 

 

Both the pulp company and the Government are interested in establishing a proper and productive 

reforestation program consisting of scarification, seeding and planting. It is essential 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

625 

that practical on-site research and experimentation be undertaken in order to develop and employ the proper 

techniques and methods for successful and meaningful reforestation for our type of soil, our annual rainfall 

and climate. 

 

Since 1967, extensive experiments and trials have been conducted by the Department of Natural Resources' 

foresters and other personnel, by competent technical experts for the Prince Albert Pulp Company, and by 

the Federal Government Canadian Forestry Services, who have highly qualified experts and an on-site 

laboratory fully equipped in this area. These trials have produced valuable information for future use and the 

overall results have been extremely successful. This work will continue until proven methods and techniques 

to meet our requirements will produce a satisfactory long-term management plan for the lease area. Such a 

plan will ensure harvesting on a sustained yield basis. The ultimate goal is to have available a forest resource 

in this area in perpetuity. Under current policy plans, and information available, the rotation of a pulp wood 

crop in this area is 60 years. 

 

To date the Prince Albert Pulp Company have sacrificed 1,580 acres. They have planted 786,000 trees on 

another 1,356 acres. The planting has been mainly white spruce. Scarification has been concentrated on Jack 

Pine cut-over areas to assist and hasten natural regeneration from the seed contained in the cone-bearing 

slash. During 1970, DNR crews planted 512,000 White Spruce trees in this area and seeded to White Spruce 

100 acres. This coming spring planting of 800,000 trees in the lease area is scheduled. These will be 600,000 

White Spruce and 200,000 Jack Pine. Additional planting will be completed this year involving use of 

tubelings or container stock. Eighteen test plots of controlled burning experiments in 1970 conducted by the 

Canadian Forest Service will be planted and seeded for trial tests. Substantial increases in planting and 

seeding are scheduled for early implementation. 

 

These plans involve our tree nurseries at Prince Albert and Big River. Our current annual production is 

1,750,000 trees. Plans for expansion of production are underway whereby 4.5 million trees annually, will be 

available. Continued production expansion will be proceeded with at an accelerated rate until future 

requirements can be met. New techniques and methods of production are being and will be adopted to 

accomplish the objectives. White Spruce and Jack Pine will continue to be the species production for 

reforestation projects. 

 

Larger volumes of seed will be harvested annually to meet new requirements. With some minor additions, 

our seed extraction plant will handle the extra volume. Currently, we have 1,000 pounds of White Spruce 

seed on hand. Now this figure and amount may appear insignificant but when you learn that the average 

number of seeds per pound is 250,000, this would thereby provide a potential of 250 million seedlings from 

our current seed stock, and I believe that it would be agreed, our seed plan is adequate. 

 

For those who first visit a clean-cut area, they are bound to be shocked. However, for harvesting timber 

resources such as we have in Northern Saskatchewan, this is the universally accepted method. By proper and 

adequate forest management and reforestation procedure new growth within a comparatively short period, 

completely alters the landscape to a pleasant sight. 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

626 

It can be likened in many respects to the satisfaction most people receive from viewing a field of early grain 

in June on any farm in the agricultural area of our province. 

 

Some concern has been expressed regarding wildlife environment and habitat. Large, mature forest stands 

are generally not considered good wildlife habitat. This holds true for our northern forests. Hence, clear-cut 

areas will produce an alteration in vegetation which is by and large, beneficial to wildlife. Studies made 

indicate there is a rapid reproduction of brush or browse. This regeneration also provides ideal cover for 

smaller animals and is ideal for moose and deer. Our Fisheries and Wildlife Branch has recently initiated an 

investigation and study to evaluate the effects of forest harvest methods on wildlife habitat in this area. All 

indications point to an improved habitat in the northern forest harvested areas and this will result in a 

decided increase in the wildlife population. 

 

Due to the economic and other benefits being realized from the use of our forest resource by the pulp 

industry, it is obvious that the attraction and establishment of this industry in Saskatchewan is one of the 

major accomplishments of this Government. The beneficial effects of this industry will be experienced for 

decades to come. I predict those who have criticized this operation so violently at times, will regret their 

actions and negative approach for purely partisan political gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now turn to lumber production in Northern Saskatchewan. Again, Members opposite have 

made rash and irresponsible statements regarding the phasing out of certain lumber operations, particularly 

the Hon. Members for Canora, Kelsey, North Battleford and Shellbrook. 

 

The fact that we have a pulp mill in Saskatchewan has brought about changes in small sawmill operations. 

The mill has provided an attractive market for wood chips. We can no longer permit saw mill operations, 

which result in an approximate waste of 50 per cent of our timber resource. In order to take advantage of the 

market for chips at good prices and fully utilize the spruce timber harvested for lumber production, requires 

expensive equipment. It is not practical, economical nor possible to install such equipment in small portable 

mills. Barkers and chippers are only feasible in a stationary mill complex. 

 

The Simpson saw mill at Hudson Bay will produce and is producing chips from otherwise waste material. 

The saw mill currently being installed at Big River by the Saskatchewan Timber Board and the new mill 

complex under construction at Meadow Lake will do likewise. Chips produced at these mills will be sold 

and delivered to the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

Formerly, the Saskatchewan Timber Board contracted with numerous small mill operators for their 

requirements of sawn lumber at the Board's planing mill at Big River, Meadow Lake Reserve and Carrot 

River. For proper utilization of our timber resource this method of lumber production had to be discontinued. 

The planing mill at Reserve is being phased out as soon as current inventory can be processed and sold. 

When this decision was made, there was concern for the small mill operators and contractors in the Reserve 

area, and for the future of the Timber Board employees in the Reserve Planing Mill. Arrangements were 

made with Simpson Timber Company to offer every Saskatchewan 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

627 

Timber Board contractor in the area, the opportunity to contract with them for a volume equivalent to their 

former sawing volumes within the same logging area, and to be assured of future contracts as long as their 

performance was satisfactory. Simpson Timber officials contacted each contractor concerned during the past 

summer, some on several occasions. All but two of these contractors are currently producing logs or working 

for the Simpson Timber Company in the woods at Hudson Bay or in the Reserve area. Of the two, one was 

not interested and is located, I am informed, in another area of Saskatchewan. The other one was contacted 

on several occasions but failed to accept a contract when it was offered him. In late October, long after the 

Company's 1971 cutting plans had been finalized, his son-in-law requested a contract. He was advised he 

could not be accommodated at such a late date but if there was a vacancy during the season, he would 

receive favorable consideration. 

 

On June 17 last, Mr. George Jackson, General Manager of the Saskatchewan Timber Board, and Mr. Robert 

Jocoy, General Manager of Simpson Timber Company, arranged a meeting with the Timber Board staff at 

Reserve. The employees were fully acquainted with the future plans for the Reserve operation. When 

operations cease at this location, sometime this year, certain employees will be transferred to other Timber 

Board operations. All others will be given employment opportunities with Simpson Timber at Hudson Bay 

where the lowest hourly paid wage paid by Simpson in the mill is $2.82 an hour. 

 

Certain propaganda suggesting the Saskatchewan Timber Board contractors were misused and that no 

consideration was given to their future is obviously false. Charges that the Saskatchewan Timber Board 

employees were given no consideration for continued employment are grossly incorrect. 

 

There are more men employed in mill and woods operations in the Hudson Bay and Reserve area than at any 

time heretofore. It may be of interest, that the $2 million expansion program of Simpson Timber is one and 

one-half months ahead of schedule. When in full operation, which will be very soon, they will employ an 

additional 40 men in the Mill and I expect some of them will be former Timber Board employees, and 

upwards of 100 additional men and equipment in the woods. Many other misleading and erroneous 

statements have been made regarding the license areas held by the Prince Albert Pulp, Simpson Timber, 

MacMillan & Bloedell and the Meadow Lake Sawmill Company. An example is to the effect that these 

companies have a complete monopoly on all timber within these specific areas. This is certainly not true. 

Provisions have been made and are in effect, whereby the Saskatchewan Timber Board, L & M Wood 

Products, Northern Wood Preservers and others obtain their supply of lumber, railway ties, posts, rails, and 

poles from these very areas. In addition, annually, quotas of spruce, jack pine and poplar are available for 

permits to farmers, settlers and small mill operators from these same areas. 

 

The Hon. Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) recently criticized the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) and myself regarding a meeting we attended in Meadow Lake late last fall. He inferred that we 

ignored the mill operators in attendance and gave no hope of a continued supply of logs. It is correct that I 

informed them, the former Timber Board contractors, that the Saskatchewan Timber Board was interested in 

contracting for further production in that area on a very limited basis, but that 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

628 

certain volumes of saw timber would be available on a permit basis. In the light of the Hon. Member's 

remarks it is now amazing that as of February 15, last, there was still available and not applied for, 300,000 

feet of white spruce and 150,000 feet of jack pine saw timber in the Meadow Lake region. No applications or 

requests have been turned down without valid reasons. There is also plenty of good saw timber available in 

the McCusker Fire area. This is just another prime example of irresponsible statements and criticism. 

 

1968, 1969 and 1970 were extremely bad years for forest fires. In 1970 nearly 400 fires required action by 

our fire suppression crews and equipment. The costs of suppression totalled $1,125,000. The majority of 

these fires, as in former years, were caused by electrical storms travelling from west to east across Northern 

Alberta, our province and the Province of Manitoba. Our sister provinces also experienced serious forest 

fires during the same period of 1970 from the same sources in most cases. 

 

During 1970, we reorganized the Forestry Branch of the Department, which up until then was responsible for 

fire suppression. We have now set up a special branch to direct and control all fire suppression activity. It 

will also have control of all Department heavy motorized and other equipment. It is considered this will 

provide more effective control and management of our fire suppression ground equipment, aircraft and 

manpower, resulting in speedier action when an outbreak occurs. As an extra assist, installation of VHF 

communication equipment covering the entire forest area is currently being proceeded with. This equipment 

will be in use during the 1971 fire season and it will greatly enhance the efficiency of our forces during fire 

suppression operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now wish to comment on an important activity of the Department of Natural Resources — 

parks and recreation. 

 

Saskatchewan has 14 Provincial parks. At an early date the Blackstrap recreation area, south of Saskatoon, 

will be designated as the 15th Provincial park. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I wish to digress for a few minutes to express my congratulations to Mr. Jeff 

Charlebois and the Canada Winter Games Committee and staff for the excellent job they did in organizing, 

managing and staging the spectacular and impressive 10 days of sport events. The organization and 

implementation of their programs was superb. The 'Mountain' and ski facilities at Blackstrap to which the 

DNR falls heir, will be a monument for years to come, to Jeff Charlebois and His Worship Mayor Sid 

Buckwold in particular. I am certain the ski facilities will prove to be a successful operation and their 

importance will be enhanced in the years ahead. We appreciate the effort put forth by so many to make this 

winter sport facility available to my Department. 

 

Now to return to the subject of Provincial parks. In the past seven years, $1,750,000 of capital expenditure 

has been made in our Provincial park system. There are currently 73 regional parks, widely distributed 

throughout the province as compared to 22 in 1963. To 99 per cent of Saskatchewan residents, this means a 

place to relax, camp or picnic at a maximum distance of 30 miles. During the 1970 summer recreation 

season over 2.5 million persons visited our 14 Provincial parks. This 

 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

629 

is a 12 per cent increase over 1969. I believe this increase could be attributed in part to the growing 

awareness of the expanded recreation programs available to our park patrons. Upwards of 200,000 persons 

participated in the organized recreation and water front programs. 

 

The number of camping permits issued in Provincial parks was up 24 per cent over 1969 so it is obvious 

Saskatchewan residents are utilizing the recreational facilities available in their own province more than ever 

before. Nearly two million people visited our 73 regional parks during the 1970 summer season. This also 

represents an increase of 24 per cent over last year’s attendance. The largest attendance for an individual 

regional park during 1970 season was at Thomson Lake where there were over 93,000 visitors. From these 

statistics, I’m certain you will agree our Provincial and regional park systems are being utilized well. I’m 

equally confident that both our local and the travelling public appreciate the facilities and services available. 

 

During 1970, a total of over 5,810,000 persons visited our Provincial parks, picnic and camp grounds, 

recreation areas. In our Provincial camp grounds there were 87,000 camping permits issued in 1970 alone. 

Proper maintenance of our present facilities along with the expansion necessary in many areas is required to 

cope with the ever increasing demand for these recreation services. These services received major emphasis 

during 1970 and steady improvement of these facilities will continue during 1971. 

 

1971 Homecoming festivities, fittingly launched by the extremely successful Canada Winter Games, will 

continue throughout the year. Thousands of out-of-province visitors will be in Saskatchewan. Family 

reunions will be the order of the day, hundreds of local community sponsored events and functions will be 

staged throughout the province. It is our belief that the current year 1971, will be a banner year for tourism 

and recreation in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget before us contains many generous items which will enable the DNR to carry out its 

plans to meet the increased tourist demand. These items are only a few of the large number of benefits this 

Budget will provide for our province and our people during the next fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the illogical, unrealistic, impractical, and in some instances ridiculous, alternatives and 

suggestions tendered, proposed and expounded upon by the Members opposite, only strengthen and confirm 

my conviction and I am certain that of a large majority of Saskatchewan citizens, that the greatest tragedy 

that could be inflicted upon Saskatchewan, would be the return of a Socialist Government at the next general 

election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall certainly support the Budget and oppose the amendment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


