



















































Hansard: August 02, 1971


131 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

4th Day 

 

Monday, August 2, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Seating of Elected Members 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day may I ask the 

Premier if he intends to introduce a Bill to allow for the seating today or tomorrow for the Members for 

Athabasca and Gravelbourg. I understand both of the Members were declared elected election night in the 

final count and have now had their recounts and in both cases the judge has declared them the winner. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Government is still considering this matter. We want to 

know among other things whether it is likely that there will be appeals to the recounts as there was not in the 

case of the Member for Prince Albert West. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — A supplementary question. May I ask the Premier, I am sure he could find this out today. I 

can give him a statement right now on behalf of the Opposition that we will not be appealing in Gravelbourg 

recount. I am sure that he could ascertain quickly today or very early today whether they intend to appeal in 

the case of Athabasca. As a result could we have a statement maybe early this afternoon, because frankly 

then we should like to introduce a Bill to do the same thing, we would much sooner the Government do it of 

course because that would indicate they intend to support it. Could we know today? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I shall attempt to ascertain that later today. It will be decided in our case by 

the candidate in Athabasca and his constituency organization and I cannot speak for them without consulting 

them. 

 

Choiceland Iron Mine Feasibility Study 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Has the Premier laid on the table the feasibility study, or is he prepared to do it now, in the 

case of the Choiceland Mine? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have not, it was an oversight, not exactly an oversight, but inability to command any 

Xeroxing facilities today because the public servants aren't here. We will certainly do that tomorrow at the 

latest. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

132 

 

Changes in the 1971 Highway Program 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, the other day I asked the Premier — the Minister of Highways 

was not in — whether he would elaborate on the number of changes that were made in the highway program, 

since you took office. He made a statement that there would be some changes made. Could we have the 

changes? 

 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I do not have with me a full statement of the very 

minor revisions that were made in the 1971 highway program, nor do I have at hand a list of the extra items 

that were included in the program and contracts awarded prior to June 24. I shall be willing to give the 

Member a resume of that tomorrow when I have had more time to look up material. 

 

Souris Valley Extended Care Hospital 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) 

could supply us with the answer to the question I directed to him on Friday? 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, in respect of the Souris Valley Level IV Care. 

The answer there, Mr. Speaker, is that there will be about 350 patients initially and hopefully the place will 

open on November 1. Initially it will take care of the patients that are now in hospital, there may be some 

exchange between the nursing homes and the Souris Valley Extended Care Unit, but for the time being it 

will primarily be taking care of the patients who are in the mental hospital, but eventually it will 

accommodate additional patients. 

 

Mr. Grant: — The question was: how many new patients will be admitted in 1971-72? The Minister had 

indicated that the hospital would shortly be open to receive patients from Southeastern Saskatchewan. I 

gather that in 1971-72 there will be no new patients, that is none to speak of. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, there may be some new patients but not very many. 

 

Leave Requested for Introduction of a Bill Respecting Certain 

Elections in the Constituency of Athabasca and Gravelbourg 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I with consent of the House we could revert for a moment to the 

Introduction of Bills. Before you ask, I will explain what I have in mind so the House can judge — I realize 

we have gone past that item but I knew we were going past — I wanted to ask the Premier under the Orders 

of the Day what were the intentions of the Government in regard to Athabasca and Gravelbourg elected 

Members. I want permission to revert to the Introduction of Bills or notices of 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

133 

 

Motion whichever is the appropriate item on the agenda. I wish to ask the Assembly for unanimous consent 

to move an Act respecting certain elections in the constituency of Athabasca and Gravelbourg, with this 

thought in mind. If the Government decides later this day that they will facilitate a Bill, then the Bill has 

already started through the machinery and I don't think it really matters whether we introduce it or the 

Government introduces if it we both agree with it. Obviously if the Government doesn't agree . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Assembly for unanimous consent to move: 

 

An Act respecting Certain Elections in the constituency of Athabasca and Gravelbourg. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Leave is rejected, it will have to be tabled as notice. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Was leave rejected, I was . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, leave was rejected. If when leave is asked one Member or more says 'No' well that 

means leave is not granted for the special notice. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I didn't hear, I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — There were at least two 'No's' that I heard. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Can we have a vote on that or is that just . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You don't make the decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! When the Speaker asks: is leave granted? It only takes one Member to say 'No', and 

I heard at least two 'No's.' I did try to count them, but I know there were at least two, so I have to declare that 

leave was refused. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I give notice that I will on Wednesday next move for leave to introduce an Act respecting 

certain Elections in the constituency of Athabasca and Gravelbourg. 

 

I resent very, very much that they refuse permission to facilitate this legislation. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

Athabasca Pulp Mill Project 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Before the Orders of the Day I have a statement. I apologize to the 

House, it is a rather lengthy statement, but it is a matter of importance. I want to make it before it is made 

public. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

134 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to announce today that I advised Mr. Karl Landegger by telephone and in writing that 

the Government will not proceed with the Athabasca Pulp Mill Project. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We won an election on that! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, the Premier has the floor! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I had hoped to deliver this decision to the President of Parsons and Whittemore in person, 

but Mr. Landegger was confined to his bed and unable to make the trip to Regina. Instead, I met with Mr. 

Joseph Condon, vice-president of the firm and spoke to Mr. Landegger by telephone. 

 

My letter to Mr. Landegger states in part: 

 

It is my wish that immediate steps be taken to determine the expenditures or obligations that 

may have been made or incurred to date in connection with the project and that no further 

obligations be incurred or expenditures made in respect thereof. 

 

Still continuing the quote: 

 

I have arranged for representatives of the Government to meet, without prejudice, with you 

or your representatives for the purpose of determining the expenditures made or obligations 

incurred in respect of the project to date and for the purpose of discussing such proposals as 

may be made to finalize the matter. 

 

Still continuing the quote: 

 

It is my view that immediate steps should be taken to this end. Accordingly, I have instructed 

Mr. David Dombowsky, Deputy Provincial Treasurer, to be prepared to meet with you or 

your authorized representatives from or after 1:30 p.m. on the afternoon of August 2, 1971, 

and thereafter to such extent as may be necessary or convenient for this purpose. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the letter states that unless this issue can be satisfactorily settled at a reasonably early 

date, it would be the Government's intention to introduce legislation to deal with the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should now like to comment on the financing of this project. Athabasca Forest Industries has 

issued and sold in Canada debentures in the amount of $35 million maturing on June 15, 1991. These 

debentures are unconditionally guaranteed by the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Under the terms of the debenture indenture, Athabasca Forest Industries Limited may redeem the debentures 

at par if the proceeds from the debentures have not been drawn down from the project fund by June 15, 

1972. Since this project will not proceed, no funds will be paid out of the project fund by June 15, 1972, and 

therefore the debentures should be redeemed by the company forthwith thereafter, along with accrued 

interest. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

135 

 

If the Company should in any way default on its obligations with respect to this issue, the Province will 

make good its guarantee. During the period before formal redemption takes place, the Province is prepared 

to purchase such debentures offered by holders at a price not less than par value. 

 

In addition to the financing in Canada, Athabasca Forest Industries has been negotiating in the United States 

the private placement of $72 million in promissory notes to be guaranteed unconditionally by the Province of 

Saskatchewan provided the terms thereof are satisfactory to the Province. Finalization of this financing on 

terms satisfactory to the Government has not been reached as at this date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear today that the Government is not prepared to proceed further with this 

financing. 

 

It is my belief that the decision not to proceed with the project will come as no surprise to the people of this 

province. 

 

In a pre-election statement, I indicated that a government led by me would not be bound by any arrangements 

made between the previous Liberal Government and Karl Landegger, president of Parsons and Whittemore. 

Subsequent to the election, I have had a number of meetings, the first with Mr. Landegger and the remainder 

with his officials. I regret that his business commitments in France and his subsequent illness prevented me 

from having further personal meetings with him. 

 

My objections to the project arise mainly from my concern over the financial risk, pollution control and 

forest management. 

 

There are many factors which have to be considered in addition to the normal risks associated with a project 

of this size. The pulp industry is presently built to over-capacity. This, coupled with the decline in the market 

due to a cutback in orders from major purchasers, has resulted in a drop in prices and very serious financial 

problems for the industry. Here in Saskatchewan a pulp producer has also to contend with freight rate 

inequities and many pollution unknowns. 

 

If the project were to fail, for whatever reason, our Government would have to find at least $149 million. 

This includes $107 million of guaranteed debt as well as other provincial commitments. A loss of this 

magnitude would sorely stretch the Province's ability to raise money for other worthwhile projects and would 

jeopardize the Province's existing programs. 

Parsons and Whittemore was prepared to increase the Province's share of equity in Athabasca. While this 

makes it possible for the Province eventually to benefit to a greater extent if the project succeeded, the 

Parsons and Whittemore proposal does not reduce the risk; indeed, it increases the Province's financial 

exposure. 

 

As far as pollution control is concerned, my Government is not satisfied that sufficient studies have been 

done to conclude that effluent can be controlled or controlled within a dollar value which would not 

jeopardize the economics of the mill. 

 

The mill, one of the largest in North America was to be 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

136 

 

located on the confluence of the Beaver and Dore Rivers. This is a very small river system and the problems 

of assimilation of effluent would, therefore, be compounded. This river system flows through Lac Ile a La 

Crosse and into the Churchill River system. Any uncertainty or miscalculation as to the design or operation 

of the system could cause immeasurable and irreparable damage to one of Western Canada's greatest river 

systems or, alternatively, could mean that the mill while constructed, might never be operated. 

 

The Van Luven Report, a study on requirements for effluent treatment at the mill, concluded that much more 

study was required to settle satisfactorily whether pollution could be controlled, by what means and at what 

cost. Officials of the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission and the Federal Department of the 

Environment indicated that the following major studies would have to be undertaken before it could be 

determined with assurance whether or not pollution of the waters involved could be kept to an acceptable 

level. The studies are four-fold, namely: (1) a study of the assimilative capacities of the water systems in the 

area and alternative means of providing for the required pollution control; (2) a study of the hydrological 

characteristics of the water systems involved to ensure that sufficient water supplies are available for the 

control of pollution in mill effluent as well as for the mill itself; (3) a study of existing fish and aquatic life in 

the rivers in the area so as to be able to predict likely effects of the operation of the mill on them and to 

propose methods of controlling these effects; (4) the study of the effects of the operation of the mill and of 

the forest operations on the general environment, for example, wildlife, forest resources, soil erosion, 

groundwater, etc., so as to minimize the impact of the harvest operation on these environmental aspects. 

 

The Company felt that many of the answers to these questions could be obtained by intensive and immediate 

studies. My feeling is that with so much at stake, we cannot gamble that the studies would produce sufficient 

information within the time available to the Company to proceed with the project. We cannot gamble that 

these studies would produce this information so as to enable the Government to make a reasoned decision. 

The problem is that the economics of the mill are predicated on an immediate construction start and there is 

no way of getting this information immediately. 

 

Forest management is also of great concern to the Government. Regeneration is known to be a problem in 

Saskatchewan forests due to long winters and scanty rainfall. As well, the Government is concerned that 

clear cutting of the type followed in Prince Albert and contemplated for Athabasca will make regeneration of 

certain species difficult. The Government is also concerned that the forest management practices which 

would have to be implemented in order to preserve hunting, fishing and environment generally, would make 

the harvesting of wood uneconomic. 

 

While the matters referred to above are not all of those considered, they are the main matters reviewed by my 

colleagues and me in arriving at our decision. After considering all relevant factors, we have reached the 

conclusion that it is not in the public interest to proceed with the Athabasca Pulp Mill project on the terms 

contained in the original documents or on any terms which it appeared possible to negotiate with the Parsons 

and Whittemore sponsoring group. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

137 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, the project will not proceed. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I on behalf of the Opposition make a 

short comment on the Premier's statement? I am disappointed, I am not surprised, but I am disappointed. I 

am disappointed on behalf of the people of this province and especially the people of Northern 

Saskatchewan. This to me is another clear cut victory for the Wafflers and the radical element in your party. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You can laugh, but those birds will have you laughing out the other side of your mouth, 

they are having it right now. 

 

It is very significant that this decision was taken after they had their famous meeting out in Qu'Appelle over 

the weekend. Again the string has been jerked and little Allan has jumped. Okay, I say that this is a defeat, 

victory for the Wafflers, it is a defeat for the unemployed, it is a defeat for the union movement, who wanted 

this program, who wanted this to go ahead, I know they wanted it to go ahead. If you answered the truth that 

you would know and you would admit in this House that a great many people in the union movement 

knowing there were a 1,000 union jobs just around the corner, at this particular project, were putting pressure 

on to go ahead with this. It is also defeat for the people of Northern Saskatchewan, the Indian and Metis, 

because no matter how much you talk, how much you say, the Indian and Metis would have received 

hundreds and hundreds of jobs in that mill, in the townsite and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . just as they have in the Prince Albert area, where over 30 per cent of the people 

employed have been Indian and Metis and still will be. Mr. Speaker, every objection that the Premier 

brought forward might have been covered, I don't say could have been, but I say might have been covered, 

and again similar to the case of the iron mine I say he rushed into it to please his radical followers and he 

should have taken more time. 

 

I am confident that the reforestation practices would not, as they are not doing in Prince Albert, jeopardize 

the future of that great forest up there, in fact it would have been improved. I am confident that proper 

pollution control methods within economic limits that would have still made this mill viable, could have 

been developed. I know that Van Luven took a more pessimistic view than some others, although he said it 

could have been done. That is one reason we brought in Sandwell Consultants who have far more 

experience, more experience probably than any other consultants in the world — and they are Canadians — 

in the development of effluent control and pollution control in pulp mills in northern Canada, and they were 

as confident that it could have been done. Granted there needed to be more studies. But, again, I think that 

the Government in view of the desperate need for industry and jobs, especially in Northern Saskatchewan, 

were ill-advised to cancel this. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

138 

 

This should have been at least carried on for another month or two and I think they would have had a great 

many more answers than they have today. Then if they found that they could not go on with it, then of course 

I don't question for one minute that it is the privilege of the Government to cancel this. 

 

I don't for one minute question that the Premier did when he was the Leader of the Opposition and in the 

campaigning point out that if he was elected it could well be that he would cancel it. He warned everyone 

concerned. This is one reason in fact the major reason, why we would not allow any drawdowns and some 

drawdowns were asked for, because while we had signed the contract and we had gone ahead, I recognized 

at the time that if we went too far down the road and the Government was defeated — as it was — and your 

Government was elected, and you decided — which you have the right to do, not to proceed with this and we 

didn't want this to be any more complicated or complex than it is today. Because when the Government 

withdraws from this, I hope that they will recognize the legitimate expenditures and costs to Parsons and 

Whittemore. No more than the legitimate, but certain the legitimate. I hope, and I ask the Premier to answer 

this question, I hope they will not follow through with the rest of the demands by the Wafflers and throw 

these people out without any compensation at all. 

 

I expect that they won't pay them one cent more than they have coming. But I also expect that they will give 

them reasonable compensation because we don't want to damage, any more than we have damaged now, the 

credibility and the credit, both financial and the credit of people making deals with the Government of 

Saskatchewan by summarily dismissing these people and saying, 'we don't care what you spent. We don't 

care what trouble you have gone to. We don't care what your out-of-pocket costs are. You are out.' If we can't 

come to some agreement we shall bring in legislation, of course. We all recognize in the final analysis that 

the Government has the power to pass an Act to kick these people out and give not a five-cent piece and I am 

sure there is nothing they could do about it. I hope, and I am confident, that the Government doesn't intend to 

act in this way, because these people are still a partner with the Government in the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

The Prince Albert pulp mill is a successful operation and I hope will continue to be. 

 

The other things the Premier mentioned. The markets. Of course the markets were difficult. Who is to say 

they will not be difficult. Anyone who knows the pulp industry knows that it is a very unpredictable industry. 

But when this mill would come on stream three or three and one-half years from now, those in the pulp 

industry, many in the pulp industry, some of the leading people in the pulp industry, are confident that the 

market will grow to the extent that it will be able to absorb this output. And, in a sense, it certainly would 

have been one, if not the most efficient mill at that time in Canada or anywhere in the world. It would have 

had no difficulty, at least in our opinion, of disposing of this product because it would be efficiently 

produced and certainly it would have been one of the highest quality pulp anywhere in Canada. 

 

I am bitterly disappointed they decided to arbitrarily cut this off. I think they should have had more studies. 

And as I say, I say today this is victory number two, three, or whatever number it is for the Wafflers and it is 

a crushing defeat for the unemployed who are looking toward some help from this 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

139 

 

Government, or from anybody to provide them with jobs. Again, I ask Mr. Blakeney to stand in his place and 

say, now that they have dashed the hopes of hundreds and hundreds of people, what does he intend to replace 

it with? What in God's name is he prepared to do for the jobless, the unemployed and the under-employed in 

this province now that he has summarily kicked out the iron mine, the pelleting plant, the whole program of 

expansion here at the steel mill in Regina, and now that great complex of the pulp mill in Dore Lake? 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I find it extremely cold in this Chamber. 

Are the others the same or am I sick? I think that the Government can economize some other ways than by 

fuel. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Address-in-Reply 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. B. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park), 

and the amendment thereto by Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition). 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, when I concluded my opening remarks on Friday, I said 

there would be a New Deal, a New Deal for many people in Saskatchewan, a New Deal for the unemployed, 

for working people generally, for the sick, for senior citizens — and a New Deal in resource development. 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, there is need of a new deal. There is no need to outline the evidence for a new 

deal. The Opposition in its amendment makes this case for me. 

 

Just one month to the day after our Government took office, the Opposition is critical because we have not 

done enough for our jobless citizens. Jobless citizens, Mr. Speaker. And there are jobless. There are jobless 

because Liberals deliberately created unemployment. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There are jobless because after seven years of promises, seven years of resource give-

aways, seven years of the taxpayers providing massive support for private enterprise. After all of these things 

there are more jobless today than there were in 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We have had seven years of applying every favorite nostrum dear to the hearts of the free 

enterpriser. We have seen unemployment rise and rise. And what's a complete answer to the Member for 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) is that we have seen thousands and thousands of our people leave our province 

in order to find a job. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

140 

 

Mr. Blakeney: —And after that record, Mr. Speaker, Members Opposite have the gall to come in here and 

be critical of us because this situation is not cleaned up after 30 days. But we are taking steps, Mr. Speaker, 

to make this province more attractive, more attractive for working people and more attractive for employers. 

 

Our first step is going to be to remove this climate of fear and oppression, to restore free and honest 

bargaining. We, Mr. Speaker, have faith in free men bargaining freely. 

 

As a start, Mr. Speaker, we will repeal The Essential Services Emergency Act, in its entirety. As I've said we 

are going to do this as a move to restore free collective bargaining in Saskatchewan. This is the first in a 

series of steps which will include rejuvenating the Department of Labour and ultimately the enactment of a 

new Trade Union Act. There will be new mediation and conciliation procedures, effective machinery and 

more highly capable personnel. My colleagues in this debate will be saying more. We are moving at this 

Session to shorten the hours of work, something we repeatedly called upon the previous government to do. 

Something which we have asked them to do. In seven years they did not change that legislation by one 

syllable. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, now, that there will be no Liberal-style labor courts under this Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I was most interested to hear last week, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) say 

that deterrent fees are a dead issue. I trust that he will also say that the Liberal-style labor courts are a dead 

issue . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . because as they well know they certainly were a dead issue in the political campaign 

which ended June 23. 

 

There will be announcements in the near future of other programs for working people. Mr. Speaker, I won't 

touch on them now. But let me assure you we intend to see that working people, like all others, enjoy first 

class citizenship and that their legitimate rights like the rights of others are fully and fairly protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is going to be a New Deal for the sick. There are still few Members of the Liberal 

Government of 1968 sitting in this House — not many, but a few — including the former Minister of Public 

Health (Mr. Grant). He will recall that when he introduced amendments to authorize these so-called 

utilization fees, I called them a tax on the sick. And they are that! A tax, and a flat tax. The fee is the same 

amount whether the patient makes $4,000 a year or $40,000 a year. And because it is a flat amount, 

regardless of ability to pay, that makes it a regressive tax. 

 

That would be bad enough. But going to the doctor or to the hospital isn't like buying a fishing licence. You 

can't choose whether you are sick or not. And it has been shown time 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

141 

 

and time again that people with low incomes have more health problems than those in the middle and in the 

higher income groups. Maybe sickness if why they have low incomes. I don't know, but the facts are 

perfectly clear. People with low income have more sickness than people with high income. 

 

So this tax on the sick becomes regressive with a vengeance. A flat tax is regressive because it takes a 

greater proportion of a poor man's income than a rich man's. But when a tax is devised not only to take a 

greater proportion of a poor man's income, but also actually to take more dollars from a poor man who is a 

sick man, then here is a tax which can only be called viciously unacceptable. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — So we say, Mr. Speaker, that tax must go and deterrent fees much go, and I am glad to say 

they are gone effective yesterday. 

 

So let's look at this tax from another point of view. How does it fall on different age groups? How does it fall 

on families of different size? Well by and large, big families have more difficulty making ends meet than do 

small ones. By and large, old people, retired people, live on more restricted incomes than those who are in 

the prime of their earning power. 

 

I could produce documentation by the yard to support these statements, statements that on the average people 

of 70 and over have smaller incomes than people in their earlier years and prove that people with large 

families have it tougher to make ends meet than people with small families. 

 

But I don't think anyone is going to dispute those facts. In short, older people and large families have little 

money to spare. 

 

So let's look at the impact of deterrent fees on three families. I picked out a couple, each age 35, no children. 

I also picked a couple, each age 35, with five children — 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 in ages. And then I have another 

couple who are 75 years of age, no dependent children at home. Now let's look at these three families. The 

35-year-old childless couple, in an average year, will require about 11 medical services in something less 

than three hospital days. Now compare this with the same family, two people each 35 but who have five 

children. We find that this family uses, not 11, but 40 medical services a year, and not three but about 10 

hospital days a year, just about three and one-half times as many services as our childless couple. 

 

Now let's look at our elderly couple, each of them 75. We find that this couple uses not 11, but 32 medical 

visits a year. That is three times as many as the childless couple. We find that this couple uses not something 

between two and three hospital days in a year, but 16 hospital days a year. In fact they use six times as much 

hospital services as our childless couple of 35. On the average, then, the family with five small children will 

pay three and one-half times as much utilization fee as the childless couple. The elderly couple will pay three 

times as many medical utilization fees, and six times as many hospital utilization fees as the childless couple. 

All these figures are taken, Mr. Speaker, from the 1970 annual reports 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

142 

 

of the Hospital and Medicare Plans. 

 

From these figures, Mr. Speaker, the following can be drawn. He who defends deterrent fees, as Members 

opposite did, as a proper basis for financing medical and hospital care, must be prepared to say that a 75-

year-old couple is three times, or six times as well able to pay taxes as a 35-year-old childless couple. He 

must be prepared to say that a 35-year-old couple with five children, is three and one-half times as well able 

to pay taxes as he would if he had no children. 

 

The Government of 1968, some of whose Members are sitting opposite, wasn't prepared to say that out loud. 

But the Liberal Government wouldn't have saddled this Province with deterrent fees if they didn't believe in 

that philosophy. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Unless they didn't believe — in fact they have stated — that they believed that the sick 

should help to pay for their own care. It is what the former Minister used to call, participating in the healing 

process. 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Someone has to pay it. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That, indeed, is correct, Mr. Speaker. Someone has to pay it and in our submission the 

people who should pay it are the people who are most able to pay and not the people who are sick and flat on 

their back. 

 

Now we hear, Mr. Speaker, that deterrent fees are a dead issue. I am certainly pleased to hear that. But if that 

is true — and I say, if it is true — then it is only because that Liberal Government is a dead government. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is only because that Liberal Party was repudiated at the polls. It is only, Mr. Speaker, 

because the people of Saskatchewan spoke out in their wrath and said that they agree, they agreed with the 

New Democrats who have unswervingly opposed deterrent fees, not only in 1968, but with respect to the 

Hospital Plan from 1947 and with respect to the Medical Care Plan from 1962 and I want to point out to the 

Members opposite that from 1947 to 1957, this Province supported the Hospital Plan out of Provincial 

revenues without a dime from the Federal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And even during those years we didn't decide that we needed to apply deterrent fees. Let 

me make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that we don't view lightly the whole problem of rising costs of health care. 

This Government is very deeply concerned about that problem. We were, when we were in Opposition, and 

we are now concerned about it now in power. We believe we have the directions or know the directions in 

which some of the solutions lie. The Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) will 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

143 

 

be saying much more about that as time goes on. But we say, and we say unequivocably that taxing the sick 

is not the solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Experience of the last three years has proved that beyond a shadow of a doubt. And even 

if deterrent fees had shown that they significantly lowered health costs — which they have not — this 

Government would still be taking action, still be taking action to repeal deterrent fees, because as I say, Mr. 

Speaker, deterrent fees are a vicious tax, are a regressive tax, an unfair tax, and that, Mr. Speaker, is why I 

say deterrent fees must go, and deterrent fees will go. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in our submission there should be a New Deal for senior citizens. Under the 

present Federal Government and under our former Provincial Government, both of the same political 

persuasion, older people had little enough to give them cheer and comfort. I believe, and all the people on 

this side of the House believe, that our pioneers have the right to retire in dignity, with some measure of 

freedom from anxiety and poverty. And to the extent of its powers, this Government intends to see that they 

have this right. We intend to give substance to a bill of rights for senior citizens — a new deal for those who 

have so much in the building of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I've already referred to the heavy burden of deterrent fees on the elderly. With this Session 

we will remove that burden, but we're going a step further. In recognition of the limited resources of most 

retired people, we've introduced legislation to abolish medical and hospital premiums for every resident 65 

years of age and over. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Beginning on January 1st, 1972, every senior citizen will receive medical and hospital 

coverage free as a matter of right. 

 

Liberals have expressed the view that this is too generous. They say that some people will be getting this 

help who don't need this help. They say it should be restricted only to those who get guaranteed income 

supplement. Let me make a few quick points. 

 

If the Liberal Party wanted to help those who get guaranteed income supplement, it could have exempted 

those people from the tax seven years ago and it did nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If the Liberal Party wanted to do something for people who get guaranteed income 

supplement, it could have relieved them of deterrent fees and it did not. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

144 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Thirdly, it suggests that somehow everybody who doesn't get guaranteed income 

supplement is comfortably well off. Well, let me just give you an example. If a person is, say 67 years old, 

gets a pension of $150 a month — he's not eligible for guaranteed income supplement. In 1970 he would 

have paid income tax of $7 or $8 a month, so out of his $142 a month he has to cover all his living expenses, 

and he had to cover deterrent fees and he had to cover his medicare and hospital tax. For such a person, a 

$36 cash payment is a significant item. We make no apology — for our part, we're proud of the fact that we 

can give such people the help that they so richly deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We have moved quickly to implement our election pledges on deterrent fees and 

removing the medicare tax but we plan to do more. We've begun work on a prescription drug plan which will 

make drugs available at reduced prices. We're planning similar action with respect to hearing aids and eye 

glasses and dentures and braces. As soon as practicable we will extend hospital plan coverage for senior 

citizens to include nursing care in nursing homes in the manner outlined in detail during the campaign. These 

steps, we believe, will go a long way toward removing the economic barriers to good health and adequate 

care for our senior citizens. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, we intend to fight in Ottawa, as the previous Government did not, to raise the Federal 

Old Age Pension. The present pension — sole support of many older people is a disgrace. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And the most recent increase is the Old Age Security Pension — a handsome 42 cents a 

month — is shameful. We'll fight to change that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has taken the first steps toward a new deal for senior citizens and during our 

first term of office, I want to promise this House — as I promised the people of Saskatchewan — that we 

will introduce for our senior citizens programs which will truly be a bill of rights for senior citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I turn now to resource development. 

 

As my announcement earlier this morning confirms, under this Government the people of Saskatchewan are 

going to have a New Deal in resource development. On Friday last, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart) had quite a bit to say about the Athabasca Pulp Mill project, negotiated and launched by the former 

Liberal Government, and I'll return to deal with his remarks of last Friday in a moment. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

145 

 

But, first let me discuss some principles of forest resource development. Mr. Speaker, there can be no shred 

of a doubt in the mind of the Member for Prince Albert or in the minds of the Saskatchewan people where 

we stand on the development of our resources. We made that perfectly clear in policy statements during the 

last Legislature and during the recent election campaign. More particularly, on February 18, 1971, I stood in 

this House and laid out the criteria we would apply to the Athabasca deal or to any other pulp mill deal. Let 

me review them. 

 

I said that, first of all, the deal must be financially prudent. (2) I said it mustn't permit huge promoters' profits 

out of construction contracts, management fees and the like. (3) I said it must be open and fully disclosed 

with all the fringe benefits and other benefits to the developers disclosed and costed with reasonable 

accuracy. (4) As I said, it must guarantee reasonable protection for subcontracts. (5) It must fully protect our 

forests, our waters and our air against pollution. (6) It must preserve our forests and our lakes as wildlife 

habitat and recreation areas. (7) It must provide reasonable compensation to small operators who have lost 

their livelihood because forest cutting rights have been signed over exclusively to the mill. 

 

Do these criteria mean that we stand opposed to resource development? Of course not. Do they mean that we 

close the door to outside capital? Of course not. They are concerned with how we develop our resources and 

for whose benefit. They're concerned with long-term costs and benefits as well a short-term gains. We 

believe they're reasonable and I think the people of Saskatchewan indicated by their votes that they thought 

they were reasonable. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — So to further amplify our action in calling a halt to the Athabasca project under the 

existing arrangements, let's see how the deal of which the Leader of the Opposition is so proud, let's see how 

it measures up to these criteria. 

 

Is it financially prudent? Before I assumed office, Mr. Speaker, and on the basis of the information disclosed 

by the former Government, I said it was not. Now that I've had an opportunity to examine the arrangements 

in detail, I am even more convinced that it's financially imprudent from the point of view of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The direct cost of the mill, excluding working capital, would have been about $160 

million. The whole project in total would be in the order of $180 million. The Province would be required to 

guarantee unconditionally $107 million in long-term debt. In addition, the Province would have been 

required to invest or guarantee directly or indirectly another $42 million. This includes such things as a 

railway branch line, power lines, roads and the like. It means that nearly $150 million is at risk by 

Saskatchewan to build and service $170 million to $180 million project. It's still difficult to determine the 

exact net risk to be taken by Parsons and Whittemore. A generous estimate is $20 million. A more than 

generous estimate is 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

146 

 

$30 million. Let's say $30 million and be more than generous and I can't see any way that Parsons and 

Whittemore could have had that exposure. $150 million by the Province, $30 million by Parsons and 

Whittemore, the developer. And what about the equity? Parsons and Whittemore would own 70 per cent of 

the equity, the Province, 30 per cent. If the mill were to fail, for whatever reason, the Province would lose 

$150 million, the developer, at the outside, $30 million. In all likelihood, much less. But if it flourished, the 

Province would get 30 per cent of the profits, the developer 70 per cent. Mr. Speaker, when I call a deal like 

that financially imprudent, I am using very moderate language. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, my friends opposite will say, 'Well, of course you've got to take risks,' and I agree 

with them. But if the people of Saskatchewan are going to take the major share of the risk, they should get 

the major share of any benefits. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition would find it sinful for the public to 

reap profits from their own resources, profits which he says should remain solely in the private domain. Ah, 

but he will say — and he said this morning — 'You haven't measured all the benefits. What about the jobs to 

be created?' And that's an important question, because we certainly need more jobs in Saskatchewan. So, let's 

look at jobs. 

 

The Prince Albert mill, in the mill and in the forests, employs about 800 men. One might expect the 

Athabasca mill to employ many, many more but besides being a bigger mill, it's a much more sophisticated 

mill technologically. Consultants to the former Government estimated a work force of about the same as 

Prince Albert — 800. Let's say at best 1,000, but at the 800 figure an investment of $150 million by the 

taxpayers of this province is an investment of $200,000 to create every single job. This Government is 

convinced that by investing that money, by direct investment or by guarantee, that amount of money could be 

invested in more labor intensive industries and we can produce six, eight or ten times as many jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And let me say this, Mr. Speaker, when I say this I am not saying anything different than 

the Hon. Eric Kierans says when he is critical of the Federal Government policies. He says that we should be 

investing our money in labor intensive industries and not in large capital intensive resource exploiting 

industries. 

 

When the Leader of the Opposition was talking about jobs on Friday, he tugged at our heartstrings about 

how the Athabasca project would produce jobs for Indian and Metis people of the North. And he talked 

again on other occasions, Mr. Speaker, about 30 per cent of the people in the Prince Albert mill being Indian 

and Metis. The way this is done is this: Mr. Speaker, it is well know and regrettable but a well-known fact 

that a good number of Indian and Metis people do not take to regular work, 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

147 

 

regular nine to five work on a continuing basis and when they obtain employment, they occasionally do not 

stay for long. This means that they must be replaced. If you hire another Indian or Metis person, you have 

hired two. And if you have hired another one, you have hired three — you've only got one on the job at any 

one time but you've hired three — and on this type of mathematics, they will show that 30 per cent of the 

people who were hired were Indian and Metis. But at any one time, the people who are working in the Prince 

Albert mill, and the forest operations, are significantly less than 10 per cent Indian and Metis. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Right now, how many Indian and Metis people are employed in the Prince Albert mill? Is 

it 400, or is it 300, or is it 200, or is it 100? In the mill and in the woods operation combined, there are no 

more than 80 Indian and Metis employed — less than 10 per cent of the work forces. $150 million to 

produce 80 jobs for Indian and Metis people. Hardly a prudent risk, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the Indian people in Northern Saskatchewan don't want the pulp mill. Let me read 

you a resolution, a copy of which was sent to me on June 11. 

 

Whereas the Chiefs and delegates of Black Lake, Montreal Lake, Patuanak, Fond du Lac, 

Red Earth, Shoal Lake and Peter Ballantyne strongly oppose the building and operation of 

any further pulp mills, particularly the proposed Dore Lake pulp mill at Meadow Lake 

because of the detrimental effects of pollution: 

 

(1) The general accrued hazards it will inflect on the livelihood of the people plus all forms 

of plants and animals in the entire Churchill and Nelson drainage system. (2) Because of the 

dangers to hunting, game and waterfowl and trapping. (3) The contamination of water for 

human consumption. (4) The ruin of aesthetic surroundings. (5) the tourist industry; and (6) 

commercial fishing. 

 

Be it resolved that the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians take the necessary strong action 

immediately to prevent any further planning for construction of this mill. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — How did they vote on it? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Moved by Chief Gilbert Bird of Montreal Lake and seconded by Chief Simon Linklater of 

Peter Ballantyne and carried unanimously. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think that that makes it fairly clear the Montreal Lake Reserve is right in 

the area where the Prince Albert mill is harvesting timber, the Patuanak Reserve is right in the area, 

presumably where timber would be harvested for the Meadow Lake mill, yet these people decided that they 

didn't wish that mill. No, Mr. Speaker, no matter how thin you slice the 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

148 

 

costs and how thick you slice the potential benefits it could not have been financially prudent, in fact, it 

would have been financially imprudent for this Government to continue the Athabasca project. 

 

Now let's proceed to the second criterion, any deal must not permit huge promoter's profits out of 

construction contracts, management fees and the like. I can't tell you whether there would be unreasonable 

profits in the construction of the Athabasca project but I can tell you this, that the construction contract of 

$117 million went to Parsons and Whittemore subsidiaries without tender, without competitive bid. The 

Financial Post stated that the profit on these contracts would range between $10 and $15 million. 

Management and sales contracts at about $2 million a year, again went to Parsons and Whittemore. So, at 

least the potential for large profits on captive contracts was there and there by the very nature of the deal 

itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The third criterion which I proposed was that there should be full disclosure of the deal 

before proceeding and that there should be disclosure of all of the attendant benefits flowing to the 

developers of the projects, all the hidden costs to the Department of Highways or the Power Corporation or 

the Department of Resources. Now these were never disclosed and so far as I am aware have never yet been 

effectively considered. 

 

The fourth requirement was that the deal must provide reasonable protection for subcontractors. My only 

comment here is to note the litigation involved at Prince Albert. I did note that there were bonds proposed to 

deal with this and very possibly they would have been sufficient. I compliment the Members opposite for 

attending to that criterion. 

 

No 5 is the key criterion. A development deal must fully protect against pollution. This the Parsons and 

Whittemore arrangements certainly did not. Consider this. Pulp mills are notorious polluters. Control of pulp 

mill pollution poses some of the most serious of all industrial pollution questions, both for industry and for 

the public. And here I am saying nothing that the Minister of Environment, the Hon. Jack Davis at Ottawa 

doesn't say. The Athabasca mill would have been situated on the Beaver River, part of a very small drainage 

system which ultimately flows into the Churchill. During the winter months the volume of effluent from the 

mill would have just about equalled the flow of the river. Just picture that, Mr. Speaker. Down stream from 

the mill, half water and half malodorous, black chemical pulp mill waste. 

 

The Van Luven Report prepared for the Government and tabled last March, outlined requirements for 

effluent treatment at the mill and concluded, Mr. Speaker, that much more study was required to come up 

with a satisfactory effluent treatment method and determination of what the cost would be. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Provincial and Federal pollution experts said at least four major studies had to be 

completed — and I outlined those in 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

149 

 

my press statement — before there could be any reasonably clear idea of the pollution and environment 

problems. Yet the former Government, the remnants of which sit opposite, Mr. Speaker, was in such haste to 

announce the project for election purposes that they shoved aside the advice of their consultants, they shoved 

aside the advice of their officials, they ignored serious warnings and they signed on the dotted line. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the studies called for by the Van Luven Report had not been done and were 

not done between March and June and have not been done to this day. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — They were rushing into it. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, this is the real problem. Long before the necessary studies could have been 

completed, the commitment to the mill would have been irrevocable. It is not unlikely that the people of 

Saskatchewan could have been faced with two options to solve the pollution problem. Either a $180 million 

mill and railway line lying empty and silent or a continuing public subsidy of an elaborate and expensive 

effluent treatment operation as the price of having one of the largest pulp mills in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Government left office and even today no one can show you the design of the 

pollution control system which will meet all of the requirements of the law. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We are told that this could be done, and of course, perhaps it could be done but we are 

also told that the economics of the mill are such that construction must start now or we lose a winter two 

years from now. There is no time we are assured for delaying commencing construction of the mill while 

these particular studies are proceeded with. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Did Parsons and Whittemore in their recent negotiations tell you they would not go ahead 

with it? Did you ask them, 'If we delay this for six months that they would not go ahead with it?' Did you ask 

them that? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the negotiations with Parsons and Whittemore are not for public 

discussion here. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Hiding information. You are the ones who ask us to lay everything on the table. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Five weeks and he is hiding 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

150 

 

things already. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the Member for Prince Albert West because of his close 

associations with a good number of the officials of Parsons and Whittemore has no difficulty in getting that 

information. 
 
Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — . . . withholding information upon which you based a decision to cancel this and you won't 

give this House the order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Certainly you do. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I charge the former Government with shameful irresponsibility in 

attempting to commit the people of Saskatchewan to a deal with so many pollution uncertainties. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are clear that they ignored their own consultants; they ignored their 

own staff and they ignored their Federal advisors and I want to say that again — they ignored their own 

consultants, Van Luven; they ignored their own advisors in the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission 

and they ignored their Federal consultants. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — All for the sake, Mr. Speaker, of what they thought would be a favorable election issue 

and they made a massive miscalculation as is attested to by the number of Members who sit to your left, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Let me turn now, Mr. Speaker, to requirement No. 6 — any deal must preserve our forests 

and our lakes as wildlife habitat and as recreation areas. I have spoken before about the practice of clear 

cutting our forests, the method of tree harvesting in practice at Prince Albert and projected for Athabasca. It 

is doubtless the most economic way now known to harvest pulpwood. There is no doubt about that and that's 

its attraction. But I think people in this Province have seen the scars it leaves, the naked land, exposed to 

erosion, unable to provide cover for wildlife. Will the forests of northern Saskatchewan, given the scanty 

rainfall and long severe winters, regenerate and grow again? Some experts say, Yes, Yes. And some who are 

not experts say, Yes, Yes. But some say, No. But 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

151 

 

the fact is that nobody knows for sure. The fact is that nobody knows for sure. Just let me say today that we 

are far from satisfied that the methods used at Prince Albert are consistent either with sound reforestation 

practices or with the preservation of wildlife and recreational resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — On this we are not dogmatic but we were and we remain unconvinced by any evidence 

offered. 

 

Now the final criterion which I set forth was that any deal must provide reasonable compensation to small 

forest operators displaced by the mill. The Athabasca agreement totally ignored this question. What would 

have happened there we can see by observing what happened at Prince Albert, where scores of small forest 

businesses have simply been forced to cease operating. Scores. And he can find those himself or he could 

have found them and still can find them in the records of the Department of Natural Resources as small 

contractor after small contractor no longer has a contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — When one is assessing jobs created, one must deduct the jobs destroyed. And the granting 

of exclusive forest rights to a single, highly automated operation inevitably throws the independent operator 

out of work. So in this respect too, the Athabasca project was found wanting. 

 

There were a number of other factors which I and my colleagues considered in reaching our decision not to 

proceed but the ones which I have set out here today are the main ones. 

 

Let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that we did not take this action lightly. We are well aware that only the most 

persuasive reasons can justify the departure from an agreement legally executed by the Government. Despite 

the fact that we warned both Parsons and Whittemore and the Government of the day that our Government 

would retain its freedom of action with respect to this agreement, we should not have taken the course of 

departing from these agreements if any other satisfactory solution had been open to us. We believe the 

reasons were persuasive, and we believe we have the support of the great majority of the people in calling a 

halt to this project. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — This, Mr. Speaker, brings us to the matter of compensation. I am not at liberty to 

speculate on this question today because I hope and I expect that meetings between Parsons and Whittemore 

and our representatives will continue on this question. 

 

But the Leader of the Opposition was not so reticent last Friday. He said in effect, 'You better be careful, this 

might cost you a lot of money.' Well, I say to him and I say to the people of Saskatchewan today that if his 

prediction should turn out to be true and it costs the people of Saskatchewan a lot of money, there is only one 

culpable party and that is the Liberal Government that ceased to be on June 30. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

152 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And of all the people sitting in this House, Mr. Speaker, the one best able to verify that 

statement is the former Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). 

 

Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what I found and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, why under no circumstances 

would I want that man helping me to protect the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I'd show you up. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — When we took office I found among the dozens of agreements signed between the former 

Government and Parsons & Whittemore, I found one dated June 14, 1971. I'll have to set the scene for the 

significance of this agreement, but I want you to keep that date in mind — June 14, 1971, nine days before 

the election. 

 

Among the basic agreements in the Athabasca deal is one called the Infrastructure Agreement. It contains a 

number of agreements about matters to be dealt with or resolved in order to make the mill possible. It talks 

about roads and railway services, access to forests and the like. 

 

Let me speak of two of these agreements, two of these things which were required before the project would 

go forward. One had reference to the cutting rights on the Cold Lake Air Weapons range, under National 

Defence control. The other had to do with arrangements made to construct a railway branch line between the 

mill site and the Canadian Pacific Railway. Specifically, Mr. Speaker, the Infrastructure Agreement provided 

that if these two matters, and others, were not satisfactorily resolved, if either party was not satisfied with the 

arrangements, then either party, that is, Parsons & Whittemore or the Government of Saskatchewan could 

call off the whole pulp mill deal. Here was an opting-out clause which could become operative. Either party 

could get out of the deal if these things were not resolved to the satisfaction of both Parsons & Whittemore 

and the Government. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Just a moment. I shall explain precisely just . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I can hardly wait. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Okay. Now what was the situation on June 14? The cutting rights in the Cold Lake Air 

Weapons range were not resolved and insofar as I am aware, the Federal Government has given no written 

commitment with respect to those cutting rights yet. Point number one. 

 

But the situation with respect to the railroad is even more striking. There was an agreement between the 

parties and the CPR but this agreement specifically provided that it would be void if legislation did not pass 

through Parliament by June 30. So on June 14 it was virtually certain that on June 30 the Government of 

Saskatchewan would be able to withdraw from all 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

153 

 

the pulp mill agreements without compensation or penalty. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That was on June 14. But on June 14, nine days before the election, an election in which 

the pulp mill deal was a major issue, the Liberal Government signed an agreement saying they were satisfied 

with the railway agreements, agreements which they knew would be non-existent by June 30 and are 

non-existent today. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And yet they said they were satisfied with that agreement and by saying they were 

satisfied with non-existent agreements, they appear — and I only say appear — to have done away with the 

right of the Government of Saskatchewan to terminate those agreements without compensation or penalty. 

Shortly put, Mr. Speaker, the facts are these: the Liberal Government knew that on June 30 there would be 

no railway agreement. The Liberals knew that if there was no railway agreement the Government of 

Saskatchewan could withdraw from the agreements without compensation or penalty. They knew, or 

suspected, that they were losing the election. In the face of these facts, in the face of these facts nine days 

before the election, they signed an agreement which seems to say that the Government of Saskatchewan was 

satisfied with the railway agreements, agreements which did not require the CPR to build a single mile of 

railroad before June 30 and which after June 30 would be totally void. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to table for the benefit of Members, a copy of the Railway agreements so they can 

read for themselves that it would be and is now void, so they can read for themselves just what this 

amending agreement on June 14 did. 

 

I hereby table a copy of the General Amending Agreement and a copy of the Railway Agreement. I do not 

know the full legal effect of this remarkable agreement but I specifically say and I am expressing no legal 

opinions on the matter but what the Liberals and particularly the Provincial Treasurer intended to do is clear 

beyond doubt. He intended by the stroke of a pen to strike away opportunities to call off the Athabasca deal 

without cost and without compensation under the terms of the contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what the effect of these agreements appears to be. He, for himself, can explain why he 

would have signed these nine days before the election or had them signed. As a matter of fact he didn't even 

sign them, he had his deputy sign them. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Is he accusing me of signing something? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask this House to consider why he would on nine days before 

the election sign an agreement which possibly could cost the people of Saskatchewan millions of dollars if, 

as appeared likely, the New Democratic Government should be elected, and if, as appeared likely, we would 

not proceed with the merger. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

154 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we don't have to speculate on the benefits of that agreement to Parsons & 

Whittemore. They are clear enough. Where were the benefits of that agreement to the Minister and the 

Government? Where were they? What did they get from it? He admits this morning that that mill didn't have 

to go ahead on June 14. He has asked us to delay it another month, but he wouldn't delay it nine days. What 

did they get from that? What did Members opposite get from that? I could speculate, Mr. Speaker, but any 

speculation I did would very quickly breach the rules of this House where I am not supposed to impugn the 

motives of Members opposite. I leave Members on this side of the House to speculate on what 

considerations led the Ministers of that caretaker Government to attempt by this nefarious agreement, to cut 

off all the options, to make certain there would be a claim to compensation. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the signing of this agreement by the Government opposite in its dying days, 

nine days before polling day, is the most damning evidence of culpability I have ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Who signed the agreement? Mr. Speaker, it is signed on behalf of the Provincial 

Treasurer and he can read the agreement which I have tabled. Mr. Speaker, I say that if the Government 

opposite didn't know the effect of this agreement — I can't believe that — they are grossly incompetent. And 

I say if they did know the effect of that agreement there is something which I will ask this House to judge. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — So let me make crystal clear to this House and to the people of Saskatchewan where the 

responsibility lies. Whatever the ultimate cost may be in the settlement of the Athabasca Pulp Mill deal, 

every dollar, every dime, every penny which must be paid out by the people of this Province, if it must be 

paid out, is the result of the deliberate and calculated actions on June 14 of the Party which sits opposite. 

They and they alone must should the blame and the responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve a better government, a government elected to protect their 

interests. I can assure every Member of this House that there will be a stop to this type of deal. There will be 

a New Deal in resource development. 

 

Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, because the Throne Speech offers help for those who need help, support for 

those who have been oppressed, because it heralds the first instalment of a New Deal for all the people of 

Saskatchewan, I will oppose the amendment and support the motion. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

155 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to the Leader of the Government and I 

have a copy of a speech which he was kind enough to give to one of our Members. When he came to the 

page where it says "Resource Development," I am quite sure I heard him say, although it doesn't say in this 

report, that I will tell the people of Saskatchewan how we are going to develop our resources. He didn't say 

one thing about how they were going to develop the resources of Saskatchewan. All he did was criticize how 

the Liberals tried to develop the resources of Saskatchewan. You know in NDP election advertisements time 

after time, you could see it on the television and hear it on the radio and read it in the newspaper that the 

people of Saskatchewan would have to put up $117 million in cash. This is what they said. Today the 

Premier was honest enough, and I suppose he stumbled on it when he said we were going to guarantee $117 

million. But during the election campaign this was the main issue, they had it on television, $117 million and 

in some instances even this money was stacked up — $117 million in cash. 

 

Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, the other day it was said by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) that 

this was just a fanfare session. When I saw the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) here the other day speak and the way 

he shook his head, I have never seen him go into such a tantrum in all my life. They were going to bring in 

some emergency legislation and all he did was criticize and talk about the election campaign. Sure we got 

beaten and I accept the verdict from the people of Saskatchewan. We got beaten and all we came here for is 

that you were going to tell us about the former Premier's defeat. The real purpose of this Session was to 

censure and castigate the former Premier, Ross Thatcher, in this House. And I think it is a real disgrace to 

call a session after the former Premier has passed away and when three Members in this House have not 

been officially elected. One day they were going to call a session, then Mr. Blakeney says, "Well, you know, 

I don't think we really need a session. We can do it all by regulation." Then the next time we hear there is 

going to be a session. The main purpose, Mr. Speaker, is all they want to do is to bask in the victory of June 

23. Well, let them have their little fun. We had our fun in 1964. We had our fun in 1967. So this time it is 

their turn to have their fun. 

 

If this is all that they think the people want to hear in this Session after all these million dollars worth of 

promises they are mistaken. I can remember the day when I heard Mr. Romanow — when the former 

Premier said all these promises are to cost one billion and some hundred million dollars — I heard him on 

radio and he gave a kind a horse laugh and said, "Oh, no it's not going to cost that much, maybe a million 

bucks." Well, you know, being a labor lawyer I'll excuse him because he doesn't know a financial sheet from 

a fiction story. 

 

Now that we are in the Session, we all of a sudden hear of a fall session going around in the corridors. The 

press tells us that we are going to have a fall session. You know, we don't know what kind of legislation is 

going to come up. They talk about the farm machinery Bill, they're going to help the farmers, they are going 

to do this, they are gong to do that. But with their steamroller tactics, Mr. Speaker, on Friday night we heard 

we were going to have some changes in the Bill. My speech was handed to the press, but since the 

announcement today about the pulp mill cancellation, the speech is not authentic. I can't state the facts that I 

wanted to make because it was all 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

156 

 

cancelled out. Today really must be one of the saddest days in Saskatchewan. Really a sad day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — First, we hear the iron ore mine being torn off the board. They'll never come back. I'll 

guarantee you people couldn't bring in a peanut stand here in Saskatchewan. Then, I was almost convinced 

that they would not announce in this Session that the pulp mill deal was cancelled. But I suppose every day 

they wait will cost them half a million or a million dollars. So today they made the announcement that the 

pulp mill is out the door. 

 

Now I should like to ask the Premier and the Members opposite, what are you going to do about the 

Wollaston Uranium mine? Will that be the next sad news that we are going to hear. But I'm going to tell you 

what kind of deals you people make and I'm sorry that the mover of the Throne Speech is out of this House. 

 

The Minister of Education the other day or shortly after the election went to Saskatoon and he met with the 

school board. I don't think he was back in Regina when this young Member from City Park (Mr. Dyck) said, 

"Oh, we had a wonderful meeting with the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) and we are going to 

have more teachers hired in Saskatoon." Well, I suppose when the Minister of Education came back to 

Regina he had to issue a statement. He countered by saying that school boards will have to live with the 

original Liberal budget. 

 

I want to tell the Government that you want to watch this fellow Dyck. He's got the gift of gab, there is no 

argument about it. We remember and the former Minister of Co-ops remembers a fellow by that same name 

who was able to convince the former government, a former CCF government, that Rosthern needed a potato 

chip plant. Oh, I can remember the day when Russ Brown was in here and we had the chips distributed — I 

think in 1962. That was a big deal! That was the kind of industry that they could bring into the province. The 

Government lost tens of thousands of dollars on that deal. I should think around $50 or $60 thousand. And 

SEDCO still owns the building, they haven't been able to get of it. That industry never got off the ground. 

That's the kind of industry they bring in. Just an out and out Socialist — the man who operated this mill was 

an out and out Socialist. Tens of thousands of dollars were lost. 

 

Then you know this same chap went over to Ottawa and said that they had to have a potato storage plant in 

Rosthern. So they gave him a grant of about $70,000, the Provincial Government gave them a grant of many 

thousands of dollars and he borrowed the rest of the money. And that thing went "belly up." Just went 

bankrupt — this is the history of the industry that they brought in. 

 

Well, it didn't take long, several years later, this gentleman convinced a group of farmers that we had to have 

another storage plant. Not in Rosthern, this time but in La Plain, half way between Rosthern and Duck Lake. 

They spent thousands of dollars, I think, in the neighborhood of $60,000. The other day I read in the Star-

Phoenix and in the Valley News that the Sheriff was going to sell this building — $40,000 against it. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

157 

 

Socialist administration! Many, many creditors are going to lose thousands and thousands of dollars. 

 

I heard the mover of the Throne Speech (Mr. Dyck) on his advertisement on the TV and on radio and the 

press, that he had visited to many people in Saskatoon, that there were so many old-age pensioners who only 

had a television and a piece of toast. That's all they had. And they were going to build nursing homes. Well 

you know the former Government and the Liberal Government never have built a nursing home in this 

Province yet. No, Sir, nobody has. The local people built them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — So now the Government is going to go into the nursing home business. You know, this 

gentleman who I was talking about, that poor fellow, always a Socialist promoter. He wouldn't have a 

colored television if it wasn't for the Liberal Government. You know that man is on welfare. He hasn't got a 

nickel, no, Sir, he'd be starving to death if it wasn't for the Liberals. He's not an old-age pensioner, all he is 

doing is receiving a welfare cheque. He is one of the people that man Dyck wants to place in a nursing home. 

The man is no older than I am. He doesn't belong in a nursing home. You have the wrong philosophy. Every 

church, be it Protestant or Catholic, don't want people in the nursing homes if they don't have to be there. 

You don't put people in a nursing home unless they have to go there. That's no place for them because 

everyone knows once you're admitted to the nursing home someday you're going to come out of there head 

first. But they want to put them in there. 

 

I want to tell the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) that you want to be real careful about this fellow 

from City Park. He can out-talk you, out-smart you and out-wit you in every area. I want to advise Mr. 

MacMurchy to see the Member from Touchwood, who was then the Minister of Co-ops. He knows all about 

this gentleman. When I listened to the Throne Speech I could see this dangerous chap how he was going to 

try and manipulate the Government. And he will, he certainly will. 

 

During the last election the prime issue was the family farm, and Mr. Romanow thinks now they've brought 

in some really good legislation. You know, when we got the Bill on Friday, I read it on the way back to 

Saskatoon and I thought maybe there was some good in it. We haven't had time to discuss this fully in 

caucus, but I want to say one thing. I thought during the election campaign that when a Bill was to be 

brought in that the Government was going to do something for the farmer. In this Bill the Government 

doesn't do anything for the farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No, Sir. All they're doing is they're telling the credit unions, they're telling the banks and the 

machine dealers and the machine companies that we will pass a law whereby you can't touch the farmers. 

That's what they are doing. I had hopes that this Government was so concerned about the farmer — why 

don't you say that you're going to put up $100 million and we will pay the accounts of the poor farmer who 

cannot sell . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

158 

 

Mr. Boldt: — We will guarantee — but no, they are disrupting the credit of the farmer. If I was a machine 

agent, gentlemen, I wouldn't sell a machine to anybody unless it was for cash. This Bill is only going to be 

active until August 1, 1972. But the farmers will know and the agents will know that this Government 

cannot be trusted. This Government cannot be trusted. They are not going to spend one nickel to help the 

family farm. Not one. You are asking the free enterprise system to do it for you . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And the credit union. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Yes, Sir. It's a real let down and a disgrace. "Oh, this is the real thing you know" says the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). The minister of Agriculture went on the radio and admitted that the 

Provincial Government may be over-stepping its authority in doing this, that there was a danger the Bill 

might be declared ultra vires. Well this is not the way Liberal lawyers operate. The Government side don't 

give a darn whether it is legal or not. No, Sir, "we will just bulldoze it through" and then he goes on to say, 

"even if the Federal Government says that you have no right to pass this legislation we don't care, it will take 

eight months, every lawyer might get his feet into the trough you know and fill his pockets. By the time they 

have proven it is legal you know it will have served its purpose." I suppose I should excuse the Attorney 

General (Mr. Romanow). He is still a young lawyer you know but he behaves very similarly to the Minister 

of Highways from Manitoba. He doesn't give a hoot whether the lawyer or the judge says something. No, Sir, 

he doesn't care. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He'll never be a judge anyway. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The man should be in jail. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What man? 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — Romeo? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No, Borowski. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Oh, I’m sorry. Here is the fellow you were talking about. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — He can read my script later on if he wants. 

 

When one considers, Mr. Speaker, the election issue as stated by the NDP would be farm income and the 

agricultural crisis in general, one would have really expected the priorities in this Special Session would 

have been legislation getting better prices for farm products. We want better prices. They even said they 

were going to get farms stable, assured income. One would have expected that legislation would have been 

passed to increase the farm prices for farm products. However, farmers will soon realize how irresponsible 

and dishonest NDP election promises were. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

159 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Not a bit of truth in what they said. Instead their top priority is labor, a 40-hour week that will 

cost the machine agents hundreds of dollars a month to keep their boys on. And of course they said the prices 

of machines were too high. Will this make the machine prices come down? They will go up. A minimum 

wage increase to $1.75 an hour and this is going to reduce prices they say. Prices are going to go up if you 

have to pay more for wages. And then of course the repeal of Bill 2, and health benefits for the rich and the 

poor. Here in Saskatchewan the NDP Government told us of the plight of the Saskatchewan farmer and at 

the same time they told their counterparts in the House of Commons to make absolutely sure that Otto Lang 

would not be able to get the Stabilization Bill through the House on June 23. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — So that the farmers of Western Canada would not get the $100 million from the Federal 

Government. I suppose they felt that if the $100 million was in the hands of the farmers they might not be 

able to win the election. 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — Cheap politics. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Then shortly after the election the new Premier took off to Ottawa urging the Federal 

Government to pay out the $100 million immediately. Yes, immediately. 

 

An Hon. Member: —— Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You don't know the difference, you don't know the difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Just how stupid can you get. Those MPs who stopped that legislation, Mr. Premier, and Mr. 

Attorney General they were campaigning in Saskatchewan night and day with little Allan. All you would 

have had to do was to kick them out of Saskatchewan and tell them to mind their own business and see that 

this Bill would get passage in the House before the summer recess and farmers would be better off by $100 

million; the machine companies would be better off; everybody would be better off. 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — They could pay their bills. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — They could pay their bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — When is that $900 going to come to the farmer? No it won't come for another two months. 

No, they have no plans for the farmer. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You don't even know what a farmer is. All the Minister 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

160 

 

of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) has suggested and has to offer to the farmers is that farmers get more involved 

with packaging and selling their products. What a bright idea! I suppose that if a farmer kills a chicken he 

should also package it. What the Minister of Agriculture recommended is that if he makes some ice cream 

that he package it and stand next to a peanut stand and try and sell it. You know that was 25 or 40 years ago 

when farmers were peddling their products. But now through health regulations it cannot be done and you 

people want to turn the clock back. You people want to turn the clock back 25 or 30 years. What is the new 

deal for the farmer? I suppose Socialistic arithmetic tells them that the increase of the minimum wage will 

bring costs down for the farmer and the consumer as a whole. They still haven't learned how to add. I believe 

that the Saskatchewan people have always been concerned about the affairs of the Government. Never in the 

history of my political life have I seen so many concerned Saskatchewan people so shortly after the election 

and today certainly will be no exception after the pulp mill announcement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You know the NDP are extremely silent, very, very silent. Many an honest individual has 

come to me. Yes even school teachers have come to me and they said . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I can name them to you too, saying that we wanted the Liberals in power but we didn't want 

them to have too big a majority and we are sorry it went the other way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Just wait until I'm finished with you. We know the NDP were dishonest in their promises, 

they've backtracked in their promises so far . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — . . . and we don't' expect them to fulfil them. They are concerned at the support and the 

elements within the party, a party elected by the extreme radical, by the demonstrator, by the long haired, 

fuzzy, foggy thinking professor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — That's your support. It has been stated in one of our Western newspaper editorials that the 

defeat of the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan was the result of the opposition of the labor unions — 

this is no surprise to me — school teachers and the clergy. I'm sure there are other factors but I could agree 

that these are the main ones. Some of the school teacher's behavior and the Saskatchewan Teachers 

Federation in the past election is just a shameful disgrace. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

161 

 

Mr. Boldt: — To call on home after home and hear the parents say that the school students were told to 

make sure their parents voted NDP or they would fail their grades . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This can happen in the USSR, and it can happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — It is a sad thing. It is a sad thing to listen to a church service when the clergy is much more 

interested in the social gospel than the spiritual gospel. I want to tell you for the benefit of the Arm River 

Member, the most foolish and disrespectful letter I ever got as Minister of Highways was from the Member 

from Arm River. 

 

The union labor bosses have been against a Liberal Government since we formed the Government in 1964, 

there is no secret about that. But with this Government, Mr. Speaker, you are going to have more problems 

with the union than we have ever dreamed of. The Throne Speech calls for the abolition of Bill 2, The 

Essential Services Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Over 50 per cent of the people support the Government in its removal. Remove it, I will not 

support the Government in its removal. Remove it, I will not support the repeal of Bill 2. But let me say this 

to those farmers who voted NDP, that you believe in strikes, Mr. farmer, and if the railroaders, the dock 

workers, the grainhandlers and any other union that affects the farm operation, entertains a strike, I hope you 

will be willing to pay the price and the cost and don't you cry to the Federal Government. No, Sir, you voted 

NDP Socialism, Socialism you wanted, Socialism you are going to get. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — And I hope for the 30 or 35 per cent of the teachers who were elected, I hope that the teachers 

are going to ask for what they got promised. Surely the student ratio must be eliminated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This is what you promised. Why didn't you do it the day after the election? Oh, no, you know, 

like one superintendent of the school unit said, "There will be no change, there won't be any change by this 

Government because every thing the Liberal Government did made sense." 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — It made economic sense. How many teachers have been 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

162 

 

hired? None. Just none. No, you won't change the student ratio because the teacher, he eventually wants one 

student, one teacher; one professor, one student. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the teachers are going to ask for a 

25 per cent increase in salary as promised by the NDP and if they don't I hope they will go on strike because 

this is what you have told them. I hope the Government will put the 600 unemployed teachers to work in the 

classroom as promised by the NDP. This is the way they were going to increase employment — 600 teachers 

and they say, "Oh we are going to give them jobs." To teach what? To teach in an empty classroom. By 

Socialistic arithmetic, the increase in salaries, the increase in classrooms, and the creating of positions for the 

unemployed school teachers, they were able to convince the majority of the people of Saskatchewan that the 

taxes would go down. Yes, Sir. Surely even you people aren't that stupid to believe it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I am convinced that with some people the more they get themselves educated the crazier they 

get. And the Socialists are absolutely no exception. No, Sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Well you know this really was a surprise to me when I heard Little Allan announce that 

MacMurchy was going to be the Minister of Education. I know why Little Allan appointed the dirt farmer 

and a poor one at that to become the Minister of Education . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I know why. Usually the experience that I have had with the farmer, he still is the most 

sensible and the most responsible taxpayer and citizen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The farmer has by far the best judgment when it comes to financing and to being realistic. I 

have been told by Members . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — How many have you got? 

 

An Hon. Member: — 21. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — How many in the front bench? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — How many on welfare? How many on welfare, that's the first question you've got to ask. 

 

I have been told by the teaching profession that the Teachers' Federation of Saskatchewan has nobody to 

recommend 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

163 

 

from the elected "kooks" of the profession to take over that portfolio. No, Sir, they wouldn't recommend one 

of you fellows on the back benches. Not one of them. So the teaching profession is headed by a dirt farmer 

and the teacher has the dirt department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Byers, I left the Department of Highways in good shape and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — And even Little Allan will admit it — that the highway program was a good one. It was a 

good one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Now don't you go and muck it up. Look at these promises. The NDP hits highway programs 

and I think Mr. Meakes said it in the House here. This is a dandy and I hope Mr. Byers, the Member for 

Kelvington, will take this and note what he said in the House here only a few months ago. "Mr. Meakes said 

the highway program could be cut back as much as 25 per cent." The Leader-Post, February, 1971. Well cut 

it back if you want to go back to gravel. You don't believe in oil, you don't believe in pavement. In fact 25 to 

30 years ago is the day and age that you live in. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the teachers are going to be in for a rough ride from Little Allan. The handwriting is 

already on the wall by appointing a dirt farmer and not a teacher. That must have been a slap to the 

Federation. I am sure not too long from now, these teachers in the Federation might need the old vet for 

some surgery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Now what about the firing of the civil servants? I don't blame the Government for firing some 

of the people we hired. If I was sitting over there, I would fire a good number of them. Yes, Sir, I would. I 

fired a few when I took over several departments — the Crown corporation, so did other Members, so did 

the former Premier. And we never said we wouldn't but when the Premier told the public that the civil 

servants would not be fired there would instead be increased job security. You didn't tell the truth, No, Sir. 

And I say this, Mr. Speaker, if a man lies to me once, I never will believe him even if he happens to stumble 

on the truth. How do these firings take place? We read in the press that somebody got a letter from the 

Premier that he shouldn't show up next morning. We heard on the radio that this is either done by letter or 

the deputy is sent in to bring the good tidings to the individual. Have you Ministers or the Premier not the 

guts to call the individual and tell him or her the facts of life? Can't you tell somebody that their service is no 

longer required? Why do you send your deputy? Down-right disgrace! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

164 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Every individual I asked to resign I did so personally and I told them the reasons why and I'll 

tell you how I dealt with one of the senior executive officials of SGIO. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Tell me. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Yes, I sure will. A certain man named Blackburn, everyone knows him, an import Socialist, 

an import Socialist with no ability. I believe he came from Edmonton. He was made the senior executive 

next to the General Manager of SGIO. I told him personally, I had him in my office, that I wanted his 

resignation. I offered him, and he accepted, six months' severance pay. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — How much did you people give Wilf Gardiner? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Zip. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I offered and he accepted six months' severance pay plus all his payments in the pension plan 

and all the payments of the Corporation towards his pension plan. If my memory holds good he walked out 

of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office with about $13,000. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Whose money? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Corporation money for your information. 

 

I feel convinced that Blackburn had very few abilities except to promote Socialism. He applied for the office 

of general manager in the Manitoba Government's insurance plan. I informed one of the Members of the 

Cabinet in Manitoba. He asked me, I said, "Blackburn couldn't run a pigsty." But they hired him as a 

manager and they paid him several thousand dollars more than the General Manager of SGIO today in 

Saskatchewan. The information I have received is that he tried to set up this Government Insurance Office in 

Manitoba, but he made a real mess of it. He just couldn't do anything, so finally I hear now by the news 

reports that they have engaged the General Manger of SGIO from Saskatchewan to set up the insurance plan. 

No, Sir, I can tell you that Mr. Dutton is no Socialist. He will set it up, the best manager I ever came across. 

 

During the campaign the NDP were advocating industrialization. I am really surprised that so many people 

were fooled into believing that in one breath they said. "We'll invite industry to come into Saskatchewan," 

and in the next breath, "tax the living daylights out of you." 

 

Well, many people are funny like Art Linkletter says, but I am sure that many people have also realized that 

they were crazy on election day. The Choiceland Iron Mine was scuttled only a few days after the election. 

Two apartment blocks were in the process of being built at Nipawin, the property had been bought and the 

day after the election, the owner stopped the projects. The people are moving out of Nipawin today and they 

will move out faster than in the past history. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

165 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — A new motel was in progress, a dining room and additional units were planned. These have 

now been abandoned. The town of Nipawin is stunned and sick. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The sensible people just can't apprehend the disaster. But this is the way the Socialist, the 

Wafflers, the long-haired and the demonstrators demonstrate their ability to create jobs. Here is where I have 

to digress a little bit from my remarks. The Dore Pulp Mill will be lost, I wrote this on Friday. You people 

have publicly stated that Landegger is a crook, an American shyster. You called him everything you could 

think of. If you are convinced that everything you said about him is true you would be the most dishonest 

people if you made a deal with him. The angels and the devils are not bed-partners, however; to some 

lawyers, honesty, integrity and fairness doesn't mean a thing. No, Sir! 

 

How does this affect the town of Meadow Lake? Before the election travellers, business people had to make 

reservations long before hand if they wanted to stay in Meadow Lake. Today the hotels are empty. Meadow 

Lake is practically dead and today I'll bet there will be many more people sick. What else has happened since 

the election at Meadow Lake? Well, Mr. Blakeney talked about the Canadian Pacific. I have a little story to 

say about the Canadian Pacific Railway as well. A contractor came to me, the Canadian Pacific had awarded 

a contract to a contractor to construct the rail bed from Meadow Lake to Dore Lake. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What date? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Before the election. In the meantime the election was called. The contractor was informed by 

wire not to start until after the election. The contractor came to me personally, I met him at Saskatoon at the 

Suburban, to see if we could get some work for him on highways in the meantime while he was there. He 

had already moved all his equipment on site. He had his cook there, he was paying his men half wages to 

keep them and he wanted to know whether the Department of Highways could give up some of the spot 

improvement on highways in the area and I am sure the Hon. Member from Kelvington will see that we 

authorized $15,000 — we had it in the program, we gave some work to him — so that he could be working 

and be able to pay his men. We authorized $15,000 worth of work in that area on Highway No. 155. I was 

also informed that if the election went against the Government — by the contractor, he informed me of this 

— the Canadian Pacific would pull out of the contract. They had agreed — oh, listen to this — they had 

agreed to pay the contractor $25,000 for moving on site and they would pay him $25,000 for moving out. 

For your information, Mr. Speaker, the contractor has moved out a long time ago, he won't move out 

tomorrow, he's already moved out. I assume that the building of the railroad bed contract was cancelled, not 

tomorrow, not today, but at least two or three weeks ago. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the Socialist's way of creating jobs. How childish? How stupid? How ignorant and 

foolish can you get 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

166 

 

and those who support you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — On June 23, the majority of the people of Saskatchewan voted for Socialism, and Socialism 

they'll get. Four years from now, 20 to 30 per cent of the people will be on welfare. No argument about it. 

And 20 to 30 per cent of those employed will be working for the welfare department making sure that those 

on welfare are well taken care of so that when the election comes around they'll be told how to vote or they'll 

lost their welfare payments. 

 

Let's take a look at some of the individual promises made by the NDP candidates. Arthur Thibault, a man 

with 12 years experience in the Legislature, he will work for a New Deal for the people. Plank No. 1, listen 

to this, extend No. 6 Highway to No. 55, built to heavy traffic, Mr. Minister, heavy traffic in order to 

accommodate highway service from resource development in the Choiceland area. In the Choiceland area! 

What kind of resources is Arthur speaking about. Oh, apparently Little Allan hadn't confided in Arthur that 

Roman, a Canadian would be also kicked out of the province. So the Minister of Highways (Mr. Byers) can 

now scuttle Arthur's number 1 plank for his constituency. There is no need for it. Plank No. 3, remove from 

the realm of politics some of your major problems such as highway safety. That is a good one, Arthur, I 

agree with you. You are following in the footsteps of the former Government. 

 

We removed the drunks from our highways when charged and found guilty and this applied to everyone 

including the Member from North Battleford (Mr. Kramer). But I understand he has been at it again and the 

Hon. Cabinet Minister will now be riding the bicycle for another 18 months. No wonder little Allan didn't 

want him in the Cabinet. But Mr. Kramer had other ideas, he stormed out of the Caucus maybe to examine a 

48-ouncer, I don't know. Within a few days Mr. Kramer was appointed to the Cabinet and I was shocked to 

hear via the news media in the Saskatoon area that Mr. Kramer would also be in charge of the Highway 

Traffic Board, the Liquor Commission and the Liquor Board. This was reported in the news media in 

Saskatoon. Now I am not sure whether the first reports of the Saskatoon news media were correct, maybe 

not. If not correct then I want to thank the Premier for having him removed from those areas which 

influenced more than any other branches of government the safety of our highways as they could have well 

influenced and impaired the Hon. Member from North Battleford. Is it not a disgrace for the people of North 

Battleford and for Saskatchewan as well that a Minister of the Crown who claimed several years ago, and 

even demonstrated so sincerely his concern for highway safety when he doesn't know when, how or where to 

indulge and to force his way into a Cabinet. 

 

What else did Arthur promise? Plank No. 4. Tax-free gas to small . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read No. 3 first. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I am sorry, I would do it, but I left it on my desk. I'll get it for you afterwards if you haven't 

got it. What else did Little Arthur do, or promise? Plank No. 4, tax-free gas 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

167 

 

to small independent men using vehicles for making a living such as electricians, plumbers, bakers, etc., as 

well as farmers. Well, you know, Arthur Thibault has a change of mind. In 1965 when we introduced the 

purple gas legislation for farm trucks as reported in the Debates and Proceedings on page 995, "Those 

opposing this kind of reduction were, Mrs. Cooper, Messrs. Thibault, Whelan, Berezowsky and my friend, 

Mr. Robbins." Now the electricians. I am sure that the electricians and the plumbers and the bakers and many 

other labor people are in need of a tax reduction. I want to ask the Government to make absolutely sure that 

these tax benefits will be introduced at the next general session in the spring of 1972. It is interesting to note 

that the NDP Government which they have always referred to as the Government that supports the farmers, 

are not concerned about lowering the taxes for the farmer in Manitoba as reported in the Winnipeg Free 

Press of May 11. I quote from the report. 

 

Farmers must pay 20 cents tax on purple gasoline used in farm trucks. This can be collected 

retroactively if they haven't paid it, Finance Minister Saul Cherniack told the Manitoba 

Legislature Monday. 

 

I don't believe that the Saskatchewan Government has any intention whatsoever of extending purple gas to 

other sectors. Even on a hotline they said they were going to have gas bowsers where you could buy your 

purple gas. Are you going to put up bowsers at service stations where you can fill up purple gas in your farm 

trucks? This is the promise that they made. 

 

Let's talk about the property mill rates. The new Premier of Saskatchewan speaking at Lloydminster on 

January 20, 1971, said this: 

 

We will guarantee to the people of Saskatchewan not only to hold mill rates, but to cut, and 

to cut sharply mill rates for basic school purposes on homes and farms. The New Democratic 

Government will raise the required money from increased taxes on larger incomes, from 

corporation taxes and from increased resource royalties. 

 

Mr. Premier, I hope the Government will try this one on for size. You have already scuttled not one, but two 

major industries and maybe you are working on the third, the Wollaston Lake Mine. These industries were 

intended by the former Government to help ease the burden of taxation, however your Government has other 

ideas. To raise the taxes from the larger incomes sounds really good to me. That will hit 11,000 school 

teachers in the Province right between the eyes, I hope you nail them good and proper. Most of the teachers 

are your supporters and they have voted for this increase in taxes. 

 

How are you going to solve the native and the Metis problems. The last time you were in office your solution 

to the problems was, you saw they had problems, but you didn't do anything about them. Oh, you thought 

maybe we'll give them the beer and we give them the vote, then they'll be happy, that was your solution. This 

is the Government that makes all kinds of sanctimonious statements about minority groups. I saw no native 

people at the opening of the Session. There were no Hutterites. I also didn't see the people representing the 

construction industry, the business people, although there could have been some, maybe a few scattered 

around. I think it is fair to say that by far the invitations were sent to the 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

168 

 

Socialists, and the union people. Oh, I noticed some teachers, but it was not the kind of people that I should 

like to see moving ahead in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say a thing about the deterrent fees. Deterrent fees, the utilization fees, the premium tax to those 

over 65 as mentioned in the Throne Speech were mentioned by Mr. Blakeney and the Member for Pelly (Mr. 

Larson) the other day. I am personally convinced that they were in the right direction, and equally convinced 

that the majority of the people do not want them. People today want something for nothing and of course the 

NDP were promoting their giveaway programs. How long and how much can we afford to be a welfare 

state? Our schools and universities indoctrinate our students with Socialism and the welfare state. They have 

succeeded in pushing the Church completely out of the physical and monetary assistance to the needy. In fact 

too many of our church leaders today feel that their responsibility is to convince the Government that they 

have the sole responsibility for the total needs of the total man. The social gospel has replaced the spiritual 

gospel. It might not take too long when our philosophy in human and spiritual values will not differ that 

much from Communist Russia and Communist China. Christianity is ridiculed, downgraded and scoffed at 

by many of our professional people who teach our students and are paid for by the tax payers, many of whom 

disagree with this new philosophy. 

 

In listening to the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson) the other day, and today to the Premier, he stated that he 

found it difficult to believe and unjust for a government to tax a man when he is flat on his back. This didn't 

make sense to him, he said, it just didn't make sense to him. I don't think that the Hon. Member or the 

Premier had thought out this statement too well, nor do I know whether they are capable of doing so. Not 

only the man who pays the tax gets sick, Mr. Speaker. I have a 12-year-old daughter who could become ill. 

What is wrong with the parent paying a deterrent or utilization fee. The homeowner in Regina if he was flat 

on his back, did not receive tax write-offs. Did Henry Baker while he was the mayor, did he take the 

municipal and school taxes off his property? No. Whether one were sick in the hospital or not he still pays 

that tax. The farmer cannot get relief . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Are you going to vote against the Bill, Dave? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — That's your Bill, the machinery Bill. Deterrent fees, removal of the fees. The opposition has 

stated its position. 

 

The farmer cannot get relief from land taxes whether he is sick or well. I am of the old school of thought . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You can call me Orthodox or you can call me a Conservative but I feel that the individual and 

the family still have some responsibilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I want to get personal here. In the case of my family 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

169 

 

my mother is still living. She is not filthy rich but she is well-to-do. She doesn't need the interest on the 

investment that was left to her by my father. All her children are not in any need of any Government 

subsidies. Not one of them. They raised a family of eight children. But if the Provincial Government wants 

to pay her $36 — she is 73 or 74 — and if the Provincial Government wants to pay all the hospital costs and 

all the doctors' fees, her children will inherit — and I am one of them — jus that much more money and we 

might be able to buy out just a few more Socialists. Yes, Sir. We will let the school teacher, we will let the 

poor labor man who is making payments on his home, we will let him pay for my mother's premium and all 

the doctors' fees. Why if John Diefenbaker or Mike Pearson, the two best known politicians alive today, if 

they lived in Saskatchewan, why should the labor man pay that $36 for them? Why? Or the $72 as the case 

might be. Why should they pay the $72. They can afford it better than anyone else in this room. But you are 

going to pay the $72. We shall let the school teacher, the poor labor man who hasn't a home or a coupon to 

clip pay for those who can travel, visit, play, play the stock market, bet on the races, pay all the hospital and 

doctor calls for those 65 and over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment and not the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — Before the Member sits down I should like to ask him 

a question. 

 

Did I hear him say that I had been forbidden from driving for another 18 months? Did I hear you say that? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No, I didn't. I said this: he had been at it again and he will not be driving for 18 months. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, this is cheap gossip. It is not proper to call a man a liar or a coward in this 

House but for want of better words I demand that he retract that. He is impugning something that he has 

absolutely no proof of, that is absolutely false as almost everything else he has said is false, but I'm checking 

him on this one. Mr. Speaker, I demand a retraction. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Hon. Minister asks the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) to withdraw the statement 

which he said wasn't correct, that he has had no suspension for 18 months. I would ask the Hon. Member for 

Rosthern to withdraw that because maybe his facts were, as he put it, not correct. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I didn't say that he had been told not to drive for 18 months so I have nothing to withdraw. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, he left the impression and this is what he said, the record will show what he 

said and I demand a withdrawal. I can wait until the records are read but I will absolutely not tolerate this 

kind of slander in the House. If 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

170 

 

he said it outside of the House he would be subject to a law suit. He doesn't dare to make that statement 

outside the House. He is sick. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — On the point of order, I understand that the rule — and I'm sure I'm 

correct in this— that we have on the Orders of the Day, a place where a point of privilege can be brought 

forward and I believe, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that is the proper place for the Member for The Battlefords 

(Mr. Kramer) to bring this point of privilege forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — While speaking in this House, on a personal point of privilege, the Member could rise at 

the time and object or he could wait until the conclusion of the Member who is speaking, and the Hon. 

Member for The Battlefords has risen at the conclusion of the Member for Rosthern's (Mr. Boldt) speech and 

asked for a retraction at this time. If the Hon. Member for Rosthern is not prepared to make a retraction at 

this time, I cannot say from memory exactly what he said, I shall have to reserve any decision until the 

records are available to me. But any Member is perfectly in his right to rise at the time that a statement 

impugned to them is not correct, such a statement would be if the facts are as the Minister states. So, 

therefore, I shall ask that if the Member for Rosthern wishes to withdraw now and if he doesn't it will not be 

pursued any further until I get the transcripts and will be raised at that time. 

 

Do you wish to withdraw? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of order. The Hon. Member 

for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt), the speaker who just finished taking his chair says that he made no statement to the 

effect that the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer) had been suspended for a period of 18 months. 

Now the Minister disputes that. Certainly the passage that the Hon. Member from Rosthern read, if it doesn't 

say it specifically, I should respectfully suggest it leaves a very strong innuendo. Now to me an innuendo, or 

direct statement in this House, both have the same effect. Now the Hon. Minister of Natural Resources is a 

man who, I think, like all men in this House, should be taken at his word. He says that is not true. He asks 

the Hon. Member from Rosthern to withdraw. I am only asking the Hon. Member from Rosthern to avoid the 

unpleasantness of looking at the transcript. I wonder if the Hon. Member for Rosthern wouldn't take into 

consideration my observation with respect to innuendo and the statement, reconsider it and in fact withdraw 

the statement as requested by the Member. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Hon. Member is not prepared to categorically withdraw the statement in which the 

rules state that if a Member objects he must withdraw, if he is not prepared to withdraw at this time, I shall 

have to peruse the transcript. I have asked the Hon. Member does he wish to withdraw and he has answered 

me, No. Do you wish to withdraw it now at this time, Mr. Member? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I have said, 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

171 

 

No and my word is No. If you want me to say it two or three times, I'll say it three times. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay, I shall peruse the transcripts and take this under advisement at a later time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, first may I express to you my congratulations on your 

being named as the Speaker of this House. May I call to the attention of all Hon. Members that you are the 

Dean of the Legislature, for you have been a Member of this Assembly continuously and longer than any 

other Member seated here, and that you also represent the largest rural constituency in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It is particularly gratifying to me as a Member of this group to know that your constituency, the constituency 

of Wadena, has been continuously represented since 1934 by farmer-labor, CCF or the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

I wish to congratulate warmly and sincerely the mover and seconder of the Speech from the Throne. The 

Hon. Member for City Park (Mr. Dyck) and the Hon. Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson) are articulate, able 

spokesmen for their constituencies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank the people of Regina North West for re-electing me. The 

constituency of Regina North West is the second largest constituency in the province. I shall attempt to 

justify the confidence the people in the constituency have expressed in me. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) had his huge majority cut in the last election 

to a mere 200 votes or thereabouts. I say this, that, if his constituents had heard him misconstruing and 

misinterpreting and exaggerating today he wouldn't even be here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Rosthern says this is a sad, sad day. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

it is a sad day for the Liberals who signed deals with their friends nine days before an election. But I say, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a much sadder day for the people who are being robbed of their resources who have to pay for 

their bad deals and who have to pay millions of dollars for generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Hon. Member for Rosthern rises in his place to castigate the Hon. Member for City 

Park (Mr. Dyck) the House knows the waste that existed in the construction of highways and the House 

knows that this was a factor in the defeat of the Government. Canvass any voters who live along a highway 

that was under construction. I know, Mr. Speaker, I was in Kelvington and one would have expected more, a 

better example for such a person who maintains that he is an example himself of efficiency and good 

management. You know the Hon. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

172 

 

Member for Rosthern sat on the other side, sat where he is before, in Opposition, we entered this House 

together. After listening to the Hon. Member today, seven years in Government hasn't improved him one bit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — He is saying the same things today that he said seven years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some other points that I should like to make. May I call it 12:30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those of us on this side of the House and the 56 or 57 or 58 per cent of the population who 

voted New Democrat were definitely not influenced by headlines. Those of us who have been in the House 

before and have watched the activities particularly of the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. 

Steuart), who is the temporary Leader of the Opposition, are not impressed, and not the least bit influenced, 

and we are not waiting with any degree of anticipation, when we read the huge headline that they the 

Opposition group would come out fighting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Session began the headliner for the feature attraction in the main bout who was going 

to 'come out fighting' wasn't even in his corner. It was only because of the good nature of Hon. Members and 

because of some powerful persuasion by those in this House who are generous that the House unanimously 

allowed him in the ring. Mr. Speaker, when he entered he came in from the back door and, Mr. Speaker, he 

has not been fighting, he has been whining since this Session began. If he is going to do any fighting, Mr. 

Speaker, he is going to have to do it in a concrete way so that we can see it. This means that he is going to 

have to represent a certain position and certain groups. Mr. Speaker, I contend that he is going to have to 

battle for them with vigor and with enthusiasm. Now in the fight game when you come out fighting, 

particularly after you have talked a good fight, it means that you start swinging. Mr. Speaker, I am going to 

make a prediction that on the deterrent fee vote instead of voting against the motion, they are going to do a 

lot of whining and then when the chips are down, I predict that, as they have all clearly indicated, when a 

vote is taken in the words of the fight lingo, they won't come out fighting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — As a matter of fact on the first punch, Mr. Speaker, they are going to take a dive. They 

won't come out fighting, they won't land a punch, they won't wade into us, they are afraid to, Mr. Speaker. I 

predict that on every issue they will take a dive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first, let me answer some of the charges that were made by the Hon. Member for Prince Albert 

West (Mr. Steuart) in his remarks. Second, let me tell the House why I don't think the Hon. Members 

opposite are coming out fighting against any piece of legislation that is before this House. And third, let me 

try to answer the question as to whether this Session is worthwhile. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

173 

 

First, the Hon. Member for Prince Albert says there is a witch-hunt going on in the Government and that we 

are firing Liberal civil servants, left and right. Most of them would be right, I think, but anyway, Mr. 

Speaker, how can you tell who the Liberals are. Second, are there any Liberal civil servants left? My 

experience in this city during the election campaign in regard to civil servants — and I am sure in any area 

the experience was the same — and regardless of what the Hon. Member says, civil servants who were 

supposed to be Liberals were voting solidly for the New Democrats. Why? Because of the incompetence, the 

inconsistency and the inept manner in which the Liberal Government Members treated the civil servants. 

Time after time after time, civil servants talked to me frankly, without hesitation, and said, oh, they had been 

hired or recommended by a Liberal MLA, and they said they and their families intended to support the New 

Democrats. 

 

Now, the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West tells us that we are going to dismiss Liberals. I ask him 

sincerely and I ask him objectively: which ones are the Liberals? Maybe they had a way of telling, but it 

certainly didn't work. I say to him, and I say to him deliberately, the reason we are not firing people he thinks 

are Liberals is because we think they may be New Democrats, and Mr. Speaker, that includes an immediate 

member of his family. We think that his own son after putting up with his illogical nonsense, after putting up 

with what this House has to put up with, that even his son is liable to vote New Democratic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The Hon. Member for Prince Albert West says we are "grandstanding." If it is 

grandstanding to keep an election promise, then, Mr. Speaker, we are grandstanding. If it is grandstanding to 

remove a tax from the sick, then, Mr. Speaker, we are grandstanding. Mr. Speaker, if we remove medicare 

premiums for people over 65 and this is grandstanding, then, Mr. Speaker, we are grandstanding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — If removing chains from the working people, chains that were put on by the previous 

government, if unshackling them and giving them their freedom is grandstanding, Mr. Speaker, then we 

plead guilty. We are grandstanding. Mr. Speaker, if giving a man who works 48 hours a week, a 44-hour 

week by law, is grandstanding, there is no doubt about it, we are grandstanding. If trying to protect the 

farmers from the machine companies, from the mortgage companies and from the banks, is grandstanding, 

then, Mr. Speaker, we are guilty. 

 

But I say this, grandstanding or no grandstanding, whether it is by legislation or by regulation, Mr. Speaker, 

what we are doing here today is keeping a commitment that we made; a commitment we are going to keep, 

and we are going to keep that commitment, Mr. Speaker, because as responsible representatives of the 

people of Saskatchewan, it is a commitment to the wishes, the desires, the hopes and the aspirations of the 

majority of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Hon. Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) said, 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

174 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I recall correctly, he said this Session would cost $6,000 a day. The people of this country, 

Mr. Speaker, pay taxes to a Federal Government. Sure they do and for what reason? Well, to provide 

medicare and those funds are available to every province in Canada, and more available when we do not 

charge deterrent fees. As has been said to this House already, by charging a deterrent fee we lose what is 

rightfully ours as part of the Canadian community of provinces — a huge grant of $4 million. We have been 

losing hundreds of thousands of dollars that adds up to millions in grants because we taxed the sick. The 

Hon. Member talks about a session that will cost $100,000 — $100,00 spent that will recover for the people 

of this province millions of dollars in this year and the years to come, to say nothing of the worry and the 

insecurity that will be removed. I say it's a pretty good deal and it's a new deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — But no the Hon. Member for Prince Albert would rather tax the sick than pick up the 

Federal subsidy that we, as taxpayers, have already paid for. 

 

The Hon. Member for Prince Albert West asks us to consult Mr. Roman re the Choiceland project. Is this the 

same Mr. Roman who was stopped at selling the very heritage of Canada to a foreign country, the most 

important industry we have — uranium I think it was — to a foreign country. He was stopped not by 

persuasion by the Prime Minister of Canada, not by lengthy telephone conversations but stopped only when 

essential legislation was passed in our House of Commons, forbidding the sale of these essential resources. 

Is this the man who even the Federal Government could not persuade and we are supposed to persuade him! 

Surely, surely the Hon. Member for Prince Albert West is prepared to admit that if the Federal Government 

had some difficulty consulting Mr. Roman, we might have some difficulty persuading him, we might have 

some difficulty negotiating with him. We may not be able to deal with him in tens days - it's just a 

possibility. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for a moment to those whom this energetic and resourceful 

Opposition will be fighting for, if they "come out fighting." I suggest they will be trying to land some 

punches on mothers who go to the hospital sick, on senior citizens with chronic conditions, children with 

asthma and eczema and broken bones; they will come out fighting to subjugate and to humiliate and, if they 

can't pay, to exploit them, and if they can, because of financial embarrassment, prevent them from receiving 

a medical service that is more than 95 per cent paid for. Yes, if they keep the newspaper headline intact, they 

will come out fighting for a $2.50 payment every day when the patient is sick in hospital. Mr. Speaker, I 

should have thought by now that Members opposite would have got the message from the people of this 

Province that they don't want deterrent fees. They want them removed as quickly as possible and they want 

them removed permanently. They don't care about newspaper headlines, and furthermore they are not the 

slightest bit influenced by the remnants of the Liberal Party even if they have a 42 per cent vote. They are not 

influenced by them. 

 

When people over 65 in this Province whose income was individually only $111 a month, the Members 

opposite who were the Government have been known to take their health cards from 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

175 

 

them. Let me quote an example of a lady in my constituency with an income of $111.04 a month whose blue 

card, medical care card she had kept since 1962, was taken away by these people — they thought she was 

affluent. They thought she had too much money because she was getting $111.04. They took it from her on 

the basis that she could afford to pay her medical care premium. They sent her a little form; this is what the 

form said: your rent is $53, for food allowance you're going to have $28.50, clothing allowance for a month 

$10, telephone $4.36, personal allowance $3.25, household allowance $1.60, medicare premium $3. Yes, she 

was getting $111.04 and that's what you want to go back to. 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald (Milestone): —- What were they when you were there? 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I told you at the last Session. The people of my constituency in a questionnaire said the 

Department of Welfare was the worst run department in the Government. He still doesn't believe me. Will 

you believe me now, look where you're sitting. Well there may be some people opposite who say the senior 

citizens are affluent and not entitled to coverage without premium. Let me point out to them, the senior 

citizens built this Province, if they don't get a square deal from us they'll go somewhere else. They've been 

doing that. To say that we are handing them money, to suggest that we are giving them something they don't 

deserve is inaccurate and unappreciative and I say typical of Liberal thinking. Mr. Speaker, I say that the 

people over 65 have earned the right to free medicare. They have bought it and paid for it and worked for it 

and I say as a New Democratic Party MLA that those we promised it to, voted for it and the people of this 

Province voted for it, then they are entitled to it. We don't care whether the people opposite come out 

fighting against it or not. They can fight against it if they like, the people over 65 will get the benefits that we 

promised them here and now at this Session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, one of the blackest days in the history of this Province was when the old 

Government, the shattered remnants of which sit depressed, disjointed and almost leaderless opposite, 

introduced legislation to make those who are mentally ill pay for their care in mental hospitals, retroactive to 

1945. To make them pay for it was discrimination; to make it retroactive was outrageous. It was in effect 

both discriminatory and outrageous. Their reasoning went something like this. This is what they said: to be 

mentally ill was different, you were in a different category, you don't get coverage under hospitalization. It 

was the kind of an illness that should be penalized, that should be abhorred, that should be treated as a 

horrible disease. Those who may have kept their estates intact, although they received treatment for physical 

illness would find that when the time came when the person who was mentally ill passed away, that if that 

individual had received treatment for that kind of illness, his estate would be charged, retroactive to 1945, 

for the care he received in this Province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a shameful performance. This was 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

176 

 

one of the most discriminatory, one of the most unkind pieces of legislation ever introduced. I was ashamed 

when it was brought before this House. I could scarcely believe that in this day and age one kind of illness 

would be treated differently; that we in this Province looked after those who were sick but if they were 

mentally ill, it was different. They paid for that type of illness, they paid for it themselves. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to say that as quickly as possible, in this so-called "grandstand" Session of this House, we will remove 

this deplorable legislation from the statutes of this Province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . so that those who are mentally ill will not receive discriminatory treatment any more. 

And if the Hon. Member for Prince Albert thinks that this is grandstanding, if he thinks we should not be 

passing this legislation, I challenge him to get up in his place in this Legislature and I challenge him to vote 

against it. If he does, then I suggest he stand as a leadership candidate for the Liberal Party. 

 

Further, the working people of this Province were used as whipping boys by the Members opposite. They 

passed legislation to shackle them to their jobs. The legislation humiliated a working man, it made him just a 

little bit more than a slave. He could not withdraw his labor from the market. In pious terms the government 

of the day talked about the high cost of living but they did nothing about it. They allowed the machinery 

companies to exploit the farmers; they allowed the supermarkets to fix the price of food on the grocery 

shelves; and when the working man tried to get enough money to keep his family fed and clothed, they said, 

"Oh, no, you can't do that, you can't strike." They set up a phony arbitration board and told them how much 

they would get for their services. Mr. Speaker, the result was the most backward legislation in the history of 

this country. Working people fled, but those who stayed, Mr. Speaker, decided to fight. The last word that 

the departing working people had — whether they were unemployed and seeking jobs or whether they were 

fleeing from this outrageous legislation was — for goodness' sake get rid of the Liberal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — And, Mr. Speaker, the working people of this Province took that advice, they tumbled into 

this political battle in a manner that I have never seen before. People who had supported the Members of the 

Party opposite for 30 years not only voted against them but worked against them. This legislation that set the 

clock back 30 years had to go. Our commitment to the work people, to the working men and women, to the 

carpenters, to the bricklayers, to the ironworkers, to the electricians, to the pipefitters, to the gasfitters, to the 

laborers, was get rid of the Liberals and we'll get rid of the legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, our commitment 

was made to them; our commitment to them is going to be kept. We don't care whether the Hon. Member for 

Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) calls it grandstanding, we don't care. We think that in this election we were 

fighting for the people. It is about time we stood against those who made profits on foodstuffs and on farm 

machinery and if the Members opposite want to come out fighting, I suggest and I invite them to come out 

fighting against the profiteers 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

177 

 

and against the food manufacturers. 

 

And, finally, Mr. Speaker, there is the farm legislation. Under the benevolent and beneficient and efficient 

administration of the Federal Liberals, farm income in this Province has dropped to a point where it has set 

records. It is the lowest in years. The cost of everything the farmer has to buy has gone up. Farm machinery 

prices have galloped and jumped, foodstuffs, everything the farmer has to buy has skyrocketed. The cost of 

money he has to borrow has risen as a result of the ceiling being taken off the bank rate. The cost of money 

has gone up at an unbelievable rate. Faced with the high cost of money and the high cost of machinery and 

the high cost of production, the farmer is in a jam. The old Government — the one that was thrown out — 

talked about legislation, but legislation without anyone to administer it is just so much window dressing. 

 

The Mediation Board which had a sizable staff now has a complete complement of three. The need for debt 

consolidation and the need for negotiating mortgages and agreements for sale, the need for negotiating every 

kind of farm debt — this most necessary part of the Saskatchewan farm economy, this vehicle for handling 

economic problems, has been stripped to the bare bones. An emergency is fast arising. I am sure that every 

Member here knows of a mortgage foreclosure, a cancellation of an agreement, a farmer who can't buy fuel, 

whose credit is gone or limited, who can no longer pay interest to a finance company or a bank. Members 

opposite are going to come out swinging, they are going to come out fighting. They say we are 

grandstanding. We are grandstanding when we pass legislation to give the farmer a second breath, to give 

him a chance to work a little longer. We are grandstanding and they are going to come out fighting on behalf 

of whom? On behalf of the mortgage companies who are foreclosing, on behalf of the machinery companies, 

on behalf of the banks. These are the friends they are going to come out fighting for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want it clearly understood that we are in favor of free adjudication, and I think this legislation 

is written in that manner, but, Mr. Speaker, the people in this Legislature, the people who sit here have 

decided and have put in the legislation which is on the desks of all Members, are going to do their level best, 

to protect, to stand by and to fight for the farmer. This is not grandstanding. Surely if we are concerned this 

is a real issue, this is a real problem and I suggest that we are trying to put forward a real and concrete 

solution. 

 

Is this Session worthwhile? I say to the families who are paying deterrent fees, is it worthwhile? Our own 

family spent $100 on deterrent fees of one kind or another in one year so it is worth something to me but to 

many groups, to the senior citizens, to the lower income groups, I say it is really worthwhile. To those over 

65 who must scrimp and save to pay their medicare premium, who built this Province, who earned the right 

to free medicare, who earned the right to this consideration, I say to them, this Session is worthwhile at 

$6,000 a day. 

 

To the family of those who are mentally ill, who have been bounded and beaten and slugged with the most 

unbelievable legislation, who have had to suffer this discrimination against those who are mentally ill as well 

as to pay for it, retroactively 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

178 

 

since 1945, I say, Mr. Speaker, this Session is worthwhile to them. 

 

To the working man who wants his freedom, who doesn't want a rigged arbitration board, who wants to 

bargain for his labor, is this Session worthwhile? I say, Mr. Speaker, it is. It is more than that. It represent to 

him, his freedom. 

 

To the farmer who is harried, who is losing his livestock, who is losing the land that he has worked for by 

mortgage foreclosure, who is living day to day facing insecurity, this Session is really worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite say that we are grandstanding. If it is grandstanding to fight against the 

tax on the sick, to fight for three years against this damnable tax on the sick, and then put it in legislation as 

we promised to do, then this is grandstanding. If we remove the premium for those 65 and over, and that is 

grandstanding, then I plead guilty. If removing legislation that causes labor strikes from the books in this 

Province, then we are grandstanding. If protecting farmers, whose very livelihood, everything they have done 

and everything they have built is threatened with foreclosure, then we have grandstanded. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, grandstanding or no grandstanding, and whether the Opposition says they are coming out 

fighting or not, I can tell you that on this side of the House, there are some people who have, one session 

after another, quietly and without headlines, without any let-up, have really and truly come out fighting. 

They have come out fighting on behalf of senior citizens, for the working man and woman, for the farmer, 

for the mentally ill and, in this Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, there are no headlines for them, the 

headlines belong to the people they represent. Mr. Speaker, so do the benefits. 

 

Members on this side of the House, sitting as the Government, find I am sure, that: (1) the Opposition 

criticisms are trivial and unfounded; (2) that they are not fighting for the right people; (3) that the Session is 

worthwhile in practical application to the people whom we represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the amendment, I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. D.W. Cody (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I want first of all, to congratulate you on being elected to the 

very high office of Speaker. Knowing you as I have in the past, I am confident you will do an admirable job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate Mr. Blakeney and his very fine choice of a Cabinet. I know that 

under Mr. Blakeney and his leadership they will do a good job with a high degree of efficiency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very briefly I wish to turn to my own constituency of Watrous. Watrous constituency is one of 

rather straight lines, one of the few left with straight lines of course, it is sort of rectangular, 72 miles long 

and 35 miles wide, made up of many ethnic groups of which I am proud. We are mainly a farming 

community with five good sized towns and four average villages. It is the only constituency in the 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

179 

 

Province which can boast of a mineral water beach and I invite everyone including the Members of the 

Opposition side to meet and come out to our very pleasant resort. 

 

I want to thank all of the people who voted and worked for me throughout this last election campaign. I want 

to make particular mention of the young people, for if it hadn't been for the tireless work of the young 

people, I'm sure this election would not have been possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Wednesday, June 23, 1971, will go down in Saskatchewan political history as the time a 

brilliant, dynamic young lawyer, Allan Blakeney by name, led his Party to a landslide victory in the 

Provincial election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — On Wednesday, June 23, 1971 Saskatchewan was led from darkness into light, from despair 

to hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record of the previous Administration should not be allowed to be buried. We should not 

allow it to be buried lest people forget. This record of inefficiency must be brought up from time to time to 

remind people, and the Members opposite particularly, of the dangers of such rude interruption of good 

government as we had from 1944 to 1964. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the previous Government is to be remembered at all, it will be remembered for devisivness 

and hard heartedness. It will be remembered for pitting one segment of society against another, teacher 

against trustee, farmer against labor, labor against government, and worst of all, big business against us all. It 

will be remembered for its cruel and vicious legislation against people. I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, at 

this time and review some of this legislation for it is the purpose of this Special Session to repeal some of it. 

 

Let's take health and the imposition of deterrent fees. If ever a government demonstrated a lack of morality 

and compassion, it was the previous Government in connection with the health care of its citizens. Let's look 

at the record. They imposed deterrent fees on hospital and doctor use of $2.50 and $1.50 a day. But whom 

were they deterring? Was it anyone who could afford it? Was it anyone who could afford to pay for it? I 

should say not. It was intended to deter only those who could least afford the cost and who needed coverage 

the most. It was a direct tax on the sick. It was, Mr. Speaker, a sick tax. I am very pleased to be associated 

with a government that intends to make the health care of its people a priority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — I want, Mr. Speaker, to turn now to another area of the Throne Speech and that is the section 

dealing with labor. The previous Liberal Government conducted a deliberate and systematic campaign 

against labor. They again attacked with vengeance, one section of our society. They again enacted vicious 

restrictive legislation, anti-union legislation. Political interference in industrial relations became the order of 

the day. But worse than that, Mr. Speaker, they denied, yes, wiped away, one of the basic fundamentals of 

the democratic rights in a democratic 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

180 

 

society and that is the right of a worker to improve his conditions. 

 

Once again they showed a lack of respect for democratic traditions. This Government, Mr. Speaker, believes 

that we have a responsibility to treat all citizens fairly and we take pride in giving back to the labor 

movement an equal place in our society by guaranteeing free collective bargaining, repealing Bill No. 2 and 

removing political interference. One can indeed say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a New Deal for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my belief and the belief of most Members of this House that our free and democratic 

institutions must be strengthened and preserved. With that in mind, I am pleased to see that my colleague, 

the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) has moved a private Member's resolution for 

legislation initiating an independent boundaries' commission. This will complete a fair redistribution of our 

electoral boundaries. I say this, Mr. Speaker, because the record of the previous Administration points out 

that we do not all have, and that we do not all share the same faith in our democratic process. It seems 

ridiculous to me that there are some Members sitting in the House who represent one-quarter of the people 

that others represent. One of the Members now isn't sitting in his seat. There could have been, Mr. Speaker, 

two reasons for this gross distortion. The first reason being that the Members of the former Government and 

of that committee, some who are sitting opposite, some who leave their benches from time to time, felt that 

one New Democratic Member could represent four times as many people and still do as good a job as a 

Liberal Member representing one-fourth as many. 

 

The second reason is more sinister and I believe the real reason and that is that they intended to perpetuate 

themselves in office even against the wishes of the majority of the people of Saskatchewan. Their contempt 

for democratic traditions was surpassed only by the people's contempt and indignation and a shared 

determination to wipe them out of office which we certainly did on June 23. If the recent Saskatchewan 

election gave us anything at all, it gave us a renewed faith in people, a renewed faith in the democratic 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have mentioned previously, the people of my constituency are engaged primarily in 

agriculture. Therefore, I am pleased to see legislation which will give the farmer protection by offering a 

year's moratorium on payments for land and machinery and livestock, again demonstrating that the New 

Democratic Party recognizes the farm situation and is prepared to do all in its power to see that the farmers 

are helped back to the road to economic recovery. 

 

I also commend the Hon. Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) for introducing a private Member's 

resolution which will establish a land bank commission. If there is any piece of legislation which will be 

popular, particularly to the constituents of Watrous, it will be the Land Bank Commission. The farmers 

throughout the Province, as I have just said, and including Watrous, are interested in this bold, imaginative 

program and they will see once and for all that a family farm in Saskatchewan can be made viable. It proves 

that this Party believes that human values will not be sacrificed for just the sake of technology and 

efficiency. It proves that the New Democratic Party is committed to saving a rural way of life. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

181 

 

I have, Mr. Speaker, tried to let this House know the hopes and aspirations and expectations of the people I 

represent. Much has been done in the past few years to build up a mistrust in our political system. We must 

do away with obsolete dogmas and outworn slogans and re-establish confidence. It is my hope and the hope 

of my people and I am confident it will come about that we have an open government and every chance will 

be given for participation and examination of policies. 

 

It is, Mr. Speaker, with this in mind that I invite the Premier and his Cabinet to come out to my constituency 

when time is available and meet with our people. "All questions," Robert Kennedy has said, "must be raised 

by great voices and the greatest voice is the voice of the people. Let that voice speak and the stillness you 

hear will be the gratitude of mankind." 

 

Mr. Speaker, let the word go forth from this Legislature to the people of this Province and to the people of 

this country that Saskatchewan has come to terms with herself. She is ready once again to take her rightful 

place with a renewed dedication to achieve new goals, to meet the needs of a new generation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is going to have this New Deal for People. I am sure by this time that you will 

have gathered, I will support the main motion and I will not support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high 

office which you now hold. As for myself, I should like to thank the people of Hanley constituency for 

granting me the privilege of representing them. As you may or may not know, Hanley constituency is a sort 

of hybrid constituency being primarily rural but also having a portion of Saskatoon in it. Nevertheless rural 

and urban share mutual concerns in spite of this unnatural but healthy alliance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this Government should be commended for introducing legislation to abolish deterrent 

fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Without going into detail which has already been brought out I should like to say that 

this legislation will, I am sure, clear up much confusion. Now I mean confusion as was to be found when 

some people on entering hospital were required to put down initial deposits, others were not. Not aware of 

the various agreements certain jurisdictions had with certain hospitals, many people in Hanley constituency 

often wondered why and for what reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the field of mental health I again commend this Government for its proposed legislation. If 

we are to believe what psychologists tell us, many cases of mental illness are in part, a product of our 

society. Is it fair, then, to single out this type of illness and consequently seize portions of estates? 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

182 

 

Related to this is another area of concern to me and various people in Hanley constituency and that is the 

care and treatment of young men and women who are physically handicapped. I don't think there ever has 

been or is provisions for these people to be together for companionship, proper care and attention. And here I 

am referring to the type of plant such as may be found in so-called Cheshire Homes. I know that in Hanley 

constituency certain organizations are holding hard-earned money in trust to supplement any government 

effort in this area. I know of one girl, almost totally physically handicapped, who for about eight months of 

the year can look forward to looking at the four walls of her home. For variety she can look out her window 

and gaze at a monument to man's ingenuity in solving certain problems — Blackstrap Mountain. 

 

I would also ask this Government to give careful consideration in the near future to more permanent and 

far-reaching programs concerning recreational facilities in our centres. Now in all sincerity I am not 

suggesting vast grants of money but rather moderate ones, clearly spelled out so as to act as initiating stimuli 

for local projects. 

 

May I also ask the powers that be — this would be directed primarily to the Federal — that if they are 

willing to spend millions of dollars on youth surveys and youth participation programs, could they give 

consideration to having some of these young people going into various communities and involving 

themselves with recreational activities. Many of these young people — and for the benefit of one of the 

Members opposite some of them do have long hair — many of them are excellent athletes who could put on 

extended ball, golf or whatever you have, workshops. Others could organize and teach our children things 

such as art, pottery, leather work, etc. If needed, surely our schools which are usually empty at this time of 

year could be used for such purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no doubt the proposed farm legislation will be welcomed by the farmers of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Again, may I point out the fact that many of our farmers are caught in a bind. In Hanley 

constituency alone, and the others are in the same position, many farmers don't know where their next 

payment is coming from. Some have had to take on other work and I know of cases of that in my own 

constituency. Some have had to take on other work to keep family and farm together, and to put food on the 

table. Some have had telephone service cut because they couldn't pay their bills. In the Glenside and 

Broderick areas of Hanley constituency, irrigation farmers feel that they have been left out on a limb and 

justifiably so. The farmers of Hanley constituency, just in case they don't see enough red in their books at 

year's end, can always gaze at night, at that little red revolving light on Blackstrap Mountain, a real 

monument to progress for people. Mr. Speaker, I know this Government will give careful consideration in 

the future to helping the farmers of this Province maintain a way of life that was very often the envy of their 

city cousins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should hope that this Government gives consideration in the near future to the inclusion in the 

school 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

183 

 

curriculum of courses geared more to the needs of our young people. Here I refer specifically to such courses 

as would better help our young people to cope with the business of living after leaving school. I mean such 

things as basic law, rights, privileges, credit buying and many other things to which they, as well as a host of 

adults, often fall victim. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my area there are three potash mines. No doubt they are beneficial in that they provide jobs 

for people. They help to diversify the economy. However, there has been in the last few years an air of 

uncertainty on the part of workers, management and — and I stress this — owners too. On behalf of these 

people and the centres which benefit from this industry, I should like to see this air of uncertainty cleared up, 

or a good attempt made at it. While I am on this topic may I also ask this Government to speed things in 

regard to improved mine safety. Now I am not implying that safety standards are not reasonably good now. I 

merely wish to say that they should and can be better, thus saving the lives of workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing me to bring to light some of the areas of concern of 

the people of Hanley constituency. I oppose the amendment but I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, may I first congratulate you on your election to the 

office of Speaker. I should also like to congratulate Mr. Blakeney for being elected as Premier of this 

Province. May I also publicly congratulate Mr. Snyder for Moose Jaw South on his appointment to the 

Cabinet. As a fellow member for the City of Moose Jaw I am very happy to see our great city represented in 

the Cabinet of the new Government. I wish him every success in behalf of our city. I should also like to 

congratulate the freshman Member for Saskatoon University, Mr. Richards. His maiden speech regarding 

Bill 3 was a most refreshing presentation from that side of the House. It is obvious he is a new Member and 

he has a great deal to learn about the method of debate from that side of the House. He completely forgot to 

tell us that we were defeated on June 23, he did not tell us what a miserable little group we were, he did not 

tell us about the type of villains we have been over the past seven years. Surely the worst mistake of all that 

he made was that when he used the words, 'deterrent fees,' he did not even bleed a little, nor did he shed a 

single tear. I don't believe he once used the phrase, a tax on the sick, the poor and the aged. All Mr. Richards 

did was to give us his thoughts and ideas in a concise and logical manner. His unemotional and logical 

presentation will not likely evoke any congratulations from his fellow Members. However, I am sure some of 

the experience of his fellow Members will rub off on him. I am sure they can tell him where to get his acting 

lessons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to take a few minutes to discuss Moose Jaw. As happened all over this Province 

we had a very interesting election in Moose Jaw. I believe that Mr. Snyder will agree that the election 

campaign in Moose Jaw was clearly fought on a very high level. During the campaign Mr. Snyder 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

184 

 

raised some very important issues, made several promises that I feel are very worthwhile for our city. I 

intend to co-operate fully with the Member for Moose Jaw South and his Government to see that Moose Jaw 

gets its fair share. One of the first projects that we should like to see in Moose Jaw is the $1.5 million 

provincial office building. I certainly agree that it make sense to decentralize some Government activities 

and develop regional centres. We in Moose Jaw look forward to an early start on the building. The project 

should certainly fit in with your expressed program of expanded public works. During the campaign Mr. 

Snyder promised an immediate start and Mr. Blakeney affirmed this when he was in Moose Jaw on June 5, 

1971. I am sure that Members opposite realize that the Provincial Government already owns the proposed 

site for this building, this vacant lot has been a burden to the taxpayer and we look forward to an early start. 

 

We in Moose Jaw also look forward to the zoological park which he promised for our Moose Jaw Wild 

Animal Park. Over the years this park has been a tourist attraction not only for our city, but for the Province 

as a whole. It has really been the only attraction of this type in the Province. The costs involved in keeping 

this facility up to the standard expected of it has become too great for a city the size of Moose Jaw. We 

certainly welcome provincial takeover of the park to make it into what we all dream it may become. 

 

During the past few years pollution of the Moose Jaw River has been of concern to the residents of our city. 

The NDP promised us a Moose Jaw River project to eliminate pollution and re-activate our beach area. This 

promise rates a great deal of merit. However, I am a little concerned with the interpretation of this promise 

by the Government opposite. A short time ago Mr. Snyder announced that there was still money available 

from the STEP program that the Liberal Government instituted. He suggested that city council should get at 

the job of cleaning the bulrushes and used cars out of the river. The only catch is that for a month or so of 

cleanup the City of Moose Jaw taxpayers will be required to pay $20,000 or $25,000, which will raise our 

mill rate nearly one mill. This is a great deal of money to improve slightly the aesthetics of our river, but it 

won't reduce pollution at all. I am not sure the taxpayers in Moose Jaw can afford your program to reduce 

pollution. I would urge a re-interpretation of your promise here. 

 

We have another to intensify development of Buffalo Pound and Besant, to eliminate the algae from the 

lakes and build a swimming pool. This promise fits admirably into your plans to enlarge the tourist industry 

in our province. However, once again I am a little worried about your methods. The swimming pool was 

planned at Besant under the Liberal Administration, the excavation was started and your Government 

awarded the contract, then withdrew it. A lovely park and a great trans-Canada tourist attraction now stands 

in a shoddy state of disrepair. Patrons are swimming in a dangerous and polluted mud hole. This certainly 

appears contrary to your promises and intentions. 

 

We in Moose Jaw are also a little apprehensive about your promise to expand the technical institute in this 

city. The announcement a short time ago by the Minister that you plan to proceed with the technical institute 

in Regina leaves us in 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

185 

 

Moose Jaw a little fearful for the future of our facility. Perhaps an announcement by the Minister concerning 

the Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw will remove our apprehension at an early date. 

 

I shall conclude these remarks about Moose Jaw by saying that I wish the new NDP Government a good deal 

of success in dealing with its promises to Moose Jaw. Our city is looking forward to a good deal from your 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party has now been in power for five weeks. Their 

true personality is now showing. The front they put on during seven years in Opposition and especially 

during the campaign has now been smashed. We find we don't have an NDP that is the people's party, as they 

have tried to lead us to believe. In fact, in five short weeks this Government is showing that it intends to 

become a bureaucratic institution with a firm first and no sense of fair play or decency. We have had some 

fantastic examples of what the New Democrats feel is fair play. We have already heard such beautiful 

phrases as, 'run them out,' and 'no consideration or compensation,' 'make examples of them,' all this from a 

New Democratic Party that for years complained about heavy-handed tactics. We have already seen 

legislation that is aimed at penalizing the persons that employ three or four employees. This is the same 

government that ran all over this Province promising help to the small businessman, a lot of people 

obviously bought this nonsense. The thing they didn't realize is that the New Democrats consider anyone, 

with more than one employee, is big business. 

 

The Government is the same NDP, that during the election campaign, told anyone who would listen that if 

they were elected there would be no witch hunt. I don't want to take away their right to fire whomever they 

wish, but I do object to the right to say one thing and do another. These are the same people who said they 

would give government back to the people, and now we find that this is a party that gives in to organized 

pressure groups. This is the same New Democratic Party that talked about a New Deal for Indian and Metis. 

 

Just this morning we find out that our new Premier doesn't feel that our Indian people don't know how to 

work properly. He feels that they aren't' the kind of people who can hold a regular job. I am beginning to 

wonder what this New Deal will mean to them. These are the same New Democrats who said that they 

would put people before profits. And yet one of their first acts is to shut down the iron-ore project. And 

why? Because they say the profits may not be — and I emphasize may not — be to their liking. What do they 

mean, people before profits? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just a few examples to show that the New Democrats ran an election campaign under 

false pretenses. During debate on some of the legislation there will be many more examples. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech was a most incredible document. The New Democrats have been screaming, 

for I don't know how long, about unemployment. The Throne Speech ignores 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

186 

 

the problem. The Government inserts the line in the Throne Speech saying, 'we have observed the serious 

misgivings of stagnation of the Provincial economy' and offering nothing as a remedy. 

 

The only solution they do offer is that they will set up a Task Force. You have heard a lot about the high 

taxes that were imposed on Saskatchewan people by the old Liberal Government, and yet there is no tax 

relief offered in the Throne Speech. In fact, it assures us there will be higher taxes next spring. Mr. Speaker, 

it might be fair to suggest that this is a new and inexperienced Government and they must be given a chance 

to prove themselves. 

 

I agree, but by the same token I feel that it is the duty as an Opposition Member to point out errors and 

omissions made by this Government. I intend to be very critical of the mistakes this Government has made 

and is making in some of the Bills that it has introduced in the Legislature. I do feel there are many. 

 

During the first Session, however, I will be less critical of the glaring omissions that are being made by this 

Government. I will give them the benefit of being a new and inexperienced Government and will expect 

much greater things from them in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that I will support the amendment and will vote against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H. Owens (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high office 

you now hold in this Legislature, knowing that you have the knowledge, the ability and the integrity to fill 

this office to the satisfaction of all the Members. 

 

In rising to take part in the Throne Speech Debate, I do so as a new Member of the Government, representing 

the constituency of Elrose. I want to thank the constituents of Elrose for honoring me in this capacity. 

 

The Elrose constituency has been noted for many years as being one of the most progressive constituencies 

in Saskatchewan, having elected in 1938 the late L.H. (Lou) Hantleman on the Farmer-Labor ticket. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Owens: — Mr. Hantleman was elected in 1934 in Kindersley and was one of the famous "quints," but 

redistribution placed him in Elrose which he represented, 'till voluntary retirement in 1944.' 

 

Elrose elected Maurice Willis in 1944, and in each succeeding election until he voluntarily retired in 1956, 

after 12 years as a Member in the Government Again, Elrose sent another CCF Member to the Government, 

when Olaf Turnbull was elected in 1956 and again in 1960. However, disaster struck in 1964, but the 

aftermath has been a return to responsible 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

187 

 

government on June 23 and Elrose again returning a Government Member to this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Owens: — I hope my term in this Legislature will be as successful and rewarding as my predecessors. 

 

Elrose constituency is located in one of the better grain-growing areas in Saskatchewan and, therefore, the 

farming economy is of vital concern to my constituents and myself. It contains no large trading centre, but 

several smaller service centres which depend entirely on the farming community they service for their 

livelihood, so the fate of the outlets providing the services is also a matter of deep concern. 

 

If the farmers are economically buoyant, it naturally follows that the towns will flourish and businesses will 

expand, but the reverse is also true as, in fact is the case at the present time. It follows naturally then, that 

those factors that influence the farming economy are of prime importance. Some of these factors are beyond 

the scope of this Assembly and in such areas I will be supporting the Government as it seeks action and co-

operation from senior governments. 

 

In those areas that are within our jurisdiction, I will be supporting our Government in legislation that will 

effectively bolster our farming community and hence all of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the chief areas of concern is in the field of taxation, specifically property taxes on farms and small 

businesses, as they pertain to school operating costs. Relief must be provided in the immediate future if we 

are to save the smaller farmers and businesses from bankruptcy, caused by circumstances beyond their 

control. In addition we must recreate a farm industry that will remain attractive to those now farming and 

attract those who wish to make farming their life occupation, but cannot do so because of the high capital 

investment and operating costs. 

 

Surveys indicate that the average age of Saskatchewan farmers is past 50. Many of these people would like 

to retire and should be able to do so with dignity, but are prevented from doing so by the inability to sell 

satisfactorily their farming interests to the young people who desire to farm, but who do not have ways or 

means to get started. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting our Government in enacting legislation 

that will make it possible for our older farmers to sell their farms and retire with dignity and security and 

also provide our younger people, who wish to farm, with ways and means to do so as well as offering them 

security and a purpose in living. 

 

The health of our people is a priority item. I am pleased to know that all Members of the Legislature are 

prepared to recognize the importance of the legislation presented at this Session. The cost of health care is a 

serious matter and requires much study and action, especially in the areas of drug and hospital care costs. 

 

The Minister in Charge has indicated that a thorough study of all aspects of the health program will be made 

and with this 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

188 

 

I am in full agreement. Our present program, in effect, gives the providers of our health service a blank 

cheque. What private operator of any establishment gives his employees this privilege? I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, you would go into bankruptcy in a very short period of time. I further submit, Mr. Speaker, that our 

Government will need to institute a more sophisticated policing program to control effectively our health 

costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments on education, a field that I have been interested in for 

many years — 16 years as chairman of a school unit board. 

 

During those years and under the administration of the CCF Government, the trio involved, namely the 

education department, the teachers and the trustees, proved themselves capable of co-operating and working 

together to produce what became known as the most progressive and forward-looking educational system in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Owens: — We had problems, but most of them were resolved at the local level. There was no direct 

government or departmental interference, just good, clean advice, guidance and leadership. Since 1964 the 

unrest in the educational field has been of unprecedented proportions. Teachers have been used as whipping 

boys, being accused as the main reasons for higher costs, tied in with higher salaries, and lower teacher-pupil 

ratios, while trustees have had their power so eroded that they must feel they are considered very poor 

administrators, especially when their budgets must be approved by higher authority before they are assured 

of their share of Provincial assistance. 

 

Surely these groups must have breathed a sigh of relief on June 23 when they were assured of the election of 

a government that will again change the directional trend in our educational system, and Saskatchewan will 

once again gain the reputation and the position it held seven years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Owens: — Referring back to the Elrose constituency, I should like to point out that it has a unique 

feature uncommon to any other constituency in Saskatchewan, being bounded on the south and east by the 

South Saskatchewan River, giving it the longest shoreline of any constituency and the total north shoreline of 

Diefenbaker Lake. 

 

This comparatively new man-made lake in the centre of prairie Saskatchewan was built primarily for power 

and irrigation purposes, but the potential for parks and recreational areas is almost unlimited and this 

potential should be realized, at least in part, in the immediate future, especially now since legislation is 

forthcoming to allow our people more leisure hours. This lake or this area is more accessible to more people 

in Saskatchewan than any other lake and so it behoves us to make it more attractive as well. The north shore 

of this lake needs and deserves much more action than it has received to date. 

 

When I look across the lake to the shoreline that borders 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

189 

 

the constituency of Morse and Arm River, and see the parks and recreation areas that are being developed 

there, I feel I should be an unworthy representative for Elrose if I failed to approach the parks and recreation 

department for more of the same for my constituents and others who frequent this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more and more people of Saskatchewan are discovering the empty fraud that has been worked 

on them in the name of Capitalism. More and more people are recognizing that a Socialist Saskatchewan is 

the only answer to the problems that confront them. In an earlier depression the people rebelled against the 

cruelty and injustice of a profit-seeking society and they formed the CCF and elected them as the 

Government of Saskatchewan in 1944. On June 23 last, the people of Saskatchewan, again spoke in no 

uncertain terms in regard to their future by electing the New Democratic Party as Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Owens: — At the heart of our purposes as a government, is the conviction that ordinary people must 

achieve and retain control over their own lives. In order to accomplish this end we must establish a 

Comprehensive Planning and Growth Agency. We cannot pass on a decent place to future generations unless 

we do plan. It has been said that, "people don't plan to fail, they just fail to plan." 

 

This Government must restore the principle that government exists to serve the people, not to dominate the 

people. Saskatchewan has passed the crossroads toward a Socialist and genuine humanistic society. The 

seventies will be a decade of decision for Saskatchewan. Compromises are no longer possible. A program of 

change toward Socialism will not come easily. Change never has come easily, nothing worthwhile in history 

has ever come easily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government is confident about the future of Saskatchewan and just as determined that 

long-standing problems can and will be solved. Our Government is ready to serve the needs of a modern 

industrial society with policies to cope with our agricultural and housing crisis, our rising costs and our high 

taxes, our educational problems, our health and welfare problems and others. 

 

Our Government will regain control of our economy and give Saskatchewan a positive voice in her own 

destiny. We do not take lightly the task that awaits us but we do accept the challenge to build a society that 

we shall be proud to pass on to the future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne and I oppose the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. Feduniak (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, may I first congratulate you for the high post you have just 

acquired. I should also like to convey my condolences to Mrs. Ross Thatcher and the Thatcher family. I 

should like to congratulate the Member for Saskatoon 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

190 

 

City Park (Mr. Dyck), the mover, and the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson), the seconder, on the manner in 

which they moved and seconded the Throne Speech. 

 

I wish to thank my predecessor, Mr. Bob Wooff, who established so much good will in my constituency that 

makes it easier for me to follow. When one speaks . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — . . . of honesty only men like Mr. Wooff qualify for this title. His whole environment, 

integrity, prestige, dedication, I hold in very high esteem. 

 

After my nomination, it was questionable whether or not I could fill Mr. Wooff's shoes, but when I looked at 

the size of my feet, I didn't think I had too much to worry about. I wish to thank all the people in Turtleford 

constituency who worked so hard to elect me, in spite of the gerrymandering of our constituency. I am very 

happy to be on Allan Blakeney's team. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — Mr. Speaker, not too long ago the farmers were told by the Liberal Federal Government 

to grow all the wheat they could and they would sell it. They also told the farmers to get into larger 

operations, to become more efficient. The farmers did that, they bought more land and bigger machinery at 

highly inflated prices and financed them by high interest rates. 

 

It has been proven by analysing the facts that this efficiency only benefited the big business and not the 

farmers who made all these additional investments. On top of all this, the price of grains dropped by some 40 

per cent. A year later, the Prime Minister of Canada said to the farmers, "you grew it, you sell it." When the 

payments came due on land and machinery, with all kinds of grain on hand, they were not able to meet these 

payments. As a result foreclosures and repossessions took place. Many farmers lost their land and 

machinery. 

 

I am told that some collectors called on farmers to collect the past due notes, in many cases found the farms 

abandoned and the machinery left behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a week ago last Friday, I drove out with an employee of mine to pick up three units — three 

repossessions. We drove into the yard, I walked up to the house, knocked on the door, and no answer. But I 

noticed through a blindless window, the furniture had been removed, the farm was abandoned. When we 

came back with these units to my shop, I noticed another unit had been delivered by another farmer who had 

given it up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Royal Commission and the Barber Commission found that the American dominated farm 

machinery companies are getting exorbitant prices for farm machinery. An insult, which adds to injury, is the 

high rates of interest charged at present, running about 16 per cent. 

 

A group that uses this plan are usually the people who can least afford it. A farmer buys some machines, uses 

them seven 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

191 

 

to ten days, puts them away and pays high interest rates on them for the rest of the year. 

 

It is not only the farmers who are affected by these problems. The dealers are also getting it too, over 50 per 

cent of machinery dealers have been forced out of business and have closed their doors thus eliminating 

necessary services to farmers. Warranty has been a problem too, as it is the farmer or dealer who has to pay 

transportation involved in going to or bringing in machinery for warranty work. I believe that the machinery 

companies should bear these costs under warranty. Also there are unreasonable increases for repair parts. For 

instance, a baler needle No. F2526 used to sell for $13.50 back in 1965. In 1970 it sold for $23. 

 

There are many reasons for the high prices for machinery imported from the United States. Freight rates are 

large factors. The farmer pays the freight on the steel shipped from Canada to United States and then pays 

the freight on the product coming back to Canada. On a large tractor the freight is $624 from Racine, 

Wisconsin to Regina. Unreasonable increases in the price of steel is another factor. For instance, the Steel 

Company of Canada gave their employees a wage increase in three years amounting to 16 per cent. However, 

they increased their profit on steel by 42 per cent in one year. They employ high paid personnel such as 

executives, directors, university graduates and engineers, who possess very little realistic knowledge in 

actual farm operations and the type of equipment needed. This results in producing poor quality and 

inefficient machinery to suit the conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to prove this theory, we have several farm machinery manufacturing firms here in 

Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta, mostly started by farmers and blacksmiths who had firsthand 

knowledge about the farming, land conditions, etc. They designed and manufactured some of the best units 

in North America. For instance, Morris rod weeders and cultivators. Several firms made stonepickers, grain 

augers — to mention a few. Now most of the swathers are made in Manitoba for the major United States 

machine companies. Many of you will remember that in the war, a group of Army Service people made a 

tractor in Edmonton called 'Rock Oil.' It was very reasonably priced but it didn't continue very long because 

one of the big businesses bought them out. 

 

There has been some legislation passed called the Dealer Termination. In Alberta, Bill No. 83 was passed by 

that Legislature. In 1970, Bill No. 64 was passed by the Saskatchewan Legislature. This Dealer Termination 

legislation provides elimination of contract between dealer and machine company. Under this Act the dealer 

has the privilege to return all new machinery without depreciation and all parts that qualify at current prices, 

less 15 per cent of wholesale cost. But this does not solve any of our problems. We want to keep our dealers 

in business so they can make a living and provide services to the farmers who need them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — In order to solve some of these problems we could introduce the Saskatchewan 

development fund for agriculture to develop farm machinery manufacturing as recommended by the 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

192 

 

Royal and Barber commissions, who state that it is highly feasible to promote this industry in Canada, 

presumably in the Prairie Provinces, perhaps combining two or three provinces together on this project. It 

would certainly tend to increase employment for our people. We should also reinstate the Agricultural 

Machinery Association testing. Time and money could be saved if the implements and parts were to be 

standardized. This would reduce inventory stocks and costs and provide more services. 

 

These are some of the problems and solutions introduced very briefly and are subject to many details. The 

basic solutions, of course, would be implementation of parity prices to apply to every occupation, job and 

operation but this will only be possible under Federal jurisdiction. I hope this will be possible before too 

long in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few remarks to address to this Assembly in 

connection with the Throne Speech and in rising to speak on this debate, I should say first that I have, 

throughout my life, been greatly impressed by the fine building and the grounds here. I think that it's a 

tremendous monument to the people who had so much faith in this Province and I should like to compliment 

the workmen who do such an excellent job of keeping the grounds and this building, and this particular 

room, in such excellent shape for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am quite aware, of course, that democracy is not made up solely of the external or physical 

things that I have mentioned. I believe it is made up perhaps more of people and traditions and I want to say 

how much I appreciate the right to be here in this free Assembly and the responsibility that rests upon me as 

a representative of people of this Province. I appreciate further that the plans that I have for the Members 

opposite, the plotting that accompanies those plans, would if I were in some other countries receive rather 

abrupt and terminal attention, because, Mr. Speaker, they're all doomed there. They are going to end up on 

the wrong side of the House in due course. 

 

Before the Speaker leaves, I should like to congratulate him on his elevation as Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 

a teacher in the area west of Dalton, west of Archerwill, Saskatchewan — I know the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Messer) regards that as God's country — but that was in the Dalton-Wadena constituency at the time of 

his first election and the people in the area have stood in awesome wonder at his steady progress and 

advancement through the House and this steady advancement and progress is the subject of occasional 

comment in the constituency. 

 

I should like to inform you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the accommodations over here are very comfortable. 

We have lots of legroom, there is quite a bit of space over here and we do not find that we have any 

difficulty in moving about with complete ease and freedom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

193 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — And for those on the other side of the House who have not had the opportunity to wander 

about these wide-open spaces, Mr. Speaker, I assure them that four years from now some of them, but not all 

of them will, I suspect, have the opportunity and the pleasure of undergoing what I am now enjoying. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the honor and the privilege to represent the constituency of 

Regina Albert Park. I should like at this time to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — . . . A titter seems to have run through that crowd. Don't worry, I ask nothing. 

 

I should like particularly to thank the campaign workers, the Liberal central office, the other candidates of 

our Party, some of whom are here today, whose advice and assistance we greatly value and all of whom 

greatly contributed to our success in Regina Albert Park and I particularly thank Mr. Stewart Cameron for 

his untiring efforts of my behalf in Albert Park. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don't forget to thank Harrington! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Oh, you could have doubled the number of people there, you still couldn't have won. 

 

Regina Albert Park, Mr. Speaker, is basically a residential constituency. It has two old-age homes at the 

present time and there is another one under construction soon to be completed. There is one apartment block 

which has been sitting rather vacantly out there for some time now. It is now being completed and when 

completed in the very near future will house more than 100 additional people. Another apartment block has 

just been completed and filled in that area. There are a number of townhouses constructed in the area just 

recently. A large number of single family dwellings are being constructed and soon to be commenced are 

two 72-suite apartments in Albert Park. 

 

All in all, I think, Mr. Speaker, we may justly lay claim to the proposition that this is the smallest but one of 

the fastest growing constituencies in the Province. And all of this commenced and was underway prior to 

June 23, Mr. Speaker, just in case anybody should get the wrong idea. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this constituency contains the largest number of apartment buildings of any constituency in the 

Province of Saskatchewan and it contains some of the nicest apartments and some of the worst. It stands 

astride the glide path to the main northwest and southeast runway of the airport and because of that, Mr. 

Speaker, it has endured a noise pollution level unmatched, I suggest, by any other constituency in the 

Province. 

 

Albert Park has just about 5,000 people who are entitled to vote. The transitory nature of our apartment 

dwellers leads to some difficulty in enumeration. I am told that in one of the 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

194 

 

polls, we had 145 per cent people vote as compared to the enumeration. So in this particular apartment area, 

in any event, they were gathered up on election day and brought to the polls. We are quite prepared to 

believe that these people actually reside there. They live and abide within our boundaries even though they 

weren't actually on the enumeration list. 

 

I am told that some extreme difficulty was also encountered by members of the census teams who went 

about the constituency at about the same time. 

 

With respect to the campaign, Mr. Speaker, I want to say at this time that in Regina Albert Park the 

campaign was fought, we think, on a very responsible and honorable level by both candidates. We stuck to 

the issues and I think this campaign does credit to politics in general to the candidates and my worthy 

opponent in particular. There was only one incident on election day in which supporters of my worthy 

opponent conducted themselves improperly during the course of the election and I am convinced that this 

was not in any way deliberate. It was, in fact, accidental and occasioned by the ignorance of one or two of 

the supporters of my opponent — not mine. 

 

I am attempting to pay my worthy opponent a compliment and I do so unhesitatingly because I am sure that 

the one instance that came to our attention I'm convinced was accidental and was not deliberate. So I am 

prepared to believe that any wrongful conduct was innocent of any evil design except for one. They had the 

design surely to bring about my defeat, which in the word of politics isn't an evil design. 

 

I might say that, of course, there were, in fact, three candidates but the election primarily was a contest 

between myself, on behalf of the Liberal Party, Mr. Jerry MacDonald on behalf of the NDP. There was a 

Conservative candidate who polled just over 200 votes so the remarks that I have made refer to the worthy 

Mr. MacDonald. 

 

Now, as a Member for Regina Albert Park, Mr. Speaker, I should like to assure you that the Member for 

Albert Park intends in this House to take his duties pretty seriously. I intend to act responsibly and for the 

benefit of all citizens. I intend in turn to look at the Government for the same sort of conduct on its part. I 

expect it to go about its affairs properly and in a businesslike manner with proper attention to the affairs of 

the people. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that with some bit of disappointment I observed the tendency of the 

Government to rush into print at all times. My eye caught an item in the Leader-Post on the evening of July 

12, 1971 — the evening edition — and it mentioned (and I'm sorry that he is not in the House) that the 

worthy Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) had moved his office. I thought that that was rather an 

important announcement obviously, at least he thought so. I started to look for another one and I found 

another press release where he says something like this: 

 

Education Minister Mr. MacMurchy studying an interim report from a committee studying 

bursaries. He says he is not prepared to comment on it and the report has not been released. 

 

And then it goes on to say: 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

195 

 

The interim report deals with the needs facing students. He didn't know when the 

committee's final report would be made or when he would be able to make long-term 

recommendations. 

 

So there we have another press release from the Minister of Education. And I started looking for them 

simply because of his apparent tendency to rush out and get his name into print. 

 

Of course I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn't mention the apocryphal story — at least I hope it's 

apocryphal — about the previous campaign in which our worthy friends on the other side of the House had a 

proposed meeting in the town of Lumsden, and with their usual accent upon press releases, they sent a notice 

in advance to the Leader-Post, I understand, that there were 300 screaming, exuberant fans who attended this 

meeting in Lumsden, and they mailed it in and shipped it off to the Leader-Post, or one or more of the 

publications around the country. The difficulty is, I understand, that a rainstorm — a real cloudburst — came 

along about 7 o'clock that night and the whole meeting was cancelled. So that this meeting at which 300 

screaming, enthusiastic fans were apparently there, never did occur. And I think that this is an example, 

among other things, of the cult method. Now, I won't get into that at the present time because having gone 

through the past election campaign, I am quite aware that counts don't always come out in favor of the 

Liberal Party. 

 

But in any event, I was rather interested in this bursary report because any time a Minister thinks it's 

worthwhile sending out a notice that he has received an interim report, that he hasn't studied, and he hasn't 

considered and that hasn't been released and doesn't know when the rest of it's going to come in, I thought 

maybe we could speculate that we are about to hear some more things. It's obvious that he wants us not only 

to hear all the news, that is the news, he wants us to hear some news that isn't. 

 

Now, I expect that we shall have following that from the Minister of Education a few more items. I have no 

doubt that he will give a news release in due course that he has read this interim report but hasn't thought 

about it. I expect, Mr. Speaker, in due course we'll get another press release from the Minister indicating that 

he has considered the report. I expect a further one, of course, that he's made a decision and will announce 

that decision in due course, and of course we'll be blessed with a final release, presumably, that he will have 

a decision which he will announce. 

 

Now, I am not saying that the Minister is overly impressed with his new magnitude of his new portfolio. It's 

very possible that the department is breaking him in gently. But this press release syndrome on the part of the 

Ministers, and particularly the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy), does lead to some pretty wonderful 

and singular possibilities. And, Mr. Speaker, I wish to state here and now that there are some daily functions 

which the Minister must regard as totally urgent and important but I recommend that he perform these 

without fanfare and accompanied by the minimum of noise. 

 

But I do think we've found the secret, Mr. Speaker, of why the Minister hasn't been able to deal with the 

pupil-teacher ratio. He's been so concerned with getting his name into the 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

196 

 

press. The Minister is changing his parking lot — I hope we don't hear about that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to go on with what I think is something that has concerned me a great deal 

and that is the quality of leadership that we have in the Province. 

 

To begin with, it is not entirely the type of leadership that we want when you call a Special Session, Mr. 

Speaker, to emphasize publicity that you've had over the last campaign. Now, of course, they're entitled to do 

that but it's one with which I don't entirely agree but "up with which I am prepared to put," because we were 

beaten and they're entitled to spend a little time gloating. 

 

I was very pleased with the Premier's remarks that the Choiceland deal is far from dead. But I was 

disappointed at his suggestion that anybody who couldn't afford to build an iron mine is obviously insolvent. 

I don't suppose the Premier is insolvent but I am quite sure — at least I doubt yet — that he can afford to buy 

or build an iron mine. 

 

Now, it is this total exaggeration of remarks from across the way that has so disappointed me. It's the 

misrepresentation that troubles me more than anything else. I am quite sure that Interprovincial Steel 

Corporation is a very well run company. I am sure that properly run it will be counted upon over the years 

with some management to produce profits not only for itself but jobs for the people and taxes for the 

Province, and I'm convinced it'll send the sort of ripple out through the economy that will be beneficial. But 

to characterize that company as insolvent because it hasn't been able to afford an iron mine is the grossest of 

exaggerations. 

 

I guess perhaps that the sort of thing — maybe I should be learning about this in the House — because I just 

listened to the Hon. Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) and in listening to him I started to 

wonder if maybe I had missed a caucus meeting because I was convinced and I was totally under the 

impression that we favored the elimination of utilization fees and we would vote in favor of the elimination 

of utilization fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — After having listened to him for awhile, I was not sure if I had missed one of the 

meetings. Now, I do appreciate that if you've got a speech prepared, and somebody pulls the rug out from 

under you, that should never in any way prevent you from giving a speech that you've already prepared. And 

I suspect that's what happened in the case of the Member from Regina North West. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . his wife . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Oh, his wife prepared one speech and then went on holiday — I get it. I understand. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The Primrose Path! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Primrose Path! In any 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

197 

 

event — as an aside, Mr. Speaker, — I certainly was interested in this comment about the relative who voted 

NDP — shameful conduct, though it is — and I couldn't help but remark that it's hard to tell who went 

astray. It depends on which side of the fence you're on. I'm quite sure that all of us have given a similar 

example. Here there's this gentleman Whelan, a very honorable dedicated Member of the Liberal Party and 

he's got a relative who votes NDP and sits in this particular House as an MLA. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Liberal MP in Ottawa! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — A Liberal MP in Ottawa and here look at this fellow who has gone astray and has joined 

the NDP. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Ed got off the track! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Ed got off the track, yes. I wouldn't want to dwell on this too much longer but I do think I 

have to put the record straight. What happened was that in this family Ed became CCF for awhile and after 

observing the tendencies that were demonstrated, the other member then joined the Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — That's the way it happened. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — And got elected! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — And got elected! Well, I guess one of the worst exaggerations that I have observed in the 

House up to now and I suppose I'll get used to this type of thing, is when the Premier suggested that the last 

Government supported — that is, the last Liberal Government in Saskatchewan — a six per cent 

unemployment ratio. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now, that has to be one thing of a landmark in misrepresentation because, Mr. Speaker, 

. . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I was here . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I was here, too, and I listened to what went on and what did go on apparently was that the 

Provincial Liberal Party congratulated the Federal Government on its fight against inflation and regarded it 

as a number one problem in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Out of that was manufactured a support for an unemployment ratio which was never 

accepted in my recollection by the last Liberal Government. So there is nothing in any record at any time to 

support the Premier's statement and the comment to which he alluded, does not in any way support his 

statement nor does any comment made by the last Liberal Government. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

198 

 

The other thing — and I don't want to beat this thing to death — but I do think that a point should be made 

once more in connection with the now defunct Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I'm so scared to death of what they're going to do to that pulp mill that I just can't help 

myself. 

 

The now defunct Athabasca pulp mill is the one to which I refer. The one on Dore Lake up in Northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Briefly, what the advertisement said during the course of the campaign and what was repeated again by the 

Premier in this House was simply along this line. They said the Government of Saskatchewan is spending, 

risking, putting out certain amounts of money, many millions of dollars. And he said in effect that this cost 

$200,000 of investment per job. Now, the big thing that I resented about the advertisement on television 

during the course of the campaign and the thing which I resented in the House, quite frankly, is the overall 

implication of this and the comparison with what actually occurred. Perhaps I could just give a simple 

example of how by applying it to some other case; namely, my own residence at 1930 MacPherson. Now, 

that house I bought for $16,700 and I put up . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Plutocrat! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Well, yes, I'm a lawyer and after all I earn $3,800 a year! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Almost as well as you teachers. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Just as well as you teachers. In any event, the Government of Canada, through the 

National Housing Act guaranteed a loan from the Bank of Nova Scotia in excess of $13,000 so I put up 

about $3,700 of my own money and the Bank of Nova Scotia loaned $13,000 guaranteed by the Government 

of Canada. 

 

Now, it would come as a great surprise to me — and a great surprise to the Bank of Nova Scotia — to 

discover, if they followed the reasoning adopted by the Premier, that the Government of Canada has a 

$13,000 investment in my house. They should own 70 per cent of my house because they guarantee the loan 

of $13,000, a loan which I hope they'll never have to worry about. That's the kind of reasoning that we've had 

up to now and that's a total example of the kind of reasoning we've had on the Athabasca pulp mill and it's 

totally and absolutely false. As far as I can see that's the kind of reasoning that prevent people, honestly and 

fairly, to assess the kind of a deal that the people of Saskatchewan were presented with when that Athabasca 

pulp mill agreement was put up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now I'm not saying that there aren't pluses or minuses and I am not saying that upon the 

entire evaluation of these pluses and minuses, you wouldn't determine that the pulp mill should not go ahead. 

I am not saying that at all. I am 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

199 

 

merely saying that the type of remarks that I've heard from the Members of the Government makes it totally 

impossible for the people of Saskatchewan to get the proper facts and to evaluate anything and that's the type 

of thing where politics lets the people of Saskatchewan down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing about this pulp mill that was totally ignored was the subsidiary type of jobs — 

subsidiary employment — and the multiplier effect. And when you talk about $200,000 investment per job, 

it's worthwhile noticing that when the University of Saskatchewan, Regina Campus was being mooted for 

the City of Regina, we were told that a university body of 8,000 people (8,000 students) was sufficient to 

support an adjoining population of some 35,000. 

 

Well, now, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt about it that we'd have had an awful lot of subsidiary industry and 

subsidiary employment — some doctors and lawyers and teachers and other people — all needed in that area 

because of the Athabasca pulp mill. And what I regard as totally unfair and inaccurate is the suggestion that 

$200,000 investment per job is what that pulp mill was going to create. 

 

I think what has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the present Government opposite during the campaign made 

statements which trapped the Government after it took office. I think they either had to bungle the deal to 

prove that they were right all along or cancel the deal so that nobody could prove whether they were right or 

wrong. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Give in to the Wafflers. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Give in to the Wafflers. By the way, I'm not sure when Mr. — the Hon. Member, I think 

he's from Saskatoon — is it University — I understand he's really calling the shots. No, he's not really. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm very sorry to have to spend time dealing with these frivolities but unfortunately I am not yet 

accustomed in this House to listening to all that nonsense without regarding it as the nonsense that it is. And 

I am here, Mr. Speaker, to say that I do not intend to object here just for the sake of objecting. I am going to 

try wherever possible to be as objective and reasonable as possible. I subscribe to the comments made the 

other day by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) about our general philosophy of opposition. I assure 

this House that we shall be as vigilant as possible in our proper defence of the welfare of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And when I say 'welfare,' Mr. Speaker, I am talking about real welfare and I'm talking about 

welfare by action and not welfare by words. But let me reiterate, we intend to be constructive. 

 

And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I have looked at the Speech from the Throne and at the very most the things 

that offend me number perhaps two or three dozen. 

 

Now, they've handled this Session, Mr. Speaker, as an extension of the NDP publicity department, only this 

time at the expense of the people. This Session was created solely for the purpose of creating headlines. On 

Wednesday we had the Throne Speech and we got all sorts of headlines. Thursday we had the utilization fees 

problem — more headlines. Friday 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

200 

 

morning we had an early press release — a very early morning press conference — to announce a farm bill, 

obviously announced, Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of getting as much publicity as possible for the Minister 

of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), presented to the nation, Mr. Speaker, prior to the time I gather that they had 

even printed the Bill but they wanted to catch the Friday headline. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Oh, no, we wouldn't do that! Presented to the nation before we got it and we got that 

thing during the argument on the motion to extend the sitting hours and they finally decided, Mr. Speaker, 

that if we were going to quarrel about the time we sat, maybe they should show us what they're going to talk 

about. 

 

And then, of course, having all the Wednesday, Thursday, Friday arguments headlines, the Government 

knew that it would not have any more good announcements and as a result it decided to compress what we 

had to say into the least amount of days. And having squeezed the maximum benefit from the Session up to 

then, it wanted to shut if off and get done with it as soon as possible. 

 

It's Exhibition Week in Regina and this is a civic holiday and I notice that even the former mayor of the City 

of Regina (Mr. Baker) instead of being out at the Exhibition, as he probably desires, is sitting in this House. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Conscientious! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Conscientious Member! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Conscientious, prevented from being that good citizen that he'd like to be by going out 

there to back the Regina Exhibition. The Regina Exhibition will be deprived of his support until some other 

time. So the pattern is clear . . . 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — He didn't get a free pass! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Well, in any event, the reporters are human. They are all up at the races, I imagine, except 

the good faithful ones still here. So what is going to happen is that by tying this thing so that the Government 

gets the maximum of publicity — and shuts everybody else off or ties them up in such a way that they don't 

get anything. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not saying that this speech isn't necessary. I'm saying that it is a very necessary 

speech. The difficulty is that to a large extent it's been further delayed by the Government. There are four 

areas at least of real emergency that we could, with dignity and honor, in justification of our being here study 

and bring to the top of our agenda. Two of them have been dealt with at considerable length and I won't 

spend much time on them. 

 

The first one deals with jobs. I was not a part of and I'm not going to spend a lot of time defending the 

actions of 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

201 

 

the previous Liberal Government . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — . . . but it does seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that that Government did understand clearly and 

fully that the process of getting industry is a long and tedious operation, Mr. Speaker, and when you lose 

something, you lose it for a long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — And without industry, you've got no jobs. And if this Session has done anything it's been 

a platform to announce how many new deals aren't going to be brought into Saskatchewan. If this Session 

has been called just for the purpose of discussing the problem of unemployment, that alone would have 

justified its existence. 

 

We want that Choiceland mine and we'd be glad to have an emergency session on it and we'll be glad if you 

get the best kind of a deal. And if you won't get the best kind of a deal, and if you can't get the second, we 

want the third best. And if it satisfied your campaign promises to make a nickel better deal, go ahead and 

make that deal or make the same deal in a different way, go ahead and make it that way too. Because in 

every deal there's room for a nickel improvement and if you can do better, this is good for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we'll give them full credit. We'll suffer darn near any sacrifice over here 

for the good of all the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — And the good of all the people demands that we have that Choiceland iron mine. And if 

you've got to do it all by yourself and the people of Saskatchewan spend all the money, let's do it. But I can 

say, Mr. Speaker, that if we lose that iron and steel complex that can result from that Choiceland iron mine, 

the people of Saskatchewan will forever hold the Government across the way totally and irrevocably 

responsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — And if we don't get it, if somebody else gets the jump on us, the same thing will happen 

in mines, in steel, as happened in the oil industry — eventually all the subsidiary industries and everything 

else will go somewhere else. The time is now, Mr. Speaker, we can't delay. 

 

The second problem that I mentioned is just as real, that's the problem of the farm economy and I agree that 

it's pretty serious but I don't agree that it's serious in the way that the people across here say it is serious. All 

we get, Mr. Speaker, is a farm bill hastily prepared, put in under the oddest of circumstances, that is, in my 

submission, the greatest hoax ever perpetrated upon the farmers. I won't deal with this further, Mr. Speaker, 

expect to say that nothing I have seen yet could have demonstrated to me the shallowness and the hollowness 

and the weakness of the NDP platform than this Bill on the farm economy which masquerades as some sort 

of assistance. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

202 

 

to the farmer. There are some problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I just don't think it's a good enough Bill. It isn't half good enough. 

 

Mr. Messer: — You should have brought it in two years ago then. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I wasn't here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I can understand, Mr. Speaker, how we can have some difficulty keeping track of all 

those "characters" but I can't understand how they can have any difficulty keeping track of who was here and 

who wasn't here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some real problems and I should like to draw one or two additional ones to the 

attention of this Assembly. In recent years we've had the skyrocketing use of drugs become a national 

disgrace. You look in almost every paper, Mr. Speaker, and you see more dangers, the problems and the 

hideous consequences of drug abuse. This harvest of heroin, for example, that starts in the Himalayas, in 

Burma, in Laos and Thailand, is transported to the United States and Canada through Vietnam, in most 

cases, and is a growing menace. It's a tremendous menace to the future citizens of Canada and the future 

leaders that are now exposed to this menace. British Columbia Medical Association announced the other day 

that there were 10,000 addicts in the Province of British Columbia, almost all of them under the age of 30. In 

Vancouver the Catholic Family and Children Services reported that an overwhelming number or percentage 

of the orphans that they are now getting come from drug abuse. In just over two years they have reported a 

substantial number and a continuing increase. This doesn't in any way include the total of the large number 

of children whose care is being neglected because the parents are involved in drug abuse. The mayor of 

Vancouver has said recently that the drug problem in the area of Vancouver is absolutely beyond control. In 

Canada, as a whole, we have 14,000 offences in 1970 against Canada's Narcotic Control Act. And just in the 

City of Regina alone the other day, we had a report go before city council on the drug problem. 

 

I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that along with poverty and crime the wide-spread use of drugs is probably the 

number one problem in the long-term for Canada. What are we doing about it? Well, Mr. Speaker, we are 

spending our time at a self-congratulatory Session of this Legislature, bringing in frilly-dilly legislation, 

ill-conceived, hastily drawn — and I am talking primarily about that totally inadequate farm legislation. Now 

if we are going to have a special emergency Session, my suggestion is that we do something about 

emergencies. 

 

In Winnipeg, drug and drug abuse, will be introduced as a subject in the Grade Nine health curriculum in 

Winnipeg schools. Authorities on the subject intend to visit schools and discuss the problem. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

203 

 

Now if the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) were a little more concerned with that, and a little less 

concerned with getting his name in the headlines, perhaps he could deal with the problem. I don't know what 

the answers are. I know that a special team consisting of a psychiatrist, paediatrician, social worker, are 

going into the children’s hospitals dealing with the drug when the drug addict arrives there. 

 

I know that our young people, today, are faced with the task of making some pretty critical decisions, 

education, career, decision on drugs, not to mention the relations with the opposite sex, which I won't dwell 

on today. They make these decision, Mr. Speaker, at a time when they are least able, through experience, age 

and knowledge to make these decisions. So what have we got for an emergency? Well, we have the 

committee to study alcohol. Well, that's only the third one. There is another one that troubles me and that is 

an external one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is the sorry and pathetic condition of the refugees and the ravaging of Bengal in East Pakistan. You 

will recall, Mr. Speaker, that this nation with a huge population, one of the oldest of so-called civilizations, 

achieved what was thought to be a tremendous step in the direction of freedom about a quarter of a century 

ago, with the departure of the English Colonists, the departure of the last viceroy, Lord Mountbatten. It was 

to be the golden age of India and the creation of India and Pakistan was a triumph for the dogooders. The 

colonial yoke had been broken, with the advice, the consent and the best wishes in support by the colonial 

power. And it was replaced immediately by some of the most terrible dislocations. Families were uprooted, 

sent packing to the country, depending on the religion you professed to end up at either India or Pakistan. 

Problems then were primarily between the two countries — India and Pakistan or India and China. 

 

But four months ago, Mr. Speaker, civil war broke out in East and West Pakistan. I want to say that the most 

hideous and inhuman action has been taken. The suffering of men, women and children is almost 

incalculable. In the four months since the fighting began, about seven million refugees have left East 

Pakistan and have poured into India. They walked there without food and shelter and the refugee camps and 

torrential rains multiply their misery. The most inhuman conduct still accompanies this revolution. Atrocity 

follows atrocity. 

 

In the last issue of the Time Magazine, Mr. Speaker, a report was transmitted through the Press trust of India. 

As a simple example of the seriousness of the revolution in India and in Pakistan, a group of refugees hid in 

a field as a Pakistan army approached and a mother with a six-year-old child was among them. The child 

started to cry and the mother who was fearful that they would all be slaughtered, strangled the child. 

 

I have heard the Members of the Government, time after time, come out with the most severe condemnation 

of the actions of the United States in Vietnam and spare no time or detail recounting the events of these 

years. I want to know where is the condemnation of the conduct of East Pakistan and the conduct of West 

Pakistan with their military forces. 

 

I don't know what we can do, Mr. Speaker. But I do know 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

204 

 

this, Mr. Speaker, the United Nations report on Foreign Aid, from the industrialized countries to the under-

developed countries of the world, is a sorry report indeed. It shows, Mr. Speaker, where the aid comes from. 

I might say that the Communist countries are at the very bottom of the list. But the industrialized countries 

who have the lowest per capita contribution to the needy people of the world is made by countries that have 

governments which call themselves Socialists. The very bottom of the list is Norway and Sweden. 

 

These fellows are far more interested in winning votes than in helping anybody. So I want to know: where is 

humanity first? 

 

The Province of Saskatchewan hasn't done a lot. But the Hon. W.R. Thatcher made an offer of assistance to 

refugees who might come to Saskatchewan. Now that offer has been interrupted by the election campaign, 

the ensuing defeat, and of course, Mr. Thatcher's death. 

 

But I should be prepared to debate what we should do, Mr. Speaker. I don't see any reason why we can't send 

a mere one million dollars, perhaps a little more than $1 per person for this from this Province. We could do 

something. And as I mentioned, incidentally, when I use words like Socialist, Free Enterprise and Capitalist, 

I might say that they don't play a prominent part in my vocabulary, because I have never yet been able to 

identify properly what Socialist is. All I know is that these countries call themselves Socialists, and these 

countries give the very least. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with emergencies around us, we have every reason to call a special session. We have a self-

congratulatory session. Well, I don't mind that. Go ahead! Mr. Speaker, I should like to deal with some real 

emergencies. 

 

The Hon. Member — and I think he is from Saskatoon City Park (Mr. Dyck) — I am not sure — praised Mr. 

Blakeney for his political skill and his political judgment. Well I agree with that political skill. He skilfully 

engineered a publicity campaign, the likes of which I have never seen. He brought on this Session, Mr. 

Speaker, as an extension of the campaign, and I agree that he is skilful. But I don't have to like it. We haven't 

had a real emergency debate on real emergencies, because, Mr. Speaker, the Members of the Government 

bench are far more interested in publicity releases than they are in emergencies. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, I regret that I will be obliged to support the amendment to the motion, but when the 

motion comes on I shall be obliged to vote against it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. Lange (Assiniboia-Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the motion. I should like to 

compliment the Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) upon his constructive criticism of our 

side of the House. 

 

I was to deliver my maiden speech to the floor of this Chamber on behalf of the constituents of Assiniboia 

and Bengough. I am proud to have been given a mandate at this age and I am looking forward with much 

anticipation to an exciting and challenging experience in the Legislature. I will endeavor to do 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

205 

 

justice to the confidence of my constituents. Although perhaps young for the position now, I feel that if the 

first few days in Legislature are indicative of what the experience is going to be like, I shall age rapidly. 

 

It was with some reservation, that I heard the Premier announce this morning, the cancellation of the Dore 

Lake pulp mill, for now, one of us on this side of the House must bear the onerous task of informing Joe 

Bishop that he did not get a job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Since David is making his maiden speech, I think it is the courtesy of the 

House not to keep interrupting. 

 

Mr. Lange: — I think that it is fitting that a maiden speech should bear a certain philosophical bent 

particularly since it will be possible to compare it with those that I give in the future after the first signs of 

decadence have crept into my character. 

 

So in my speech I shall attempt to show how social movement is growing in society, how public education is 

the only solution to coping with the movement and how this is incorporated into the work of the 

Government. For the benefit of Lloyd Robertson, of Weekend television, I shall be speaking instead of 

singing. 

 

We are presently in the midst of a revolution. It is not like any revolution which has occurred in the past, but 

one entirely unique. It is a social revolution, originating with the individual and his culture. Before it is 

finished, it will have touched the base of virtually every aspect of our society. It will have affected our daily 

way of life, our morals, our culture, and even our financial institutions and corporate structures. And in its 

final act, it will affect our political structure. The clamor for social change manifests itself in many forms of 

protest, in both the young generation and the old. We are protesting the hypocrisy of war, the rampant 

technology and destruction of the environment; protesting poverty and disordered priorities in the face of 

unprecedented abundance; protesting the tragic waste of both human and natural resources; and, perhaps, 

more important than all, protecting the loss of self — the loss of the individual as a separate entity in society. 

 

This social change is apparent in Saskatchewan when one looks at the results of the recent election. 

Although Saskatchewan people were, perhaps, protesting the previous Liberal Administration, our mandate 

is also indicative of the growing unrest in people under our present political structure. It is possible that our 

political system, like many other machines in society, has become obsolete, has run its course and needs to 

be changed. Old line parties must either change their philosophy in accordance or succumb. People have had 

enough of governments concerned only with pragmatic reform and are now looking for one concerned with 

social change. 

 

The election has produced an air of hope and expectation in the public. I would suggest that the most direct 

approach we could take to solving the problem would be through the educational system. Legislation such as 

the student-teacher ratio is a 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

206 

 

blatant denial of the right of any member of our society to be an individual. 

 

The education of a society is a slow, tedious, and most expensive process, but it is also the only process 

through which our society can hope to progress. And to remove the teacher from the student, under present 

educational philosophy, is to remove opportunity for that student to become a creative, thinking individual. 

The last place in which any government should begin to cut back on budgets should be in the field of 

education. 

 

Rather, more money should be spent upon education than upon educational research. Adult education 

programs should be expanded and all information services should be developed to make full use of mass 

media. Education should be a lifelong process and not something which stops at the end of formal education. 

 

Our school systems give priorities to the sciences rather than to the humanities. In order to qualify for 

entrance to University, for example, we must have had courses in high school which are oriented heavily 

towards the sciences. Subjects in the humanities or fine arts don't carry as much credit because there isn't the 

demand in our society for cultural or humanitarian qualities that there is for technical abilities. 

 

The total economic structure is oriented towards waste and obsolescence, solely for monetary ends. 

Consequently an individual is coerced into technology by the very real need of making a living. So a man has 

become a servant of his own machine — a tool of his tools, if you like. A way of rectifying this would be to 

place more emphasis upon humanities in our school system. We presently teach such subjects as physics, 

algebra and chemistry. These subjects have no value whatsoever to the student in terms of living, unless he 

chooses to pursue them after he has left high school, and then they have value, generality, only in a monetary 

form. He gains no understanding of an individual by learning algebra. Psychology, on the other hand, is a 

subject which could teach the students how to get along with others. Economics which he could use 

throughout life is not taught. We do not have sex education, or drug education. Sociology, philosophy, 

political science are more subjects which could be of tremendous value to the individual, but are not taught. 

 

We must learn to make science and technology a tool which will work for us and not to become, ourselves, a 

tool of technology. Our educational system could do this by placing emphasis and priorities upon subjects 

other than those related to science and technology and at the same time making us aware of the potential of 

science. 

 

People would not have to be subjected to the pandering of financial institutions if there were some subjects 

such as business management and economics taught. 

 

The recent election campaign is also an excellent example of the political ineptitude and ambivalence of 

people within our society. The words, Socialism, Capitalism and Free Enterprise were bandied about in an 

irresponsible manner. Few people know the meaning or the philosophy behind these words. If one stops to 

rationalize the matter, he will realize that 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

207 

 

we presently have all three in our society simultaneously. Our schools, for instance, are social institutions, 

paid for by the people of the community. Our farms at the same time are capitalistic in the sense that they 

must show a profit if they are to survive economically. And yet we still have free enterprise in the sense that 

the individual can choose which system or aspect he likes and can operate it as he wishes. Yet in our society 

we have huge multi-national corporations, which are so powerful they can dictate to and influence the lives 

of each and every one of us. And yet society could not function without these corporations. Our daily lives 

depend upon them. The question is not one of their elimination, or of their nationalization, but one of 

control. 

 

Are we, the people, going to be controlled by corporations or are we, the people, going to control 

corporations? Resolving this problem will be a democratic process, of course, but think of how a high school 

background in political science and economics would help the voting population. They would be informed 

and rationally capable of weighing the alternatives themselves instead of having to depend upon, the 

sometimes slanted and twisted words of certain politicians and press. We are assuming here, of course, that 

we have a public which is informed upon the issues. But we have tremendous facilities available now to aid 

us with educating and informing people. It is now possible to have a public so well informed that we could 

hold a plebiscite on virtually every issue that arises. Our priorities must be long headed to introduce a 

program like this. 

 

Here are some of the examples of issues which are presently before us and of which it will be our duty to 

inform the public. The closing of small hospitals is a major bone of contention. If we leave them closed then 

a more comprehensive medical program must be introduced to replace the loss of a hospital. It will be our 

job to present the alternative solution and if it is accepted to make people aware of how to use it. The land 

bank program and its implications upon urban and rural living is another example. What are the alternatives? 

What facilities must we provide along with it and how shall we be able to convince people to comply with 

these facilities? What must we do to make the program work? An informed public will be able to weigh the 

issues itself. 

 

The onus to change society then must be upon the education system for society cannot change any more 

quickly than the thinking of the individuals within society itself and the onus to change the educational 

system is upon the MLA. All change ultimately takes place through laws made upon the floor of this 

Chamber. Let us hope that as we grace our leather swivel seats we do not become smug in complacency. We 

must make a proving examination of where we are going and what our options are. We must be aware of the 

problems which pervade society and flexible enough to change with the new ideas which inoculate society. 

But MLAs should never know more than the rest of the public about an issue. In a democratic society all 

men should know what the issues are; we should know the moves that are made because of the issues and 

the consequences of those moves. Saskatchewan could, as it has before under the New Democratic Party, set 

a precedent for North America and indeed for the world with an education system engendering the 

individual's importance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

208 

 

Mr. H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, may I along with all the others, offer you my 

congratulations in being elected as Speaker of this House. It is no easy task from what I have seen so far to 

keep order and to have the Members of the House follow the rules. As a new Member of this Legislature I 

want to assure you that I will always try to abide by the rules and to be guided by your Honor's decision. I 

have only one request to make of the more experienced Members of this House and that request is that they 

always follow the rules so that the new Members will know what the rules are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I want to illustrate with one example and I must admit that I have been somewhat dismayed 

and disillusioned. It was my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that we always refer to the Members as the Hon. 

Member of Prince Albert West or the Hon. Member of Regina Centre. However, since the Throne Speech 

began on Thursday last, Members have been referred to by their christian names, by their surnames, and also 

by less complimentary terminology. It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the experienced Members will accept 

their responsibility and assist the new Members in learning their rules. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I should like, Mr. Speaker, at this time to thank all the people of Nutana South who worked 

so hard and diligently in getting me elected. I wish also at this time to pay a compliment to my worthy 

opponent, Mr. Austin Forsyth of the Liberal Party. It was said that Austin Forsyth was the conscience of the 

Liberal Party and I want to tell you that I firmly believe that Austin Forsyth had sincerity and integrity. 

Although I didn't agree with his political philosophy, he fought a clean campaign and he accepted the will of 

the people and for this I want to thank Austin Forsyth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, in the last election there were many people from all parties who supported me 

and came out and worked. Many of them felt that the Liberals had dealt democracy a very severe blow by 

their legislation on the redistribution more commonly referred to as the gerrymander. People in 

Saskatchewan still believe in the principle of representation by population. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It is my belief also, Mr. Speaker, that the people must have the basic right to discharge a 

government when they wish and this must be done without undue hardship or restrictions placed in their 

way. In order that the democratic process may prevail I ask all the Members of this House to give unanimous 

support to the resolution introduced by the Member for Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) on the establishment of 

an Independent Boundaries Commission. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

209 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Last week, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Milestone (Mr. C. MacDonald) referred to 

this Session as a grandstand theatrical performance. It would appear to me, at least, that one of the Members 

on his side has accepted the challenge and is going for the first prize. I want to compliment the Hon. Member 

for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) on his theatrical capabilities for his sense of humor and for his witty 

remarks. But I also want to tell him that I found his arguments and his remarks totally without substance as 

did the people of Saskatchewan a few weeks ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Nutana South, I have many senior citizens and handicapped people, people who reside in 

such places as Cosmopolitan and Eamer Courts, Eventide Home, Central Park Lodge and the CNIB. These 

people and other senior citizens who live on subsistence salaries in my constituency will welcome, I'm sure, 

the proposed legislation on the abolition of deterrent fees and the exemption from medicare premiums for 

people 65 and over. I agree with Members opposite that when this legislation is passed that a heavier 

financial burden will be placed on most of the people in this House and for that, Mr. Speaker, I do not 

apologize. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, although I do not represent a rural constituency, I was born and raised on a 

farm and like many of my constituents in Nutana South have relatives on the farm. I recognize that 

Saskatchewan's economy is largely dependent on agriculture and my constituents are well aware that their 

livelihood in large measure is dependent also upon a sound and viable agricultural economy. The Hon. 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) must be commended for recognizing the serious plight of the farmers. 

The legislation that he has proposed will in the interim save many a small farmer from going into bankruptcy 

thereby and from there possibly joining the ranks of the unemployed and welfare recipients. 

 

Our Government must do more. I urge them to prepare legislation on agriculture in addition to the proposed 

resolution on the establishing of a Land Banks Commission. Legislation must also be proposed for the 

restriction of ownership of farm land to Canadians. And, secondly, the re-introduction and the expansion of 

the Agricultural Machinery Testing Program. 

 

Permit me, Mr. Speaker, to spend a few minutes on our youth. And at this particular time I should like to 

compliment the Hon. Member opposite from Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) who, I think, recognized a 

very serious problem with our youth and that is the abuse of drugs. And I should think that our Government 

in the four years that we have should very seriously look at this problem. I should also like to say a this time 

that I personally believe that one of the reasons why our youth are on drugs today is that they find so much of 

what we do today irrelevant and we must in the ’70s come up with programs that are really in tune with 

humanity, that put people first. I make no apologies when I firmly believe that the Members on this side and 

our Government will do that job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

210 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Many of our young people in the last election worked very hard to elect their NDP 

candidates. They will expect some fundamental changes to take place and when I observe the number of 

young people that we have on this side of the House, I know that we shall come up with that legislation and 

that the young people will not be disappointed. I don't think too many Members in this House will argue with 

me when I say that the greatest natural resource that this Province has is our youth. If this Province is to have 

a future our Government must help society in providing the environment which will permit the young to 

develop their whole selves. Furthermore we must encourage our young to become active participants and we 

must permit our young to express their voice of dissent. We must not forget that they were born in a society 

which was beset with problems of pollution, population explosion and useless wars. I think many of the 

young, as myself, and many people in this House, firmly believe that many of these evils are a direct result of 

an uncontrolled profit economy which concentrates wealth and power in the hands of a few people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — They do not feel that there is security in such a system and consequently they either revolt 

against it or opt out by the use of drugs. It is the task of this Government to help our youth build a truly free 

and peaceful society, a society based on the philosophy of co-operation. 

 

I should now, Mr. Speaker, like to turn to the field of education. It was said that Saskatchewan had built one 

of the finest education systems in the world in the ’50s and the early ’60s and this was under the leadership 

of the former leader of this Party, Woodrow Lloyd and Olaf Turnbull. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I must, Mr. Speaker, say in all sincerity that I as an educator have looked somewhat with 

disappointment on the trend that our educational standards have taken in the last seven years. From a fine 

system we today have merely a mediocre one. Nowhere has the policy of the Liberal Party of divide and rule 

been more noticeable than in the field of education. And I think it was mentioned previously by Members on 

this side of the House that the Liberals seem to go out deliberately to set trustee against teacher; teacher 

against parent and everybody against everybody else. It is our Government's task to work diligently to restore 

this trust amongst teachers, trustees and parents. We must also, Mr. Speaker, clearly define what we mean by 

education. Education is a word that is bandied around just like Socialism and Capitalism and Free Enterprise 

but we must determine what we want out of education. To me, education is not merely the dispensation and 

the assimilation of facts. If that is all it is, then the teacher-pupil ratio plays a very little part. But to me 

education is an on-going experience, an on-going experience between a child and a teacher, whereby a child 

can acquire some of his own sense of self-worth, where he learns how to live rewardingly with others and 

where he accepts his own potentials. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is a series of experiences with people, the 

pupil-teacher ratio and the quality of the teacher play a very important role in this educating process. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

211 

 

The Liberal Government's insistence on a high pupil-teacher ratio as a basis for all school grants, defeated 

the primary purpose of developing the individual. Including in the pupil-teacher ratio, all outside staff, 

whose function was to help children with problems, resulted in the downgrading and often times elimination 

of reading specialists, counsellors, social workers and speech therapists. 

 

From my experience as an elementary school principal, I know that children with problems can be readily 

identified, at least, as early as the third year in school. It is at this stage that they are more easily helped. They 

are still open about their problems. They have not yet built around themselves walls nor have their attitudes 

hardened into anti-social behavior. It is at this stage that we need counsellors, social workers and others to 

work with our children. An arbitrary pupil-teacher ratio does not permit the flexibility needed to assess each 

situation and to determine what professional staff are required. I am particularly pleased that the Hon. 

Minister of Education saw fit to remove the arbitrary pupil-teacher ratio for school program planning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — The Hon. Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) reminded the Government last 

Friday that every time you lower the pupil-teacher ratio, you cost the taxpayers $3 million. Surely the Hon. 

Member realizes that it costs thousands of dollars for every person whom we have in the Prince Albert 

Penitentiary. And it costs thousands more for each emotionally disturbed child whom we have in Ranch 

Ehrlo and Brown's Camp. 

 

I am certainly convinced that maybe we can cut down on some of the very doubtful exorbitant rehabilitation 

costs by providing some professional staff at a very early stage in a child's life. I will be the first to admit, 

Mr. Speaker, that there will always be individuals who will not be able to function in society and will need to 

be housed. But I am convinced that if we provide more professional help, then, to the child and to the family, 

much of the exorbitant cost can be reduced. In many instances, the professional help is already there and this 

is a sad thing. But because of the lack of co-ordination between the Departments of Health, Education and 

Welfare, a person who requires the help is unable to benefit from it. Oftentimes we find duplication in 

services and services required in one branch are inaccessible to people in a different area of need. I ask my 

Government to look into this matter of co-ordinating the professional help that we have already and possibly 

save the people of Saskatchewan thousands of dollars and at the same time give the urgent and the skilled 

service that we need for these people. 

 

For example, as a counsellor in Saskatoon, I have found that when I was working with a child, the family 

often at the same time was receiving help from Family Counselling Services, from the Welfare Department, 

from McNeil Clinic for Disturbed Children and the Psychiatric ward at the University Hospital. All of us 

were working on the same child, on the same problem but often times, Mr. Speaker, we were working at 

cross purposes and many times one party did not know that the other was working with the child. There 

should be one clearing house where people can go for advice when the problem first begins. For example, 

new married couples having problems in adjusting to each other 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

212 

 

and to their new state, families unable to live within their income and requiring budgetary services; parents 

with questions about raising their children and teenagers with problems. The school in my estimation as the 

focal point of the community could most easily be adapted into this broader perspective. 

 

I should also like to see our Government decentralize the Department of Education and return more authority 

to the local school boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Education should set minimum but not 

maximum standards. It should function in an advisory, consultative capacity and not hand out dictums and 

ultimatums to local school boards. In co-operation with the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation and the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association, it should establish the objectives of education which objectives 

then would become the guidelines around which local schools and school systems could develop a 

curriculum. Although I have advocated and believe in local control in education, I should like to suggest that 

our Government, in consultation again with the STF and the SSTA, attempt to establish province-wide 

bargaining. I do not believe that this is a contradiction. I do know that area bargaining has not been 

successful and provincial bargaining of basic salary scale could do much to solve many of the problems 

experienced with either local or area bargaining. I would further recommend that conditions of employment 

be locally negotiated. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I feel that it is necessary for me to reply to the Hon. Member for Prince Albert 

West (Mr. Steuart), when he attempted to plant the seed of dissension among the teachers of this side of the 

House. I want to tell him that I am satisfied and at the same time compliment our Premier in appointing the 

Hon. Gordon MacMurchy as Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In my conversations with Mr. MacMurchy he has been very co-operative. He doesn't pretend 

to know all the answers. He is willing to listen and he doesn't view his position like a general marshalling his 

troops. The teachers of this Province did not object to the occupation of the former Minister of Education 

(Mr. McIsaac). We did, however, object to the centralization that took place. We did object to the divide and 

rule policy that seemed to prevail, and we did object when the high standard of education which we had been 

accustomed to was quickly downgraded by an arbitrary pupil-teacher ratio. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

compliment our Government for the legislation it has proposed and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take great 

pleasure in supporting the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, a tradition that has been continued by the new Members this 

afternoon — far be it from me to break it — is that a little time is spent on the attributes of the constituency 

which he represents. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

213 

 

I should first like to thank the citizens of Lumsden for electing me to this Legislature. I don't think I have to 

spend too much time describing this constituency, Mr. Speaker, because all the Members except the Regina 

Members pass through this great constituency on the way to this Session. Much of the activities in the 

constituencies have been chronicled by various magazines. They refer to the spirit of the town of Pense and 

that was chronicled in the Weekend Magazine, the beauties of the town of Lumsden itself were also 

described in a later issue of that magazine supplement. I should also like to extend, as we have been invited 

to various other places around the province — I should like to extend an invitation to all the Members to ski 

on White Track this winter, and I should hope that the Government opposite would see fit to continue to 

expand those facilities recognizing this booming winter sport. 

 

But the constituency of Lumsden also had a very interesting campaign prior to June 23. During that 

campaign certain election promises were made by the New Democratic candidate. This just wasn't an 

ordinary candidate, this man was a former Member of this Legislative Assembly in the CCF Party and 

represented the constituency of Lumsden for two terms. I am sure that his man would not make any 

irresponsible promises or promises that would not be kept by the NDP that formed the Government. 

 

I am going to refer, Mr. Speaker, to some of these promises. I refer first to a copy of the Lumsden Advance, 

a one-shot effort that hit the constituency during the campaign. In that Lumsden Advance, volume one, 

number one, the NDP candidate promised a nursing home for the constituency of Lumsden. I am certain he 

means the town of Lumsden but anyway the constituency would be very happy to have this nursing home. I 

assume, too, that this nursing home will be one of the good nursing homes referred to by the Hon. Member 

from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards). I know, too, that the concern expressed last week by the Minister 

of Welfare (Mr. Snyder) will be evident by this new nursing home in the town of Lumsden. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — We don't get it. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Oh, I think we'll get it Dave — they promised. The New Democratic candidate also made 

several verbal promises in the constituency which I know will be honored by the Government opposite. He 

made a verbal promise to rebuild Highway No. 364 from Balgonie to Edenwold, Avonhurst and Edgeley. He 

also promised to pave, this is interesting, pave the new highway to Sedley from Kronau. I urge immediate 

fulfilment of these promises so that the question of the political responsibility of the New Democratic Party 

candidate does not come into question. 

 

The Lumsden Advance also contained another promise by the NDP candidate and that is that compensation 

would be paid for farmers suffering flood damage in the Qu'Appelle Valley river system. I am assuming by 

the answer given to a question in the House the other day by the Hon. Premier that he had forgotten about 

that promise and again I am prepared to show him a copy of that Advance at any time and the promise made. 

I trust again that that promise will be kept. Several other promises, of course, were made by the NDP during 

the campaign and I should like to discuss a few of them. 

 

You have promised to remove deterrent fees and you are 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

214 

 

acting on that promise. You have a mandate form the people of this Province to implement that promise. But 

as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) said the other night, "Make no mistake that the responsibility 

for holding the line on the escalating public health costs is now yours." You can spend four years saying the 

Liberal Party did this, that or the other thing but make no mistake the day of reckoning will come and the 

people will want to know whether or not you can act responsibly in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — If you can control the escalating public health costs you will have our support. If you cannot, 

you will not get our support and you will not get the support of the people of this Province. 

 

Another promise made, and I am going to spend some time on this as it is a matter of special concern to 

myself. I refer, for example, to some campaign material that's authorized by the Prince Albert East NDP, 

that's Mike Feschuk, "Why put up with the high cost of drugs, start a drug-care program — Vote for Mike 

Feschuk." Now a few other comments were made by Members opposite in that regard prior to assuming the 

responsibilities of office and I refer to a statement made in the Legislative Assembly last session by the new 

Premier (Mr. Blakeney): "We will set up a drug-care program. Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear!" Mr. 

Brockelbank has made a statement to that extent, as has Mr. Gordon Snyder and I refer to Mr. Snyder's 

statement March 10, 1966 in this House: 

 

I think it can be logically argued that the time has come to provide through a public agency 

prescription drugs for all our people. 

 

I should like to go into a little more detail on the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair's statement (Mr. 

Brockelbank) on March 17, 1966, where he stated: 

 

I think everybody agrees that it is a good thing to have insurance to cover the cost of drugs. I 

think what the Members of this House want is to have this kind of insurance come into effect 

just as soon as we can. 

 

Now these were statements made by Members opposite. We have the campaign promise, but it seems there 

was a mix up somewhere along the line and there is an interview printed in the Regina Leader-Post of July 

20, 1971. It is an interview with the present Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek). He says and I quote: 

 

Mr. Smishek says there has apparently been some misunderstanding of the NDP's election 

platform for health, particularly its proposed drug plan and its plan for handling small 

hospitals. We did not say that we would introduce an insured drug program, we were talking 

about bulk-buying of drugs and about providing a list of approved drugs to be handled in this 

way, he said. 

 

Oh, the responsibilities of office, Mr. Minister! The Government misled the people of this Province. It 

promised a drug program but now intends to backpaddle and welch on its promise. Now, we are not 

promised one, says Mr. Smishek. Keeping in mind 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

215 

 

that rousing song, sung with great vigor and gusto at the NDP Convention, "Solidarity Forever," I can only 

surmise the following: No. 1, Mr. Feschuk misled the people of Prince Albert East Cumberland and should 

make a public apology and state that he has no intention of keeping his promise, or that Mr. Feschuk was 

speaking just for himself. We can surmise that the Minister of Health does not know what his own party is 

doing. We can surmise that the Premier was making an irresponsible promise in the House last year. We can 

surmise that Mr. Brockelbank made an irresponsible promise. We can surmise that Mr. Snyder made an 

irresponsible statement in this House or we can surmise that the Minister of Health made a false statement in 

the Leader-Post and as such, a public retraction and apology is in order if it is false. 

 

This Party opposite has been misleading the people of this Province of Saskatchewan with regard to a drug-

care program. But the statement made by Mr. Smishek, assuming it to be true, indicates that he is in closer 

touch with reality than is the Hon. Member for Prince Albert East Cumberland, or Mr. Brockelbank, or the 

Premier, or Mr. Snyder. I refer to a statement of the Government of Canada that was made in the Federal-

Provincial Conference and of officials on the cost of drugs and hearing aids held June 10 and 11 in Ottawa, 

1970. That Crown paper was prepared by the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, Consumer 

Research Branch. I quote from page 98: 

 

It is tempting to believe that the problem of drug prices to the consumer could be solved by 

placing drugs under a Government-sponsored scheme such as medicare. 

 

I hope the Hon. Member from Prince Albert East Cumberland (Mr. Feschuk) is listening very closely to this. 

For his benefit I might add that the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs in Ottawa sets and places 

the interest of the consumer first and its concerns and interests are known to most, obviously excepting the 

Member for Prince Albert East Cumberland. The Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs in Ottawa 

has studied in great depth this problem of drug pricing and has this to say about a comprehensive drug 

program: 

 

This would not solve the problem, it would merely shift directly to the Government and 

indirectly to the consumer as taxpayers the burden of supporting the existing drug retailing 

system. It is true that professional fee schedules may be set by negotiations between 

provincial and voluntary associations of pharmacists proposing a fee schedule and the 

Government paying for it, or some percentage of it, the pharmacists would likely retain much 

freedom to manoeuvre under such arrangements and would be able to exert enough upward 

pressure on fees every time the Government program came up for renewal. Costs to the 

Government would rise. 

 

Again, I will remind the Members opposite that the Department which prepared this paper is very active in 

the field of drug pricing and concerned about the high cost of drugs, as is, I assume, everyone in this 

Chamber. But irresponsible promises do absolutely nothing to rectify the problem. Such promises mislead 

the people of this Province and is another example of the window-dressing proposals of the Government 

opposite. But with regard to the matter of a voluntary prepaid drug scheme the background paper prepared by 

the Department continues on page 98: 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

216 

 

Voluntary drug insurance schemes would face one of the same difficulties foreseen for 

Government medicare schemes; that is the need to face up to constantly rising drug costs 

which will inevitably lead to rising insurance premiums. 

 

I should hope that some of the prevailing irresponsibility of Members opposite will end immediately. 

 

There is a very serious problem which must be dealt with here and that is the high cost of prescription drugs. 

Looking at these further studies on this matter, all other studies indicate that one of the major reasons, if not 

the major reason for the high cost of drugs, is an inadequate and inefficient retail distribution system. The 

pharmacist is caught in the middle of this system and must be protected. We must devise a system for the 

people of the province which will lead to economies of scale which will protect the Saskatchewan 

pharmacist who is supplying a basic service to the people in all areas of this Province. A system which will 

lead to the elimination of pharmacies in this Province will further add to the demise of many small towns in 

rural communities and yet this is the system that is proposed by the Member from Prince Albert East 

Cumberland (Mr. Feschuk). 

 

I can assure the Members of this House we will co-operate in every way to reduce the cost of drugs to the 

consumer, but we will insist that the proposals must be basic to the solving of the problem and not mere 

political propaganda or misleading statements or ignorance. Because of the urgency of this problem I 

propose that a Legislative Intersessional Committee be formed immediately to study the rising cost of drugs. 

A program similar to medicare or an insured scheme will not reduce drug prices. Drugs are a great expense 

because the retail distribution chain is inefficient. This Government has put the question of distribution of 

liquor before the distribution of prescription drugs and its priorities are all wrong and I urge the 

establishment of a committee at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Oh, in the matter of public health, the Government made several promises with regard to 

reducing the cost of physical aids, one of which I shall cover in some detail and that is the promise to reduce 

the cost of hearing aids. The public should be made aware that hearing aids are presently available at a cost 

of approximately $30 from the P.Y.E. Electric Company of England. This, of course, does not take into 

accounting fitting, testing, etc. I should hope the Government does not intend to mislead the public into 

merely cheaper hearing aids, however. The Government's counterparts in Manitoba are considering 

legislation to regulate the sale of hearing aids. Compulsory technical training should be established for those 

involved in selling hearing aids. These comments are made in the hopes that the Government will not 

institute a program of superficial proposals in the matter of public health. I urge this Government to forget 

about the window-dressing proposals in dealing with public health and I urge the Government to solve 

problems and not avoid them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne, legislation was promised to protect farmers unable to pay their 

debts, to protect farmers from seizure of their farm land and machinery, and 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

217 

 

legislation has now been introduced. I'm particularly interested in this, Mr. Speaker, because amendments 

were made to The Limitation of Civil Rights Act which gave to the farmer substantial protection against 

seizure of his farm equipment and he merely had to make an informal court application and he would be 

heard by a judge who was empowered to make such order as he saw fit. We have also had on the statute 

books for a number of years The Land Contract Actions Act and this protects most citizens who own land 

from arbitrary foreclosure and cancellation. The Government, however, has deemed the existing legislation 

to be inadequate. 

 

But I submit, Mr. Speaker, the legislation as proposed by the Government may well destroy the farmers' 

ability to obtain credit. Most companies will not lend unless they have reasonable collateral. The legislation, 

in effect, removes this collateral or prevents action to recover on collateral for a period of one year. It merely 

puts off the paying of loans for a year. No one is going to lend money over the next year to someone who has 

substantial debts to pay off a year later. Legislation too must be revised to protect the local implement dealer. 

When seizure has been put off for a year his collateral will have depreciated substantially and no protection 

in this regard is given to the implement dealer. I would suggest that the Government be very, very careful 

with this legislation because the previously mentioned legislation was one of the factors that caused many of 

the implement dealers to leave this Province or go out of business. This has led to the problem of farmers not 

being able to obtain parts or having to wait for parts during an equipment breakdown. I hope again that your 

legislation in this regard is very carefully thought out because it could easily hurt and not help the farmer. 

Here we have another example of the Government's window-dressing proposals. This moratorium legislation 

was announced to the press by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). This Chamber was by-passed by the 

Minister, a practice which indicates the respect to which the Minister holds for this House. 

 

But a greater principle was broken by the Minister of Agriculture and I quote from the Leader-Post of 

Saturday, July 31, page 4 with respect to loans made by the Farm Credit Corporation, which is a Federal 

Government agency or under the Federal Farm Improvement Loan Program. 

 

The Agricultural Minister admitted that the Provincial Government may be overstepping its 

authority in doing this and there was a danger the Bill may be declared ultra vires beyond the 

jurisdiction but that decision is up to the Supreme Court of Canada. He was then quoted as 

saying: 'Even if it does go to the Supreme Court it could take seven, eight or nine months and 

by that time it will have served its purpose." 

 

I find this statement appalling, Mr. Speaker, that a Minister of the Crown would propose legislation not 

caring whether it was legal or illegal, lawful or unlawful because, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is 

bound by the laws of Canada whether he thinks so or not. I don't care whether the Government has 45 or 60 

Members it is still bound by the laws of Canada. I must remind the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) that he 

has sworn to be responsible for the administration of justice in this Province. You too, Mr. Attorney General, 

are bound by the laws of Canada and I hope an apology from the Government is in order. The 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

218 

 

practice of passing legislation that may be unlawful is contrary to all principles of democracy and the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) should be severely chastised for his attitude and I will again remind the 

Government that you are not above the laws of this country and don't forget it. I might remind the Attorney 

General and the Minister of Agriculture that the legislation does not have to go to the Supreme Court and if 

you are concerned about the validity of the legislation you can refer it immediately to the Court of Appeal of 

this Province and you would probably get an answer in a very short period of time. Your attitude, Mr. 

Minister of Agriculture, is shocking and abhorrent in a federal democratic country. 

 

I should like to spend a couple of minutes replying to a few comments made by the Hon. Member from 

Assiniboia-Bengough (Mr. Lange). I have made a couple of notes on his statement. He advised the House 

that a revolution was coming. I agree, there is a revolution of consciousness coming. I am not convinced that 

using multi-national corporations as a scapegoat answers the problems. The policy of the NDP in the past 

has been to substitute another evil and that is an overriding bureaucratic system and that doesn't work. And 

the words you used 'make people comply' is a weakness in your argument. It must be a question of individual 

choice. The individual must be sufficiently taught and educated so that he can make a rational choice on his 

own but the idea of making him comply, I find personally very, very wrong but I agree that there are going to 

be some drastic changes in the consciousness of the people. I am not convinced in my own mind that this 

revolution can come about without a solid economic base. The Government opposite has seen fit to remove 

many possibilities or opportunities for an economic base for this province. I should hope that your thoughts 

in this matter will be reconsidered in light of their past experience, as I say, substituting an overriding 

bureaucracy for a multi-national corporation. Two wrongs don't make a right. I should hope that you would 

stop future moves by the Government opposite in this regard and would be wary of it. 

 

In summation, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the Government that some very irresponsible promises were 

made to the people of this Province in the last election. The people remember them, we will remember them 

and we will make sure that you remember them. 

 

I will oppose the motion and vote for the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to congratulate you on your election to a most difficult 

position. I know that you will fulfil your role with dignity and impartiality. 

 

I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak following the Hon. Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) because 

I wish to make reference to the former Member for Lumsden (Mr. Heald). He too has been elevated to a high 

office. He is to be congratulated on knowing when to leave a sinking ship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — In addition, as Mr. Trudeau's key supporter in Saskatchewan, 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

219 

 

he earned his elevation. It is not an easy thing for a person from Saskatchewan to support Mr. Trudeau. He 

deserved something. Instead, however, he was appointed a judge. I asked a lawyer friend why it was that 

Liberals received such appointments. Happily, he was able to explain it by referring to MacKenzie King's 

reply to that same question. MacKenzie King said that he appointed Liberals as judges because Liberals 

made the best judges. I'm certain that those sitting opposite will appreciate those sentiments. While the 

Opposition in this House may not represent the people of this Province, it certainly represents the lawyers, 

almost one-third of the Opposition Caucus is made up of lawyers. We look opposite and we see many who 

have distinguished themselves at the Bar, and some of them are lawyers. But they are all of that group that 

MacKenzie King said made the best judges. Seriously, in a time when we wish to teach our young people to 

respect the law, it is not a time to continue the practice of appointing judges for political services rendered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite obviously feel they share in the divine right to rule. They 

not only believe that they have the divine right to be judges, but the Members opposite obviously feel that 

they have the divine right to be the Government. In referring to their discredited Government, do they refer 

to the mistakes they made? Do they apologize for their arrogance? Do they admit that it was wrong to tax the 

sick? Do they acknowledge with shame that they taxed cancer patients? Do they feel real sorrow that they 

taxed mental patients? No. That's right. The answer is, No, No, No. Rather, they characterize their 

Government by the words integrity, and honesty, and responsibility. They say it takes a lot of integrity to tax 

the sick. They say it takes a lot of honesty to tax cancer patients. They say it takes a lot of responsibility to 

tax mental patients. We say it takes a lot of arrogance to do it, and a lot of gall to defend it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — They confuse integrity with hard heartedness; they confuse honesty with arrogance; and they 

confuse public rejection for martyrdom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — Their attitude during this Session reminds me of a comment made of the Bourbon princes of 

Europe. Talleyrand said of the Bourbons that they learned nothing, and they forgot nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — These same men who were characterized by hard heartedness and arrogance as a Government 

have forgotten none of it. They have learned nothing from their crushing defeat but to whine and whimper 

and snivel about how few Members they have in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

220 

 

Mr. Faris: — They have few Members because they deserve few Members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — They have few Members because the people of Saskatchewan wanted them to have few 

Members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — And they know very well that if it were not for their gerrymander, they would have six fewer 

Members than they do now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — They learn nothing and they forget nothing. Mr. Speaker, if they continue with their present 

attitudes, they, like the Bourbon princes, will disappear from the pages of history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of representing a rural constituency. Perhaps it one of the 

most rural in Saskatchewan because of its 20 communities, the largest has a population of 1,000. Within the 

bounds of Arm River we have produced curling and hockey champions, and some of the finest grain and 

cattle in the world. Yet we have problems. Our towns are in great trouble. They depend upon the business 

brought to them by farmers. And our farmers have found their income steadily declining. Their costs go up 

every year, but their incomes decline. Not only do they sell less grain, but they get less for it. Farmer after 

farmer will tell you that they have more problems now than any time since the 1930s. 

 

There are two particular groups of farmers who have problems in my area. They are the older farmers and the 

younger farmers. Most of the farmers in the area are nearing retirement age. Their life savings are tied up in 

their land. Their sons very often don't want to farm; they don't like the idea of working for nothing. These 

older farmers want to be able to retire in some dignity after a lifetime of work. 

 

And the other group of farmers who are in trouble are those young men who choose to farm. There are young 

men in their twenties and thirties who want to farm. Some of these young men in Arm River have university 

degrees. In normal times they could do something else. But they want to farm. They like the life. They like to 

grow things. They want to bring up their children in the clean air and the open spaces. So they went into 

farming and they did what successive Liberal Governments told them to do. First of all, they specialized. 

They were told to get bigger, to get economic units. Grow all you can. So they did it. They got bigger. They 

produced more. They became the most efficient producers in the world. And their bins filled up and their 

prices fell. And then the Liberal farm experts, Trudeau and Lang and Boldt, told them to stop. They said, 

"You know what the trouble with you farmers is, you're 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

221 

 

too specialized. You must diversify. Get into something good. Get into hogs." So they got into hogs, oh yes, 

they got into hogs and lo, the hogs did multiply and lo, the prices did fall. So the Liberal farm experts called 

a meeting. They said: (1) We've got too much grain and (2) we've got too many hogs. What does that mean? 

It means we've got too many farmers. If the logic escapes you, it does not escape the Liberal farm experts. It's 

all there in the Task Force Report. Problem: Too many farmers. Solution: Get rid of them. It's what Hitler 

waited for, the final solution . Hitler had the problems — answer: get rid of the Jews. Liberal Governments 

have problems — answer: get rid of the farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — Well, the farmers knew what was happening so they got rid of the Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is a thing of beauty. It takes this Province out of 

reverse and puts it into forward gear. But I especially like the emergency farm legislation. It is a courageous 

move that indicates that we understand the depth of the farm crisis. It is a pledge to the people of this 

Province that in the next sessions of the Legislature, we shall bring in those positive measures that are 

needed to deal with the holding down farm costs and rising farm income. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by asking once again that the Federal Liberal Government 

stop playing politics and pay out the $100 million to Western farmers immediately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — And further, let it be known by them and everyone in this Province, that the New Democratic 

Government will fight to the finish against their stabilization plan that only promises to stabilize poverty for 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I oppose the amendment and support the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Engel (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to take this opportunity publicly 

to congratulate you on your election to this high office as Speaker. And I also should like to take this 

opportunity to thank the senior Members of our party who helped some of us rookies and made this June 

campaign a success the way they did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — There are several reasons, 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

222 

 

Mr. Speaker, why the people of Notukeu-Willow Bunch are represented on the Government side of this 

House. One of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, is the former Government's attitude towards hospitals. In fact, I 

believe this was the number one reason for their poor showing at the polls. It was a black Friday in one of 

our small towns some nineteen or twenty months ago, Mr. Speaker, when they lost the services of their 

resident physician. Since that time the Local Hospital Board has reviewed many applications from doctors 

and tried unsuccessfully to get one of these applicants to fill the vacancy. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, it 

was a real thrill to be in this same town on a Thursday on July 22 when the hospital was restaffed and a new 

physician began his practice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to what Members opposite say about a New Deal for People, the 

people of this town and the surrounding areas are enthused about their new deal. 

 

Now, if you could stretch your imagination, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that half of us would be on the other 

side of the House, if this had happened I am sure this town would still be denied the services of a resident 

doctor. The local hospital would still be closed, the employees of this hospital would still be out of work. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, in this small town senior farmers who are residing there would begin thinking of moving 

to a larger centre; older business people who had intentions of staying and people formerly employed by the 

hospital, all would be trying to dispose of their homes. The point I am trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is that 

one of the key factors contributing to the depopulation of our small towns is the lack of health care services. 

 

The Bill that makes medical care available to all our senior citizens is of top priority to the older people 

living in my constituency. We don't intend to exclude anyone from proper health care. So I say the 

availability of a service, a doctor and a facility, is very important to people, especially for those who have a 

choice as to where they make their home. If, during the winter months, when older folks seldom start a car 

let alone keep their driveway cleared, it is a pretty comforting thought to have a doctor live in your own 

town. But you move this doctor and hospital 20 or 30 miles away and you have a new set of rules. 

 

The other advantages to a rural community of a small hospital that I wish to point out are the fiscal and 

monetary gains to the small town. The fact that a small hospital offers employment up to as high as $80,000 

a year to its local residents, you add to this the money a doctor would spend locally as well as that of a 

druggist, the money earned by other people offering related services provided by the community, in a time 

when things are financially pretty tough, this makes a big difference to the rest of the town. The savings 

enjoyed by the Department of Health, if you tie up expensive beds in our larger hospitals with cases that can 

be handled adequately by a local plan, in some cases where the per-bed cost in a rural hospital is less than 

half of that in our city hospitals where some patients are forced to wait for months for a bed, I think these 

small hospitals have a great deal to offer. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

223 

 

Mr. Speaker, we value the rural way of life. In our New Deal for People we have stressed programs that 

would make this way of life a reality for our farmers and those living in our small towns. We must take 

action to maintain a viable family-farm unit. To do this, the rest of the province realizing its dependence on a 

healthy farm community, must bend a little and be prepared to go a second mile to reverse the trend we have 

been forced into by the former Government's policies. 

 

I think I have a pretty good idea since I've heard the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac), he was speaking at 

a meeting during the campaign — he was down to dedicate a gymnasium — and I quote from an address he 

made in my constituency: 

 

In the field of education we went from the ox cart to space age in the last ten years. 

 

The pupil-teacher ratio apparently dealt with the space age and I am quite sure his practice would tell him 

what the other area would be about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — I suppose he was referring to the idealistic type of training in his ox-cart classification where 

pupils were given individual attention ten years ago. We now have a little better idea and we can understand 

him and his Administration a little better when he referred to a deductible clause in fixing either a fender or a 

broken arm. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, if they were give another term or another chance, the rate of our 

insurance on our physical bodies would be based according to our age. This is exactly the opposite to the 

principle we are proposing in our Throne Speech today. The rural people of Saskatchewan that are 

represented in such force in this Government are assured that problems directly related to them will have 

solutions for their comforts, conveniences and ideals in life. They had their hopes restored to them in good 

measure on the 23 of June. The legislation before this House in this special Session will give them a new 

lease on life in the country. They are already reaping the benefits of this kind of Government they chose — a 

Government that puts humanity first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to the amendment but I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Hon. Member would accept a 

question at this time. I am not sure whether I heard correctly or not but I think I did. Was he referring to the 

Kincaid Hospital? If I am correct, I'll proceed. 

 

Mr. Engel: — Yes, I was. 

 

Mr. Grant: — I should like the Hon. Member to tell this House of any action I took, the Department took, 

or my Government took to deny a doctor to that hospital. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, it was the general 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

224 

 

attitude of the Government. 

 

Mr. Grant: — No, no he was talking about the Kincaid hospital. Mr. Speaker, he was talking about the 

Kincaid hospital and I want him to tell me what I did, or what the Government did or what the Department 

did to deny a doctor to that hospital. 

 

Mr. Engel: — I'll answer that when I find out which constituency the Hon. Member represents. It's a small 

one I can't find it. I should like to point out that it is what the Hon. Member didn't do that they didn't have a 

hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — I will tell the Hon. Member, Mr. Speaker, that we gave that hospital board every co-operation 

and they know it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the Member wishes to take part in the debate he may have the floor at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — Thanks for the invitation, Mr. Speaker, I hadn't planned on speaking but since you invited 

me, I'll accept. I am a little puzzled as to why the Hon. Member from Notukeu-Willow Bunch (Mr. Engel) 

wouldn't be able to identify 14 souls over here and the constituencies they belong to. After all he has had 

nothing to do now for four days, only get acquainted with us and I should be glad to help him out if he needs 

some help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on your right sits the most promising Government in Canada. Of this I shall give them credit. 

What they can't think to promise, isn't worth promising, and what they do promise they say most of it's going 

to be free. Well, the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) said that the people of Saskatchewan have been 

singing, "halleluiah" since June 23. He may be right but I haven't heard too much of it. Thank goodness the 

Speech from The Throne ended, "May divine Providence guide this Legislature in all its deliberations." 

Believe me, Mr. Speaker, we are going to need the help of the divine spirit to keep them within reason 

because they are certainly not prepared to listen to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post used to carry a by-line and I don't know why they discontinued it because it 

was a pretty good one, "Where all think alike, no one thinks very much." Well, apparently there is a lot of 

thinking going on in this House these days because believe me, we don't all think alike. It is understandable 

how there would be a difference in thinking between political groups, I think this is good, it is part of our 

democratic process and I hope we encourage different thinking. But, while this is so, it is incomprehensible 

to me as to how there can be such a wide variation of thinking of the Members opposite. Possibly it is 

because the right hand doesn't know what the left hand is doing, possibly it is because the promises were 

flowing so freely that they couldn't keep track of what each other was doing, particularly what the Wafflers 

were cooking up. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

225 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to continue, now that you have invited me to do so, but there is one very important 

Member missing from the Government side of the House tonight and I certainly want him to be present 

when I make my remarks from here on in and so I am going to ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of 

Health) that Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in closing the debate on Bill No. 3 I should first of all like to extend my appreciation 

to the Members on the Government side of the House, particularly our young contingent of Members who 

have spoken in support of this Bill during second reading. I thought that their speeches in regard to the 

removal of deterrent fees were both thoughtful and eloquent, they presented them with force and conviction, 

a conviction and feeling for the people of Saskatchewan. A conviction that medical and hospital deterrent 

fees have no place and no room in public health programs. I believe that these young Members, who are 

sitting in this Legislature are going to be the conscience of both sides of the House. 

 

May I also express my appreciation to some of the Members in the Opposition for their contribution, 

criticisms, and ideas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened with a good deal of attention to the remarks of the Opposition in respect of Bill 3. I 

am not quite sure whether they will be supporting Bill 3. The Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald), who followed me after I moved second reading, said that the Opposition will be supporting Bill 

3. He admitted that deterrent fees were unpopular. He admitted that deterrent fees are socially undesirable. 

He admitted that deterrent fees have not reduced costs of medical and hospital care. He also conceded that 

politically they were stupid. And then he proceeded to argue why the deterrent fees should retained. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, I am always puzzled and I regret that the Hon. Member from Cannington isn't here, you 

know several years ago when we heard the news of the death of the Right Honourable Arthur Meighen, it 

was said that the last of the Tories, of the real Conservatives, went to his rest. Any time that the Hon. 

Member for Cannington gets up to speak I am just not so certain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I moved second reading of Bill 3, I provided statistics that deterrent fees did not reduce 

the average length of stay in the hospital. I demonstrated, statistically, that deterrent fees did not reduce the 

average number of separations, nor did they reduce the number of patient-days of stay in the hospital. What 

deterrent fees have done is place $21 million of costs directly on the people of Saskatchewan, and what 

deterrent fees have also done is that Saskatchewan lost some $4.5 million of revenue or grants from the 

Government of Canada. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

226 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did listen with particular attention to the new Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) when he 

spoke on Bill 3. He again reminded us that we should be alert and that we should watch the rising costs in 

health and welfare and education schemes. And I agree that health programs and welfare programs and 

education programs are costly programs, but they are programs for the people. While I agree that we must 

ensure that we get our dollar value in respect of these programs I also feel that they are worthy public 

expenditures. I want to assure the Leader of the Opposition and the people of Saskatchewan that the 

Department of Public Health will be making careful assessments to ensure that we do get our dollars' worth 

for the programs we administer in the health field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is worthwhile to review and remind ourselves of the arguments that were used back in 

1968 and subsequently to that. The reason deterrent fees were introduced the Liberals said was to control 

skyrocketing costs. I said this before in this Legislature but I think it is worthwhile repeating and taking a 

close look as to the increased costs in hospital and medical are. I want to remind the Members opposite that 

in 1964 . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. When any Minister is closing a debate he is not allowed to 

bring new material in, he can answer anything that was said on this side of the House. I have no objections if 

he brings in the reason why we brought in deterrent fees but it wasn't mentioned on this side of the House 

and I think the Minister should stick to the rules. He has a chance for rebuttal but he doesn't have a chance 

really under Parliamentary rules to make a brand new speech on the subject. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the rule has been well established that any Member who closes a debate should not 

introduce new material but answer any statements or clarify any statements which he may have made earlier, 

but not to introduce new material. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, it is this particular point I am trying to clarify. The Members opposite said 

that the reason deterrent fees were introduced is to control costs because costs were getting out of proportion 

and I merely want to answer this allegation and point out to them that in 1964, the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan out of consolidated revenue provided $15.8 million. In 1964, the gross expenditure for medical 

care from the consolidated revenue was $19.7 million. In total in 1964 out of consolidated revenue the 

Government of that day provided $35.5 million for these two important programs. In 1971 out of 

consolidated revenue we are to provide towards the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan $32.4 million and 

about $7.7 for Medical Care. In other words about $40 million for the two programs. So in a period of seven 

years if one is to look in terms of the increase in costs to the Provincial Treasury or to consolidated revenue 

the increase is something in the order of $4 million. Surely, Mr. Speaker, this cannot be construed as an 

exorbitant cost, when one also recognizes that some additional benefits were added. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Surely, the Minister does not delude himself . . . what about the . . . 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

227 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I am just coming to that particular point. In 1964, when it came down to cost sharing from 

Ottawa, the CCF Government received $21.4 million towards helping finance the Hospital Services Plan. In 

1971, the Government of Canada is going to provide $70 million towards the cost of these two programs. 

But it must be remembered, Mr. Speaker, that we are not getting this money for nothing. Remember that the 

citizens of Saskatchewan are paying a 2 per cent social development tax imposed by the Government of 

Canada and we are getting our share of the money back from the Government of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) during his remarks made a reference 

that the Minister of Health was being a Robin Hood in reverse in taxing the poor in order to give to the rich. 

Mr. Speaker, he went on to say that a larger percentage of the people of 65 years, particularly in rural areas 

of Saskatchewan, needed assistance much less than urban wage earners under 65. Then he proceeded to say 

that it's the workers who are going to pay this increased tax as a result of us providing free medical and 

hospital cards for those 65 years of age and over. You know, Mr. Speaker, I have known the Hon. Member 

for Cannington for the last seven years. It is interesting to note that all of a sudden the Hon. Member for 

Cannington has become interested and concerned about the working people of this Province. You know, year 

in and year out, he was one of the leading spokesmen and advocates of reactionary anti-labor legislation 

proposed by the former Government. Year in and year out, he supported compulsory arbitration. Year in and 

year out, he supported the ideas of the former Administration in keeping the workers down. All of a sudden 

he is interested in the working people of this Province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, had the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) opposed the anti-labor and restrictive 

labor laws introduced by his colleagues, perhaps the working people would have been much better off and 

would have been able to pay the taxes more freely, but, as a result of the restrictive legislation the Liberals 

imposed, today Saskatchewan workers are getting something like $15 a week less than the average workers 

in the Dominion of Canada. So it may be a little more difficult for the workers to pay any increased taxes. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are not proposing to increase taxes in order to exempt those 65 years of age and over 

from payment of the fee. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Hon. Member all of a sudden becomes concerned about us exempting those 65 

years of age and over and that the workers will have to pay the premium, I wonder where the Member was in 

the last three years. Why didn't he propose the removal of the $120 ceiling in the case of the social 

development tax where the poorer people have to pay the brunt of that tax; or in the case of the social 

security tax, which is 4 per cent and again has a ceiling of $240; or in the case of the Canada Pension Plan 

which has a ceiling of $86.40, again the burden of those taxed most heavily falls on the low income groups. I 

didn't hear the Hon. Member at any time advocate the lifting of the ceiling in respect of these taxes. So when 

he starts suggesting that I am behaving like Robin Hood in reverse, Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Member 

should examine his own conscience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a suggestion has been made that in the case of those 65 years of age and over who are to be 

exempt from payment of the premium, that not only should they be exempt, but also 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

228 

 

the premium in respect of the whole family should be removed. Also suggestions have been made that only 

those should get the exemption who are not receiving the Guaranteed Income Supplement. Mr. Speaker, I 

have now been able to obtain the most up-to-date statistics available in the Government Departments of the 

numbers of persons who are receiving Old Age Security. The exact figures as of May 31, 1971, in the 

Province of Saskatchewan is 94,017 receiving Old Age Security. Out of this total number, 54,650 were 

receiving the guaranteed Income Supplement or 58 per cent. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the majority of 

those 65 years of age and over are living on an income of $135 a month or less. Mr. Speaker, I believe that 

our proposal to exempt those 65 years and over from paying the premium is a proposal that is long overdue. 

We do not believe, as a political party and as a Government, in the means test principle. 

 

I, in many ways, object to the references of the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) to the effect that we 

are going to be paying the premiums for those who are going to be living in the Waldorf Astoria and for 

those who will be spending their time in Florida, and his reference to the former Provincial Treasurer, Mr. 

Fines. I am not aware that Mr. Fines is presently a resident of the Province of Saskatchewan and that he is 

paying any premiums. He is not covered by medical care, he is no longer a resident. These kinds of 

arguments have no place in a common-sense, logical debate. He is trying to make an issue out of something 

that doesn't exist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member went on and said that the Government should have looked at the needs of 

more housing and other essential needs of some of the less fortunate people in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member was the Minister of Welfare; for seven years he had time to 

look at the less fortunate. What did he do? Mr. Speaker, this Government is doing something about the less 

fortunate. This Government is removing deterrent fees to help the unfortunate. This Government is 

exempting the people 65 years of age and over from payment of the medical and hospital premiums. This 

Government is concerned about the less fortunate. Mr. Speaker, this is only a beginning of the extension and 

improvement of the health services. 

 

I can assure this House that as we improve and extend services we are also going to be looking very carefully 

at the cost of services. I agree with the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) that we must be concerned 

about the cost of health services and other programs. It is my conviction that our health services can be 

organized more effectively so that we can get more value for our dollar. This Government proposes to 

experiment and to innovate in the health field. We have already initiated a number of studies to be made 

within the Department. I have had meetings with the College of Physicians and Surgeons. I had a meeting 

with the Saskatchewan Hospital Association. I have had a meeting with the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association. I can assure the Members of this Legislature and Members of the Opposition that we have 

placed before the medical profession and other health bodies our program. We have invited their criticism, 

their ideas, their suggestions as to how our program can be best implemented. It is the intention of this 

Government to work with the people in the health field to ensure that not only are we getting the best value 

for our dollar, but also to ensure that Saskatchewan is once again going to take the lead in establishing the 

best health services for the people of 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

229 

 

Saskatchewan, and is going to give a lead to the people of North America in developing the most progressive 

ideas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — We make no apologies for our promises. Mr. Speaker, our promises will be fulfilled. It is 

not possible to initiate our total program within 28 or 30 days. But watch us, we shall be moving ahead in the 

next four years. Saskatchewan is going again to gain the distinction of being the prime leader in the health 

field in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 3. 

 

Mr. C.P. Macdonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Is it not the rules of the House that 

before a standing vote is called that there must be a Nay in the House, and I heard very distinctly that there 

was no 'Nay." I should like to ask you, Mr. Speaker, did you hear a Nay? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The rules of the House are that two Members rising in their place at any time can call a 

recorded vote, whether it is Yeas or Nays. Two Members did rise in their place and ask for a recorded vote, 

so call in the Members. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 50 

Messieurs 

 

Brockelbank Carlson Feschuk 

Byers Engel Kaeding 

Wood Tchorzewski Flasch 

Smishek Richards Steuart 

Romanow Owens Coupland 

Snyder Larson Gardner 

MacMurchy Taylor Grant 

Kramer Faris Boldt 

Kowalchuk Dyck MacDonald  

Baker Cowley . . . (Milestone) 

Thibault Cody McIsaac 

Robbins Feduniak Loken 

Pepper Mostoway Weatherald 

Meakes Comer MacLeod 

Whelan Rolfes McPherson 

Brown Hanson Lane 

Kwasnica Oliver MacDonald  

  . . . (Moose Jaw North) 

   

 

NAYS — 00 

Messieurs 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

230 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 6 — An Act to Repeal The 

Essential Services Emergency Act, 1966. 

 

He said: I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that it may be considered somewhat out of the ordinary that the first 

legislative act of the new Minister of Labour should be to introduce a Bill to repeal a labor law. However, I 

make no apology at all. If there was ever an occasion on which it was possible to be constructive in 

destroying something, this is that occasion. I feel certain the overwhelming majority of Saskatchewan 

citizens will agree. 

 

The Essential Services Emergency Act, Mr. Speaker, has been at best an unnecessary statute and at its worst 

it has been a mechanism which has undermined the entire concept of collective bargaining. As a matter of 

fact, Mr. Speaker, it is doubtful if any other action in my career can be the source of greater satisfaction than 

the repeal of this particular piece of legislation. I make this statement, first in my capacity as a servant of the 

people who is charged with the responsibility for protecting the best interests of working people whether 

they are employers or employees. It can be said without reservation that the Bill before the Legislature is 

intended to promote labor-management harmony and accordingly will benefit both employees and employers 

alike. I am also gratified, Mr. Speaker, to be able to participate in the repeal of this legislation as a long-time 

Trade Union member in as much as this Act has rendered a grave disservice to the Trade Union Movement. 

Finally, as a citizen of this Province, I am relieved that The Essential Services Emergency Act will be no 

more because this piece of legislation has posed a serious threat to the freedoms, the security and the welfare 

of every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan. 

 

A statement has been made, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a politician is a man who can rock the boat himself 

and persuade everyone that there is a terrible storm at sea. It is obvious, however, that the erosion of the 

collective bargaining process which Bill 2 has already started to accomplish represents a very significant 

storm which, if carried further, could deteriorate management-labor relations in this particular Province to 

the point of utter chaos. 

 

With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like for a few moments to first explore the ramifications of the 

legislation in its mildest form, that is that it is an unnecessary enactment. It will be remembered, Mr. 

Speaker, that the word 'emergency' is included in the title of the Act, a term which, at least in my mind, 

suggests a life or death sort of situation. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that no genuine emergency has arisen 

since the passing of this statute in 1966, nor is one likely to develop in the future. In no case has there been a 

refusal to make provision for services the absence of which would place life or property in jeopardy. The Act 

was originally introduced in 1966 to terminate arbitrarily a strike of employees of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. Since that time the former Liberal Government has consistently employed scare tactics 

designed to delude members of the public into believing that the Act was necessary in order to safeguard 

their lives. It has been implied, for instance, Mr. Speaker, that strikes could result in 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

231 

 

the elimination of heat and power in mid-winter which could cause Saskatchewan citizens to freeze. It has 

been suggested that people may die because hospital facilities are unavailable during a work stoppage. The 

assertion has been made, Mr. Speaker, that a man's home could burn down around his ears during a walkout 

of fireman. I suggest to you tonight, Mr. Speaker, that is not only blatant nonsense but it constitutes an insult 

to the integrity of all Saskatchewan working people, both in unions and those who are non-unionized. Surely, 

Mr. Speaker, no honest person could surely entertain the belief that any responsible Saskatchewan citizen, 

union member or otherwise, could in any way knowingly contribute to the death or injury of his fellowman. 

Union leaders have consistently made it clear that genuinely essential services would be maintained in the 

event of strike action and in every case, Mr. Speaker, in this Province in which life or property has been 

endangered this has been done, often at considerable inconvenience to the union members involved. 

 

Individuals who adopt the view that union members would stand by and watch human beings suffer, display 

a wilful lack of knowledge and understanding of the Trade Union Movement and what it stands for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — There are people, Mr. Speaker, who seem to think that unions are interested only in milking 

employers. For the most exorbitant wage settlements possible, without any regard for their employers, his 

business or the public interest. Most intelligent citizens, Mr. Speaker, or voters, know that the facts of the 

matter are otherwise. Granted, Mr. Speaker, unions are in the business of negotiating for favorable working 

conditions for their membership. But they are not naive enough to ignore the economics of the company 

which issues the pay cheques of their members. They are not unrealistic enough to refuse to temper their 

demands where the employer cannot afford to accede to them. They do not want a bigger slice of the pie than 

anyone else, they are simply striving for a fair deal. For the edification of those who have been unable or 

unwilling to grasp it, Mr. Speaker, unions are playing, what I think has to be regarded as a very positive and 

a very constructive role in our society. They are making very real progress in achieving their objectives of 

improving the wage and improving the working conditions of their members. In doing so they have assisted 

in a more indirect way, in raising the living standards applicable to non-union employees as well. 

 

Members of labor organizations are assisting materially in the improvement of industrial efficiency and the 

expansion of productivity. At the same time these organizations are doing a good deal also to safeguard the 

welfare of union members and their families away from the job. They are actively engaged in encouraging 

their members to upgrade their educational and vocational qualifications. They are providing moral and 

financial encouragement to the sons and daughters of their members to stay in school, to equip themselves to 

face the challenges of the employment world of tomorrow. 

 

Individually and collectively, Mr. Speaker, union members are contributing in a real and dynamic way to the 

affairs of their community and of their province. Similarly those responsible for the enactment of Bill 2, Mr. 

Speaker, have provided 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

232 

 

concrete evidence of a shocking degree of ignorance of the functioning of the collective bargaining process 

and of its importance to our democratic way of life. 

 

It is widely recognized, Mr. Speaker, that the process of collective bargaining is a most efficient means of 

regulating the conditions of employment. It is a system which ensures quality of treatment and 

standardization of conditions with a subsequent elimination of the undesirable differences and 

discrimination. 

 

As such, Mr. Speaker, it is advantageous to employees and to employers and to the economy of the whole. It 

is an instrument, Mr. Speaker, for the seeking and the attainment of social and economic justice. I notice that 

on this particular occasion the fort is being held by one of the freshman Members from the gerrymandered 

constituency of Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod). But I think for the large part with these few exceptions 

that most people recognize that the collective bargaining process is an essential ingredient of Canada's 

socio-economic political system. 

 

For example, the submission of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, to the 1968 Wood's Task Force on 

Labour Relations stated, and I quote: 

 

The Chamber believes that collective bargaining is the best method in our economic and 

industrial system of determining wages and working conditions. 

 

To be effective, however, Mr. Speaker, and to permit the orderly and progressive development of the 

Canadian economy, the collective bargaining process must be allowed to operate in a free and unrestricted 

way. Its success is dependent upon an independent trade union movement. If bargaining is to be fair and 

meaningful, each side must have some bargaining power and each side must be unimpeded by domination by 

each other or by other outside influences. 

 

It is in this area, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 2 exerts its most devastating impact. Despite the many protestations 

to the contrary, since 1966, Bill 2 has become what it was always intended by the previous Administration to 

be, a universal instrument of compulsory arbitration, a means of imposing second-class citizenship on 

Saskatchewan employees, a means of taking away collective bargaining rights, a means of enforcing low and 

unfair wages, a means of setting up the former Administration as judge, jury and executioner, the highest 

tribunal in the land from which there was to be no appeal. Let's make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker. The 

Essential Services Emergency Act is an embodiment of disrespect and contempt for the democratic process 

and it is a weapon which has the fire power to destroy collective bargaining. 

 

This is no exaggeration, Mr. Speaker. The spectre of this statute for almost five years has been hanging over 

every collective bargaining table and has been upsetting the balance of free collective bargaining in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The parties to negotiations in many instances have not settled down to serious bargaining in the knowledge 

that the issue would eventually be resolved by compulsory arbitration, in which a government imposed wage 

guideline was to be the 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

233 

 

certain outcome. If bargaining is to work, Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that the union side possess some 

bargaining power. In this connection employees have only their services to offer or to withdraw. The right of 

workers to strike, and the right of the employers to lockout their employees, are generally considered as 

necessary for the proper operation of a collective bargaining process. 

 

If employees and employers disagree on matters of wages and working conditions, the employees may refuse 

to work or the employer may refuse to offer employment on the grounds that the terms are not acceptable. 

The right to strike amounts, Mr. Speaker, to a simultaneous exercise of rights of the individual workers to 

withdraw their labor if they regard conditions of work to be unsuitable. 

 

Our democratic institutions, Mr. Speaker, guarantee us certain freedoms. Freedom of religion, freedom of 

association, freedom to education, freedom of speech and so on. The freedom to decide not to work is as 

important as any other freedom which we enjoy in our Canadian society. The threat of strike represents a 

powerful economic device and a very legitimate one. 

 

This is not to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the strike weapon should be used casually or irresponsibly. It 

represents, I believe, a very serious failure on the part of negotiators to reach a mutually satisfactory 

agreement. It is not a step to be taken lightly and it is not regarded as such. The employees are only too 

aware that immediately when they walk off the job, their income ceases. However, it must be accepted that 

there are circumstances under which an employer will sometimes refuse to consider justifiable improvements 

in working conditions. And under those circumstances, on occasions, members have no other recourse other 

than to withdraw their labor. 

 

It is apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the magnitude of strike losses in this country tends to be grossly inflated. In 

the words of the Wood's Task Force on Labour Relations, and I am quoting: 

 

Few unions strike frequently. Many strike infrequently and some very rarely. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the time loss attributable to accident, sickness and unemployment are well 

over one hundred times greater than the time losses resulting from strikes. And that ratio was even greater 

prior to 1964. Even in a bad year, Mr. Speaker, man days lost in strikes will not be equivalent to more than 

one tenth of one per cent of working time available. It should not be overlooked, Mr. Speaker, that 

responsible employers, too, are not in accord with the philosophy inherent in Bill 2, The Essential Services 

Emergency Act. 

 

Employers, I suggest, do not want settlements imposed upon them by government, and rightly so. They are 

not prepared to accept conditions affecting their enterprise in which they have had no hand and in which they 

have not had the opportunity to determine, with their employees, the circumstances under which their 

business will operate. Moreover they realize that the viability of their enterprise depends on a happy and 

contented labor force, the achievement of which can be best facilitated by the two parties themselves, 

bargaining in good faith, without interference. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

234 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, many employers have indicated that a strike is often the only visible portion of the 

iceberg which represents a very great larger portion of unseen labor management disharmony. Human 

relationships cannot be legislated, Mr. Speaker. The ending of a strike by compulsion does not necessarily 

terminate the dispute. This approach may be far more costly than a strike which results in the final analysis 

in a mutually satisfactory settlement. 

 

Long-term benefits, Mr. Speaker, of employee morale, of loyalty and contentment, are far more significant to 

thoughtful employers than the arbitrary and unsatisfactory imposition of compulsory arbitration. 

 

Criticism of compulsory, government-controlled arbitration is widespread in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Time will 

permit me only to quote to you three examples tonight. Speaking in the House of Commons on September 

19, 1968, the Hon. Bryce Mackasey, the Federal Minister of Labour, had this to say: 

 

Compulsory arbitration is a dictatorial solution which is really no solution at all. I think that 

far too few appreciate the collective bargaining process, too many people fail to distinguish 

between labor and management in assessing blame for a strike. On those rare occasions when 

we have found it necessary, in this country, to introduce ad hoc restrictive labor legislation, 

that legislation inevitably has worked against the best interest of labor and has come down on 

the side of management. 

 

Here, Mr. Speaker, is the recommendation, another reference, a recommendation of the labor-management 

committee on the construction industry in Saskatchewan, which the previous Administration created, and 

which reported to the previous Government last year. I am quoting from the report of that committee. 

 

It is our conviction, after nearly two years of review, that there is no substitute for the 

collective bargaining process. There should be no government compulsion in the process in 

the construction industry. Government has a role to play during contract negotiations, and 

that role is to provide the parties with effective mediation machinery. 

 

As a final example, Mr. Speaker, let me quote from the September 8, 1966 issue of the Regina Leader Post, a 

newspaper that is not generally known for its support of the New Democratic Party. Speaking of the newly 

enacted Essential Services Emergency Act, the editorial writer suggested that the Act be left on the shelf and 

added, and I quote: 

 

That would be a good place to leave it to gather dust as visible evidence that responsible 

Saskatchewan union and management leadership is able to settle differences without calling 

upon coercive authority of the people as it is exercised through their Government to impose 

compulsory arbitration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there can be no more damning evidence of the extent to which Bill 2 has no place in our 

democratic society than its relationship to international labor-organization Convention 87, dealing with the 

freedom of association. This Convention which has been ratified by 77 countries, Mr. Speaker, provides that 

workers and employers, without distinction 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

235 

 

whatsoever, shall have the right to establish and join organizations of their own choosing, without any 

interference from public authorities. The Convention states further that such organizations shall not be liable 

to be dissolved or suspended by administrative authority. 

 

Unbelievable as it may seem, Mr. Speaker, it has not been possible for a progressive country like Canada, to 

ratify this Convention because assurance cannot be given that the terms of the Convention will be carried out 

throughout this country. The sole reason for the inability of the Canadian Government to ratify the 

Convention is the existence of The Essential Services Emergency Act, with its clauses involving compulsory 

arbitration, the decertification of unions and other heavy penalties. 

 

I am pleased to say tonight, Mr. Speaker, that one of my first official acts, following the repeal of Bill 2, will 

be to advise the Government of Canada that freedom of association has again returned to Saskatchewan, and 

that accordingly Convention 87, can then be ratified. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I expect a question might be asked: how does the Government of Saskatchewan 

intend to ensure that the economy will not be disrupted by harmful strikes without Bill 2 to fall back on? 

 

I might say in this regard, Mr. Speaker, that in the unlikely event that a genuine emergency should arise, the 

situation can be handled by legislative action as a very extreme and a very last resort, but applicable only to 

that one situation. Why should a threat to all of the collective bargaining process be created simply because 

of the possibility existing at some future time that there may be an emergency? What is needed in this 

Province, Mr. Speaker, is not a Bill 2 or labor courts, but a drastic improvement in the industrial relations 

climate in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is an area which has been sadly neglected in the past seven years. It is the intention of my Government, 

Mr. Speaker, through the Department of Labour, which I have some responsibility for, to rebuild the 

machinery of mediation and conciliation in order to facilitate an industrial relations climate which the 

previous Administration has tried and failed to get with an iron fist. 

 

The record for labor peace in Saskatchewan during the 20 years of Administration by the former CCF 

Government, was the envy of every other province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. We propose to restore to 

Saskatchewan the kind of labor management consultation which will promote healthy industrial relations 

and industrial harmony. We intend to establish a conciliation program designed to identify labor-relations 

problems before they attain the status of disputes, thereby enabling the Department to provide conciliation 

services earlier. We intend to take steps to equip labor-management and conciliators with better defined 

bargaining criteria. 

 

It is our hope that an approach of this kind will facilitate better informed bargaining and result in earlier and 

more equitable settlement. Above all, Mr. Speaker, we intend to restore an atmosphere of trust between labor 

and management which has been lacking as a result of the anti-labor policies of the former Liberal 

Administration. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

236 

 

We intend to encourage the unrestricted interaction of people, the employers and the employees, who will sit 

down together, not as enemies, but as partners working together for a common cause to negotiate all aspects 

of their work relationship in a free given and take atmosphere. This way, Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that 

the area of conflict can be substantially reduced and rendered more flexible and that the present system of 

free collective bargaining can be adapted to the new demands of our technologically oriented society. 

 

On this basis, Mr. Speaker, it will continue to play a vital role in the industrial development in Saskatchewan 

and in the attainment of our economic goals of full employment, the continuing rising standard of living and 

an equitable distribution of income. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and gratified that Bill No. 6 — An Act to Repeal The Essential 

Services Emergency Act 1966, be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before I get into the general text of my 

remarks, I hope that the Minister of Labour, (Mr. Snyder) who just took his seat, — if he hasn't already, and 

he may have, but I haven't seen it yet — will set the records straight as to the plans of his Government in 

regard to labor-relations and especially that he will answer, very clearly, the statements made at the Waffle 

meeting held at Fort Qu'Appelle this weekend. On behalf of that group, I quote: 

 

Ron Ruth, of Regina, a trade unionist, said that the Waffle will insist that the Government 

take a strong pro-labor stand and will demand that it appoint pro-labor persons for arbitration 

boards and to the Labour Relations Board. We will also insist that a new trade union act be 

brought in within the framework of the new act, that it be pro labor. 

 

Now, I must again say that I admire the Wafflers — not for their philosophy or what they are attempting to 

do to this country or this Province — but at least they have the courage to speak out for what they believe in 

and what they think. But to hear the new Minister of Labour's (Mr. Snyder) sanctimonious utterances 

concerning the repeal of this Bill and promising everyone that we will have labor peace and they intend to 

consult with everything, management and labor, and I presume intend to strike a very middle of the road line 

between these two forces, I certainly hope that very soon that he will assure the people of Saskatchewan that 

he intends to ignore the demands of the Waffle group and, in fact, take a responsible attitude in the labor-

management relations in regard to industrial peace in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Why don't you ask . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I beg your pardon? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Why don't you ask Mr. Ruth that? 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

237 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, no, Mr. Ruth made the statement and I'm asking him and you people because I haven't 

seen any statement, Mr. Attorney General, where you are saying that you have the nerve, you, the Premier or 

anyone else — and some of these people, they're not just a group of people who just drifted into Qu'Appelle, 

you know, they're not just a group of people who have no status. One of the Members ran and received a 

tremendous number of votes and a great deal of support at your leadership convention. When the final count 

came between you and Mr. Blakeney, fortunately or unfortunately for the people of this Province — I don't 

know — they threw their weight to Mr. Blakeney so we can expect . . . and they've already had some payoff. 

Now they are making public statements and demanding certain things and all I've said, and I think very 

rightly so on behalf of the Opposition of the people of the province, is whether the Minister of Labour at the 

first opportunity will say, "Look, we really intend to be neutral. We really intend to be fair. We don't intend 

to load every board up with pro-labor people so that every decision is made while we're the Government (no 

matter how brief it may be), we'll be pro labor." In other words, will they act as fair and reasonable as we did 

when we were the Government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on behalf of the Opposition to fulfil a clear and immediate 

responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan, and that is to let everyone know where the New Democratic 

Party stands on labor issues. 

 

The NDP Government has introduced this Bill to remove The Essential Services Emergency Act from the 

Statutes of our Province. The Liberal Party contends that this move is nothing but a political payoff by the 

NDP for the assistance of labor unions in the recent political campaign. The Socialists made a commitment 

to the labor unions and they are now fulfilling that pledge. 

 

The repeal of this Act, while to the benefit of a small number of labor unions, is detrimental to the general 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is Bill 2? Why did the Liberals bring in this Bill? Those are just two of the questions that 

must be answered today and during this debate. 

 

For some time it has been apparent to those who are not prejudiced that collective bargaining in Canada is a 

very sick institution. A great many intelligent people think that it has become an outmoded practice and that 

is has broken down too often to the detriment of the general public in this nation. 

 

As I see it, collective bargaining worked well until recent years. While there were bitter disagreements and 

strikes, they were usually resolved without serious inconvenience to the public or serious damage to the 

parties involved. In the past, collective bargaining worked reasonably well because the strengths of the two 

parties, employers and unions, were reasonably equal. Relatively equal strength has to be the case because if 

one party is very much stronger than the other, real meaningful bargaining won't take place. The stronger 

party will simply dictate the settlement and the weaker side will agree to it or be destroyed. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

238 

 

Now, years ago employers were invariably the stronger party and laws were designed to offset these 

advantages. For example, to prevent unions from being harassed by legal actions, they were not required to 

become legal entities. They were shielded from the restrictions of anti-trust and anti-combine legislation. 

Many other benefits favored the union and offset the greater power of the employer. 

 

But today the situation has changed. Once again in too many cases the strength of the two negotiating parties 

is again unequal. However, this time it is the union strength which frequently far exceeds that of the 

employer. What small businessman or manufacturer can stand up to the tremendous power or the resources, 

unions like the Teamsters' Union, the Automobile Workers' Union, the Steel Workers' or the Packing House 

Workers'? What small contractor can truly negotiate with construction unions who hand him a 

mimeographed contract and tell him to sign or go broke? Frequently union demands have no relation to the 

profit or loss picture of the employer. The employer can't give what he hasn't got, if he does, he goes broke. 

Yet the union organizers time and time again are absolutely not interested in the economic facts of life. 

 

Another factor which I believe is destroying collective bargaining is the manner in which it is being extended 

to the public sector. What government, for example, can permit electricity or gas to be turned off by Power 

Corporation employees? What government can permit — responsible government, that is — police or 

firemen to strike without endangering the very lives of the public that they are paid and sworn to protect? 

What government can permit hospital employees to leave their jobs for any length of time without 

endangering the sick? Yet such strikes have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You encouraged the doctors to . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, we didn't encourage the doctors to do it, Mr. gentleman from that side of the House, 

you're the people who set the stage that drove the doctors. Don't try to blame it on us. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, such strikes have taken place on the Canadian scene with increasing frequency these last 

few years. There may be no real limit to what a government can pay in wages but let's never forget, it is the 

poor taxpayer who invariably pays the bill. 

 

There are many, even prominent trade unions, who also agree that strikes have become obsolete. I quote 

from Time Magazine, September 7, 1970, when AFL-CIO President George Meaney, without a doubt the 

most powerful union man in the United States of America or maybe anywhere in the world. I quote; Mr. 

Meaney stated: 

 

We find more and more that strikes really don't settle a thing. Where you have a well 

established union, you are getting to the point where a strike doesn't make sense. 

 

Even your little friend, Tommy Douglas, a few years ago in this very province stated that strikes are 

becoming outmoded and obsolete. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

239 

 

In the present state of affairs, Mr. Speaker, under existing legislation once the two sides agree to disagree, 

reconciliation becomes more a matter of one side waiting out the other than any real concrete negotiations. 

Sometimes, in fact, nothing happens for months and everyone gets hurt. 

 

Let's take the example up at Flin Flon. That strike went on for four months. The economy of that city in that 

district ground to a halt and yet as I understand it, the two parties didn't even begin to talk until they were 

virtually forced into it. Recently, supposedly intelligent people in our modern society referred to the ancient 

theory, "might is right." What a barbaric way to settle anything, especially our economic problems. And 

that's exactly how a strike is settled, no matter who wins it, whether the company uses their power to 

dominate the working people, or whether the union uses their power to dominate the employer. Might is 

right when it comes to a case of a strike. 

 

I think the people of this nation are looking to legislatures to find a better way of settling labor disputes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I think the people of this nation are demanding that the public interest — the public interest, 

the innocent people in these strikes — that their interest is put first — ahead even of the union or the 

employer. Let's make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, that no one wins in a prolonged strike. The workers lose their 

pay cheques and a great majority of them are sick at heart knowing that it may taken them years to win back 

their losses. The wives and the families of the unemployed husbands suffer over the powerless situation that 

the wage earners find themselves in. The companies lose huge sums of money and the loss to the economy 

generally through strikes runs in this nation into millions of dollars annually. 

 

There is another factor frequently involved in bitter labor disputes. The last ten years have seen an increased 

acceptance by unions of the fact that picket-line behavior need not be governed by the same rules of conduct 

which are not provided to protect the rights of individual citizens in other situations. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That's not true! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, yes, it's true! Originally picket lines, Mr. Attorney General, if you've ever tried to go 

through a picket line — you ask Mike Feschuk and the people up in Prince Albert — you just listen for a 

minute — and you ask the people up in the Prince Albert Co-op when they tried to walk in or drive into the 

parking lot to deal in their own co-op store after the workers there had been on strike for weeks and the 

whole situation became so bitter that it was a disgrace. They were threatened, sometimes their cars were 

scratched. They were threatened and their families were threatened. Don't tell me that nothing happened. 

Don't tell me that the same behavior takes place on a picket line takes place anywhere else. 

 

It used to be a picket line was for information. But today the picket line has been abused. It may be thrown 

up anywhere. It may be manned by anyone and a person who crosses the picket line, whether he is involved 

in the dispute or not, does so 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

240 

 

at his peril both physically and socially. Members of a picket line often carry out activities which otherwise 

would incur severe penalties. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the original Bill 2 was a means to find an appropriate method of settling serious strikes. 

The initial issue concerned the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and that dispute threatened not only the 

Province's economy but also the lives of the people of this Province. However, the long-term purpose of this 

legislation was to permit the Government to intervene in any labor dispute which imperilled Saskatchewan's 

economic health for the provision of necessary services to our people. 

 

Today, under the legislation, when there is a strike in any essential industry which is detrimental to the 

public interest, the Government may order the workers back on the job. At the same time, an arbitration 

committee is set up which has compulsory powers. The workers may name one man to the board, the 

company names one representative and if they can't agree amongst themselves, they name the chairman. If 

they can't agree amongst themselves, the Government names the third party to act as chairman. And we agree 

the Act has very stringent teeth. A union leader who ignores the order to return to work may be fined $1,000 

a day. If the union ignores the order for more than ten days, it can be decertified and cease to exist in this 

Province. The Act is fair. Employers are subject to the same $1,000 a day fine as the union for authorizing a 

lockout or in any other way hindering the orderly settlement of the labor dispute. In fact, the Government can 

forbid the company to carry on business in the Province of Saskatchewan if they have failed to comply with 

the regulations. 

 

The legislation, Mr. Speaker, has been effective on five — I don't say it has been used — I say it has been 

effective in five different situations: the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, hospital unions, construction 

workers, a nursing home when the union asked us to put it in, and the pulp mill strike. 

 

We believe it is fair and necessary to protect the public interest. I should like to state categorically that: 

 

(1) This legislation was never used by our Government to bully, to oppress or intimidate any union that was 

engaged in legitimate negotiations to advance their reasonable interest of its members; (2) this legislation 

moreover was not employed in any dispute until the Government was assured that every other avenue or 

approach had been explored; and (3) this legislation was employed only when the public interest was 

involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for several moments to the reason, to just why, the NDP wish to repeal Bill 

2. I quote from the Regina Leader-Post of July 25th of this year. Mr. Blakeney, the Premier, is quoted as 

saying: 

 

There is no rush to repeal Bill 2. The Essential Services Emergency Act, since it is operative 

only when the Government decides to use it, as far as the NDP is concerned for now, it is just 

a matter of not using it. 

 

I suggest that the NDP changed their mind after they listened to the labor union bosses when they were 

summoned to the meeting with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

241 

 

We knew that meeting took place and I would have bet $10 to a plugged nickel that when they snapped their 

finger, little Allan wouldn't have said, "How, when do I jump?" he'd have just said, "How high?" 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I should like to suggest to this Assembly that the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

told the NDP to get rid of Bill 2 or else. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Or else, what? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Or else they would have withdrawn their support, stirred up the Wafflers and you wouldn't 

been there ten minutes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You've got a very, very shaky hold! As I pointed out before, you're all doomed — it's just a 

matter of time. But if you're good boys to the Wafflers and if you're good boys to the labor unions, you might 

last four years. 

 

Bill 2 didn't need to be implemented by the Government opposite. Indeed the only way The Essential 

Services Emergency Act can be brought into force is by a Cabinet order. Mr. Blakeney said the Cabinet 

assured labor that they wouldn't bring it into force. Well, if you're not tied to the string of labor and if they 

don't order you around, then Mr. Attorney General I can only come to the conclusion that the labor unions 

don't trust you to keep your promises any more than the rest of the people of this Province and so they said, 

"Just in case you get other ideas, you better take it off the books and do it right away." 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's right, that's right! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let me emphasize again today to this House and to the people of this Province, our 

Government is not anti-labor. We're not anti-anything. We're very much aware, a great deal more aware than 

you people are that a well paid labor force makes for a healthy community in a healthy province. The first 

thing you've got to find for a contented labor man is a job, and that's something that you've overlooked the 

last two or three days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also believe that all times the public interest must transcend the right of any particular 

group, including any particular union. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And I challenge the farmers who sit on that side of the House that the next time there is a 

grainhandler's strike, the next time the railroad workers decide to tie up the movement of grain, to stand up 

in this House and say — as they probably all will, like little sheep, "I voted for the removal of Bill 2. I fell in 

line with the labor unions." 

 

Never mind, if we had passed Bill 2 and you people didn't take Bill 2 off, this is a pattern that should and 

will eventually spread across this nation. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

242 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You people! Never mind what they said. Of course they said it, but I'm telling you tonight 

that it may be fine to vote against Bill 2 but I guarantee tonight that every farm Member, every Member from 

rural Saskatchewan, will live to regret the day if he stands in his place and votes for the repeal of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The Liberal Government was just as generous to our own unions, to the people who work 

for this Government, as the financial capacity of the people of this Province permitted. However, we refused 

to be blackmailed by any labor group or any union group or any other organization. Our Government will not 

and would not have been intimated by tough union leaders as you people have already shown that you can be 

and you will be. 

 

We dislike seeing the present Government favor any one group at the collective bargaining table at the 

expense of another group. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party is opposed to the removal of this Bill from the Statute books, especially when 

the NDP left the impression across this Province that they would not remove this statute until they were 

prepared to replace it with something that would protect the rights and the interests of the ordinary people of 

this Province against irresponsible and prolonged strikes, and they haven't done that to this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I call on the NDP Government to show some backbone and to withdraw this Bill from this 

Assembly tonight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. Flasch (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to speak on the Bill to appeal The 

Essential Services Emergency Act. I should like to commend the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) for having 

the courage to introduce the Bill in this House. 

 

I have no pro-labor or anti-labor bias personally. I am concerned, however, that the rights which people have 

built up over decades, and indeed over centuries, and which have now become a part of their heritage, should 

suddenly be destroyed by some government which has a definite anti-labor bias. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I consider Bill 2, Mr. Speaker, to be a bad piece of legislation. I think that it takes the whole 

process of collective bargaining and relegates it to the stone age of labor relations. 

 

It has been my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that if a man has a product to sell he should have the right to bargain 

collectively 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

243 

 

for the price at which he will sell that product. If the only product that this man has to sell is his labor, then I 

suggest that it is his democratic right to sit across the table from his employer and bargain collectively for the 

price at which he will sell that labor. I do not believe that he should have the oft-mentioned 'Sword of 

Damocles' hanging over his head. I don't think that anyone can bargain in an atmosphere like that and 

bargain freely. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that Bill 2 is that sword. 

 

I agree with Members opposite to a certain extent. I believe that there are certain services which might be 

considered essential services . . . 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Come on over. We have room for one more. 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Not yet boys! I do not believe that suddenly at the snap of the fingers of some union boss, 

the whole bunch are going to jump up and walk out and plunge this Province into chaos. I don't think that 

people are that irresponsible. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that it was the callous attitude of the former Liberal Government towards labor that 

prompted the recent labor disputes that we have had in this Province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — . . . and that it was not irresponsibility of hospital workers, Crown corporation employees 

and labor in general that was at fault. Since 1964, Mr. Speaker, the number of man-days lost through strikes 

jumped from 5,200 to 40,000 per year. I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that the attitude of labor has changed, 

but after 1964, I suggest that the attitude of the Government of this Province certainly did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I have a clipping that appeared in various weeklies, I am sure, throughout the province. This 

one was taken from the Leader Weekly and it says: 

 

Bill 2 — your insurance policy around the clock. 

 

Do you know who paid for this? The Government of Saskatchewan paid this. They paid for this with the 

taxpayers' money, with some of the money which was taken from the very people that this Bill was designed 

to be imposed upon. I don't mind them putting their propaganda sheet in the paper but I wish they would pay 

for it out of their own party funds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I notice that it mentioned hospital employees. It doesn't mention doctors. I don't know 

whether they are employed in hospitals or not, but they are not mentioned. I recall that the Government 

forced the hospital workers in Estevan back to work for something like $1.70 per hour. I recall that they gave 

the doctors — and all they had to do was ask for it — they gave them a 11 per cent increase on something 

like $20,000. It is easy to see whom they favor, who the elite are. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

244 

 

The former Government, Mr. Speaker, created a fear psychosis in this Province amongst its employees. 

During the recent election campaign, many of us were out campaigning and I know that it happened to me 

personally — I went around and knocked on a door and introduced myself and somebody would say, "How 

do you do. I am very pleased to meet you, but I work for the Power Corporation, eh?" Another person said, 

"We are all on your side, but mum is the word. We don't dare say anything. This is a fact, we don't dare say 

anything." 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, have been threatened with dismissal if they engaged in politics unless, of course, 

they engaged in it on behalf of the Liberal Party and then it was fine. I say that every man has the right to 

engage in party politics when he does it on his own time, if he can work compatibly with the people by 

whom he is employed. There is nothing wrong with it and I would stand up for that right anywhere. 

 

My colleagues and I, in the teaching profession, who are sitting on this side of the House, know what it is 

like to bargain under a Liberal Government, or with the guidance, at least of the Liberal Government. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Look at the increases you had in the last seven years. 

 

Mr. Flasch: — We had good reasons to oppose that Government in the recent election, and I shall mention 

only a few of them. We object to the arbitrary way in which they imposed area bargaining upon us. Some 50 

people, I think, out of a total of some 700, at a trustees' convention voted for it. And it went because the 

Government wanted to bring teachers to heel. That's the reason. The imposition of the pupil-teacher ratio had 

its adverse effects. We weren't happy with that. The only good thing about it, I am happy to say, is its repeal, 

that's all. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member 

should keep his remarks to the Bill that is before us. I would be very interested in his remarks on the teacher-

pupil ratio. Teachers, I don't find under Bill 2. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, okay, Mr. Speaker, if you want to throw the rules wide open, fine, let him go. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — May I speak to the point of order, Mr. Speaker. My respectful submission to the House is 

that the Hon. Member is in fact fully in order, because, as I understand the thrust of his remarks, he is saying 

this: that it was the attitude of the former Liberal Government, the arbitrary, dictatorial attitude when it 

implemented Bill 2, could also be exemplified in its teacher-pupil ratios, salary teacher negotiation 

bargaining. And all that the Hon. Member is trying to do, is to show that there is a consistent Liberal Party 

line when it comes to doing these matters. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

245 

 

order. That is fine. We have 14 over here and if you want to give us all the latitude to say anything that we 

like on any Bill, let her go. We don't mind at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe that any remarks on Second Reading should be related to the Bill that is before 

us. I think that Bill 2 as it is usually referred to, The Essential Services Emergency Act, in its application was 

broad enough to cover any laboring people, as I understand the Hon. Member, that is what he was intending 

to point out, that he could be covered as a teacher. Now if he goes into discussion of educational legislation 

then he will be out of order. I would say that as long as he relates his remarks to this Bill, Bill 2, he is in 

order. 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Mr. Speaker, I say that my remarks are relevant, because we were definitely threatened with 

being included under Bill 2. And nobody knows it better than the Hon. Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) 

sitting across the way. 

 

I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that the Government wanted us to reach an agreement. No decent effort was made 

to bargain collectively with us. Time after time nothing happened. I think that they were hoping that we 

should all go out on strike. A few of our people did in Prince Albert, but they were looking for us all to go 

out on strike. This would have given them an election issue and would have enabled them to include us 

under Bill 2. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the matter of establishing an arbitration board leaves a bit to be desired. It is fair 

enough to say that labor can pick its member, management picks its member, and then if they can't agree, 

and in all likelihood they can't because of the very fact that they are engaged in dispute. They are not likely to 

agree. And then, of course, in steps the Government and appoints the Chairman. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this 

is tantamount to the Government settling the whole dispute exactly according to its will in the first place. 

 

I suggest that we, now, would have that power. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we don't want that because we 

have faith in people. We believe that if they are accorded some degree of latitude that they will settle their 

own disputes without Government interference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I notice from a press release that the Opposition Leader (Mr. Steuart) said that his group in 

the House would vigorously oppose Bill 2. I would suggest that Bill 2 was a major factor in the debacle as 

far as they are concerned of June 23. I can't really see how it can be advantageous to the Members opposite 

to oppose this bill now that they are in opposition. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We've got principles. 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a deliberate attempt to save face. They talked against labor 

before the election and they have to continue doing so afterwards so that they can continue to court the favor 

of the big business friends who paid 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

246 

 

for their election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 2 was repulsive not only to those who were included under it, but to those 

who were threatened with inclusion under it. It aroused the ire of every democratically-minded citizen of this 

Province. I noticed too, that the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) mentioned the other 

day that the big union bosses were finally collecting the first instalments on the I.O.U.'s of what they 

contributed to our election campaign. Well, I don't know how much they contributed but I should like to 

thank them for any contribution they did make. I know one thing that none of that money found its way to 

Maple Creek. We won the election out there, but we have a deficit on our books, Mr. Speaker, and I should 

like to see it wiped out and I should be very pleased . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — . . . Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member would tell me who the union bosses are who are 

willing to part with a couple of thousand of dollars, I shall gladly accept it. As a matter of fact I would even 

take it from Carl Landegger, but I doubt that he is in a generous mood today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — During their term of office, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals attempted to use organized labor as a 

scapegoat and to make labor responsible for all the economic ills of this Province. I don't think that any one 

group should be held responsible — maybe not even the provincial Liberals (the campaign is over now). Mr. 

Speaker, let me say that it was my wish that somehow the Members opposite when they were the 

Government, could have been brought under Bill 2. I really think that their attitude toward labor was 

responsible for most of the strikes that did occur. And if I look back, judging from their accomplishments in 

office during this period, I would say that they were virtually on strike themselves as a government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Mr. Speaker, the onus is on this Government to restore the rights of collective bargaining to 

the people of this Province and recreate an atmosphere of trust between management and labor and, indeed, 

between all segments of society. 

 

To sum up, Mr. Speaker, I wish to state that I consider Bill 2 a bad piece of legislation and that I will vote for 

the Bill to repeal The Essential Services Emergency Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to rise on this occasion and speak in favor of this 

Bill. 

 

I was pleased to hear the Leader of the Opposition 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

247 

 

(Mr. Steuart) mention that they had principles. As I have listened to the debate in the last few days, I was 

beginning to lose my faith — what little faith I had in the Liberal Party. Time after time, legislation came 

forward and speakers from the opposite side of the floor stood up and said, "Mr. Speaker, we introduced this 

legislation, or we did this, because we thought it was in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan." 

Obviously the people of Saskatchewan weren't in favor of it. They voted against it, so now we have changed 

our minds. I rather thought that they had been running the Government on a Gallup Poll basis, that they put 

in whatever legislation they thought was popular. Now that it has proved to be unpopular they are throwing it 

out and changing over to another horse in midstream. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Well, I am pleased to see that in the case of Bill 2 they have some principles. I am afraid 

that they are misguided principles, but at least I am pleased to see they have put them forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition stated that they hope that we would be as fair in our dealing with 

labor-management relations as the Liberals have been. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that won't take much of an 

effort. As far as the insinuation that the introduction of this Bill, at this time, is a political payoff, it is a 

"bunch of baloney" and nothing more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — When this Party sat in the Opposition, when Bill 2 was introduced into this House, and 

when Bill 57 was introduced after it, this Party opposed compulsory arbitration in spite of the fact that many 

people said that it would be politically unpopular. We based our stand on principles. We based our stand on 

this before the election and we were elected. Mr. Speaker, it is important that this Bill be repealed now. It 

never was, and it is not now, the kind of legislation which is compatible with a democratic society. Only a 

Government which believed in pocket boroughs and gerrymandering, and believed that they were part of a 

democratic system, only such a government could have enthusiastically endorsed The Essential Services 

Emergency Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Compulsory arbitration must go, and it must go now. It is the first in a series of actions 

which this Government will take to strengthen democracy in Saskatchewan. It must go because it has begun 

the destruction of collective bargaining in Saskatchewan. During the election campaign one saw 

advertisements stating that collective bargaining had worked 98 per cent of the time in Saskatchewan, and 

yet those Members sitting opposite were willing to risk the whole process with this legislation. It was simply 

a grandstand play to try and convince rural Saskatchewan that they could, and would, hold labor down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

248 

 

Mr. Cowley: — It was part and parcel of their policy of playing one group against another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I represent a rural constituency. The people in the constituency of Biggar were not fooled by 

these attempts to place the blame for their difficulties on labor. Farmers are much too aware of their own 

lack of bargaining power. However, they have rejected the theory that they can enhance their position 

through legislation which is discriminatory against labor and which removes the rights of the common 

working man. The repeal of The Essential Services Emergency Act was a part of the New Democratic Party's 

New Deal for people. That's where it came from, from convention resolutions put forward and passed by a 

convention of the New Democratic Party. 

 

On June 23 rural Saskatchewan spoke out resoundingly in favor of this program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Rural Saskatchewan spoke in favor of this program, I am certain, because they were 

confident that labor would support fully the right of farmers to bargain collectively if farmers found 

themselves in similar circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 2 must go. I'd like for a minute to turn to the whole question of 

compulsory arbitration. The strike is an important part of the collective bargaining system, as has been 

mentioned. The threat of a strike or the threat of a lockout is what enables the system to function. If the 

working man does not have the right to withdraw his services, I ask the Members opposite, what he has left 

to bargain with? Compulsory arbitration won't work. When you make it known that the decision can be left 

to an arbitrator, bargaining in good faith stops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no guarantee that an arbitration board will be impartial. In the case of the previous 

Administration, I believe there was real and justified fear on the part of organized labor that they would get 

the short end of the stick with regard to any arbitration board. Matters of principle should not be decided by 

arbitration board. For example, the scope of negotiations should not be submitted to such a board. This is a 

matter which should be rightly arrived at through collective bargaining between the two parties concerned. 

Arbitration boards have seldom broken new ground. At a time when we need, we desperately need, new 

approaches and new concepts, we cannot afford to stand pat with arbitrations boards. It is imperative that the 

new ideas like the four-day, 40-hour week be examined and that the decision with respect to this idea be 

arrived at through negotiations between the two parties concerned. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, as an argument against compulsory arbitration, the Provincial Government is 

directly concerned with, and directly affect by, negotiations with groups like the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation employees. It should not be, and it should not wish to be, put in the position of having to 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

249 

 

name a chief arbitrator in matters which affect it so directly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are real alternatives to compulsory arbitration. We need, and I am sure this Government 

will enact, better legislation to assist the collective bargaining proceed. We need, and we shall have, I am 

sure, better conciliation and mediation procedures, and better trained and more mediation and conciliation 

officers. The collective bargaining system must be allowed to function freely in Saskatchewan. 

 

The repeal of The Essential Services Emergency Act puts the onus squarely on the shoulders of unions and 

employees, where it should be. I am confident that they will adopt responsible attitudes towards negotiations. 

I look forward to an era of harmonious relations between employees and employers. It is quite possible there 

will be some rough spots on the road ahead, Mr. Speaker, but they are but a small price to pay for freedom. I 

am confident that the new atmosphere created in Saskatchewan on June 23 will go a long way to achieving 

the kind of employer-employee harmony that we all, I am sure, sincerely desire for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the repeal of The Essential Services Emergency Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. Feschuk (Prince Albert East): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the Hon. Minister of Labour 

(Mr. Snyder) on his appointment and also on the legislation he has introduced in this Session of the 

Legislature. 

 

There is no doubt that the benefits to all far outweigh the disadvantages to a few and the province as a whole 

will be better for this legislation. Labor and management will no longer have the threat of Bill 2 over their 

heads and will be able once again to carry out meaningful collective bargaining that should lead to much 

greater industrial peace than we have experienced in the last several years. 

 

It will now be the responsibility of this Government to provide proper staffing in the Labour Department to 

ensure that the legislation is effected and also to make sure that the unorganized as well as the organized can, 

without threat to their jobs, enjoy the full benefit of this legislation. These labor changes are a step in the 

right direction. However, Mr. Speaker, we must still be concerned about excessively long hours where 

payment of overtime is little or no deterrent to management who would much rather pay overtime than train 

employees as essential workers. 

 

This country is experiencing some of the highest unemployment in its history while many are working as 

much as 20 hours per week overtime, and others walk the streets. Surely a government has the responsibility 

to do so something about such a tragic situation. I raise this, Mr. Speaker, in the hope that we shall realize 

that our job is not finished with the progress made at this Session but that our Minister of Labour will 

continue to work in the direction he has taken, and that we can look forward to more improvements in the 

future sessions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I say I am pleased to support the Bill, an 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

250 

 

Act to repeal The Essential Services Emergency Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Comer (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, it's with a sense of pride that I rise today to participate in this 

debate to repeal Bill 2. I first joined the New Democratic Party in 1966 just after the remnants of that 

Government passed Bill 2. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) said, "We've got principles," and 

certainly Bill 2 shows some of those principles. That Government was based on the principle of being one of 

the most viciously anti-labor governments that this country has seen and certainly that this Province has 

seen. They were proud of it but obviously Saskatchewan wasn't proud of it. They mended that situation on 

June 23. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — Mr. Speaker, today we are participating in a historic debate on labor legislation. We are 

moving the repeal of Bill 2. We are striking a blow for labor democracy. When Bill 2 was passed through the 

Legislature in the summer of 1966, Woodrow Lloyd, the then Leader of the Opposition, declared, "This Bill 

is evil." And it was and it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — This Bill was a cruel blow to the working men of this Province. It gave the working man a 

sense of oppression. It caused free collective bargaining in any real sense to be something of the past, and the 

Government was proud of it. This Bill that we're dealing with today, Bill 6, restores free collective 

bargaining or takes great steps in restoring it. Free collective bargaining can only occur when the 

workingmen's representatives and the company's representatives negotiate to arrive at a new collective 

bargaining agreement to change wage rates and working conditions. Does this cause strikes? No, it does not. 

Does compulsory arbitration cause strikes? Yes, it does. Once you introduce a third party, a coercive force to 

collective bargaining, you introduce tension. One side invariably feels that it'll get a better deal by going to 

arbitration. And that side, from the beginning, opts to strike. That's what happened really when there was a 

strike against the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in 1966. Saskatchewan Power Corporation felt it could 

go to compulsory arbitration and get a better deal than it could in collective bargaining. The employees went 

to strike. This is the case in what happened in teacher negotiations last fall. The boards and the Department 

of Education were prepared to let a strike occur because they felt they could get a better deal. And it caused a 

teachers' strike. It could have caused a lot more teacher's strikes. 

 

Many times when a strike occurred, the Government, the former Government was willing to move in with 

compulsory arbitration and then they boasted to the province, "We've stopped a strike." They didn't stop a 

strike, they caused it. They caused it by introducing compulsory arbitration, by threatening the working man 

and by threatening companies with compulsory arbitration. And it wasn't excessive wage demands. We all 

know that. It wasn't union bosses. I've been in unions. I'd like to see a union boss. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

251 

 

It was the realization by management that Government was willing to stick the workers with compulsory 

arbitration. As I have mentioned earlier, removing compulsory arbitration restores labor peace. We are 

removing, compulsory arbitration, to a large degree. We are moving towards restoring labor peace. We are 

restoring freedom in negotiations. Bill 6 is a just Bill and I certainly am proud to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. Macleod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have quite a number of remarks to make on this 

Bill and I therefore beg leave to have the debate adjourned. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the intent of the proposed amendments to this Act are very similar to those described 

in Bill 3, to amend the Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 

 

The amendments before you remove the authority for regulations which prescribe medical deterrent fees that 

may be charged by doctors in this Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Bill also provides that a person who has reached the age of 65 is a beneficiary under the Act and is 

exempt from paying premiums on his own behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was on March 1, 1968 that the Liberal Government of that day announced that they were 

going to put an end to 21 years of prepaid hospital care in the Province of Saskatchewan. They were not 

content with just committing this one dastardly deed, they also announced that they were going to put an end 

to six years of free medical care in the Province of Saskatchewan. This was a cruel and inhuman blow to the 

people of Saskatchewan, not only because it was a severe tax imposition on the citizens of this Province but 

because it was a major erosion of the two most humane and most important plans legislated by the former 

CCF Government. 

 

The introduction of these deterrent fees constituted a deliberate sabotage on the part of the Liberal 

Administration on these two important health service programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1968 when we debated the deterrent fees, reference was made at that time to the Thompson 

Committee including in its report a recommendation on deterrent fees. I think I must remind the House that I 

was proud to be a member of that Committee, and it was during the three years of study on medical care that 

I became more deeply convinced of the necessity to establish a publicly administered and financed 

comprehensive health service for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also became convinced that you cannot have a health service program which has built-in deterrent fees. It 

was for this 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

252 

 

reason that I submitted a dissenting report, declaring my firm opposition to deterrent or utilization fees. 

 

I assure you the Committee spent considerable time in discussing deterrent fees and made the 

recommendation only after a great deal of soul-searching. I am sure the Hon. Member for Regina Lakeview 

(Mr. McPherson) who was also a member of that Committee will concur with me that the Committee gave 

this matter a great deal of thought. I was particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member for Regina 

Lakeview who in 1960-61 supported the idea of deterrent fees, after ten years of thought and consideration 

stood up in his place this afternoon and he voted against deterrent fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I congratulate him. It takes time to learn but there's always a hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Thompson Committee report did identify a number of distinct disadvantages associated 

with deterrent fees. I think it will be useful for the Members of the House and particularly our newer 

Members to take note of some of the arguments that the Thompson committee presented in regard to 

deterrent fees and their disadvantages. The Committee said this: 

 

They are discriminatory in two ways: they tax those who have legitimate needs for services; they fall with 

unequal weight on persons of different incomes. They discourage persons from seeking preventive care and 

they deter persons from seeking early treatment. They are a nuisance to both the physician and the patient. 

They are expensive and they are difficult to administer. Their application does not recognize that the 

provision of some medical services are initiated by the patient while others are provided at the order of the 

physician. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Thompson Committee did, as I have already noted, make a recommendation concerning 

deterrent fees but the conditions that they specified were a far departure from those imposed by the Liberal 

Administration. 

 

I should like the Members to take note of the Thompson Committee's recommendation. First of all, the 

Committee said that they should be small in amount, that they would not apply to referred specialist services, 

that they would only apply to the first three visits in any one illness. The doctor would have the right to 

waive the utilization fee. Records of receipts of payments of utilization fees should be kept by the physicians 

and recorded with his claim to the Commission for payment. The payment to physicians by the Plan would 

be reduced by the amount of the utilization fee. Utilization fees should be directed to those items of service 

which are initiated by the patient only. 

 

In addition, because of the wide difference of opinion as to the desirability of deterrent fees and the lack of 

experience in applying them, the Committee recommended that the whole question should be reviewed 

within three years of their introduction. Mr. Speaker, I am proud that the CCF Government of that day had 

the foresight to see that any disadvantages that might have accrued outweighed the advantages and therefore 

did not accept the recommendation of the Thompson Committee in respect of deterrent fees. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

253 

 

Mr. Speaker, rising costs was the main reason the Liberals claim for bringing in this sick tax. They said that 

the financial position of the plan would be jeopardized if drastic action was not taken immediately. Of 

course, it is a fact that the costs of medical care are going up. This I do not deny. In 1963, the first year of 

operation of medical care insurance, the gross payment for the full year was $21.4 million, the comparable 

figure in 1970 was $33 million. There are many good reasons for this, Mr. Speaker. Since 1963 a number of 

new classes of beneficiaries have been added to the case load of the Commission; 25,000 Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan beneficiaries were added effective April 1, 1966. This figure grew to over 60,000 in 1971; 

2,177 War Veterans' Allowance recipients were added as of July 1, 1968; 32,000 Indians residing in reserves 

were added as of January 1, 1969. Costs were bound to go up because of the increased case load. There have 

also been a few changes in respect of insured services provided for and paid for by The Medical Care 

Insurance Commission. For example, refractions by physicians became an insured service in July of 1968, 

and refractions by optometrists were insured as of September of that same year. Naturally these additional 

services did contribute to some increased costs. I might remind the Members of the House that providing for 

these additional insured services was not particularly the will of the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan, it 

was a requirement that was imposed by the Federal Medical Care Act and became a legal condition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — In addition to all of this you will recall there have been increases in doctors' payment 

schedules and the percentage figure that is used as a basis for payment. This also resulted in a considerable 

increase in cost. Mr. Speaker, the point I am trying to make is that all of these changes have contributed 

substantially to increased costs, but they are costs over which the citizens of Saskatchewan have no control. 

 

There was another important development associated with this program in July of 1968 and that was that on 

that date of July 1, the Federal Government started making contributions under The Federal Medical Care 

Act. It was unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, as we were going to get more money as of July 1, 1968, towards 

helping finance medical care and hospital care plan, the Liberals chose in that same period to introduce 

deterrent fees. In 1970, the sharable costs for the Medical Care Insurance Commission and the Swift Current 

Health Region totalled $30 million, contribution under the Federal Medical Care Plan came to approximately 

$19.6 million or 63.7 per cent of sharable cost. 

 

I have also noted that the gross payment for the Medical Care Insurance Commission totalled $33 million in 

1970. Let's subtract the $19.6 million received from the Federal Government and the $5.7 million received 

from the medical care premiums; this leaves a net payment by the Government of Saskatchewan of only $7.7 

million or just 23 per cent of the total cost of the plan. The comparable figure for 1969 was $8.6 million so 

in fact the net effect on the consolidated fund was a decrease of close to $1 million over a period of two 

years. The comparable figure for 1963, Mr. Speaker, would have been over $16 million that the CCF 

Government paid at that time. In other words, the net cost to the consolidated fund was over twice as high in 

1963 as it was in 1970. 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

254 

 

Mr. Speaker, are these the catastrophic increases my friends across the floor are telling us about these days. 

We knew right from the start that it would be inevitable that medical care costs would increase. I believe the 

Thompson Committee estimated an annual increase of 3 per cent. It was for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that we 

insisted on basing the financing of the medical care plan on progressive taxes rather than on regressive taxes 

as the Liberals did. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the medical care plan was to be financed from portions 

of four different tax sources, the joint hospital and medical care tax, the education and health tax, the 

corporation tax and the income tax. With the exception of the joint medical and hospital tax the revenues 

derived from these sources are increasing annually. It is true that the Liberals on taking office in 1964, 

increased the premiums by $20 in the case of families and $10 in the case of individuals from $52 family 

premium and $26 on individuals to $72 and $36 respectively. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, in 1962-63, the education and health tax revenues to the province of 

Saskatchewan were $38.2 million; in 1969-70 the comparable figure was $63 million, an increase of almost 

$25 million or 64 per cent in just a period of seven years. This gave the Government more money to finance 

programs, more of this money should have been used to also help finance medical and hospital programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all of these facts show that the gloomy financial picture painted by the former 

Government in respect to the medical care plan is not nearly as black as they would have the people believe. 

Returning to the increased costs of the medical care plan, the area the deterrent fees should affect the most is 

the per capita utilization, for the number of services provided per beneficiary. Deterrent fees have nothing to 

do with doctor fee schedules, increases in the level of insured services or increases in the number of 

beneficiaries. If they are going to work at all they must work in some way to affect the per capita utilization. 

 

I should like to refer the Members of this House to the Medical Care Insurance Commission annual reports. 

It is interesting to trace the changes that have occurred in the per capita utilization. In 1964 the increase was 

5.7 per cent over 1963; in 1965 the increase dropped to 2.4 per cent over 1964; it rose again to 4.5 in 1966 

and then dropped to 3.7 in 1967. So that at the time the Liberals introduced their deterrent fee program the 

increase associated with the change in per capita utilization was in fact going down, Mr. Speaker. There was 

a rather significant drop in the per capita utilization in 1968. Instead of an increase the change between 1967 

and 1968 indicated a 3 per cent decrease. These figures dramatically underline the inhibiting effect of 

deterrent fees. But it is interesting to note that in 1969 the trend started to reverse itself. The significant 

change took place in 1970 when the increase in per capita utilization went up by almost 9 per cent. 

Obviously a rebounding effect was beginning to take place. We could speculate at great length about the 

reasons for this change but I think the important fact is that deterrent fees did contribute to a substantial 

reduction in the number of services per beneficiary in 1968-69. I am sure that our low income groups were 

being deterred originally by these fees from seeking needed medical care. Perhaps when they had to choose 

between a trip to the doctor or a couple pounds of butter they chose to buy the butter. But as time went on 

and they could see how a medical condition which could have been nipped in the bud by one visit to a doctor 

developed into a more 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

255 

 

serious condition, often requiring an admission to the hospital, they decided the next time, Mr. Speaker, to 

do away with the butter. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how much of this 9 per cent increase in 1970 can be 

attributed to medical conditions being left unattended because the patient did not have the money to pay the 

deterrent fee. As I said before it is well known that early detection of illness and a prompt introduction of 

effective treatment can often prevent complications and chronic disability. 

 

The introduction of deterrent fees was a part of the Liberal Party's policy of attacking the farmers and the 

wage earners of this Province. These fees are a most vicious form of class distinction. Deterrent fees tend to 

concentrate on the low income and the large family groups. If deterrent fees are to work in the manner hoped 

for by the Liberals they must discourage the would-be patient from obtaining medical services. Deterrent 

fees are not going to discourage the well-to-do persons from obtaining services but they emphatically will 

cause serious problems for the poor, for the couples trying to get by on old age pensions. 

 

Medical deterrent fees have not reduced the overall costs of medical care programs, they have simply 

transferred much of the cost to the sick people of the province who have paid about $10 million in medical 

deterrent fees since April 15, 1968. This approach runs counter to any humanitarian view of our society. It is 

also diametrically opposed to the Socialist principles of this Government. It is a total violation of the basic 

underlying principles of comprehensive health care insurance that this Government recognizes. We insist 

that every person in this Province irrespective of his means, sex or occupation shall have equal access to the 

best and the most up-to-date health services we can make available. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — There is no place for deterrent fees in comprehensive health programs to promote health 

care, to prevent disease, to provide early diagnosis and treatment of disease and to promote rehabilitation. 

This is why we have placed this amendment before the Legislature during this Session. 

 

The other amendment, Mr. Speaker, to this Bill when passed will provide old people or senior citizens with 

free medical care and treatment. I am, therefore, very pleased that effective January 1, 1972, they will be 

provided with free medical care as well as free hospital care. These are the initial steps, Mr. Speaker, that 

this Government is developing in improving health care for the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. I 

want to assure the Members here and all the people of this Province that many more improvements are 

already being considered by my Government. Our objective is nothing less than the development of the best 

health care service available in the world. We have the resources, we have the skills, we have the people and 

we have the desire to make this objective a reality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to conclude my remarks with a very brief but grateful tribute to all the workers in the field of public 

health care. They are serving the people of Saskatchewan in a dedicated and selfless manner that commands 

our respect and admiration. We have great confidence in their skills and in their abilities. I want to assure 

them that they can now have the confidence in 

 



 

August 2, 1971 

 

256 

 

receiving the fullest co-operation and support of the Government of Saskatchewan in developing a health 

service that will be second to none. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on this Bill and due to the 

lateness of the hour and the fact that the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) has made quite a lengthy 

statement on the Bill, I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:25 o’clock p.m. 

 


