



















































Hansard: March 25, 1971


1238 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Thursday, March 25, 1971 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Grand Champion Bulls at Regina Winter Fair 
 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I am sure it will be of 

interest to all Members of the House to learn that a constituent of mine, Mr. Harvey Wegner, was 

successful in showing the grand champion Hereford bull last night at the Regina Winter Fair. It will be 

of particular interest to the Member for Humboldt (Mr. Breker), whom I see in the galleries this 

afternoon. He thought that his area of the province had a monopoly on grand championships. I was 

going to, on Tuesday morning, stand in my place and announce that another breeder from our area in the 

province, Mr. Calancie — I don‟t know whether you can lay claim to him or I should, Mr. Speaker — 

won the grand championship in the shorthorn show. The Wegners are some of the best breeders of 

Hereford cattle in Western Canada. They not only had the grand champion bull last night at the show, 

they won the best pair of bulls and for the sixth time they showed the best group of five bulls and this 

morning Harvey was able to establish an all-time record for horned bulls by selling his animal to a 

United States firm for $7,500. I am sure all Members will want to join with me in congratulating both 

the Whitesand River Ranch and the Wegners. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — And our friend, Mr. Calancie, I want to remind the Members as to where Mr. Calancie 

and his famous herd of cattle belong; I claim them for the free state of Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Newly Elected President of SUMA 
 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I want through you to bring to 

the attention of Members of this House that a constituent of mine, Mr. Walter Mysak, the mayor of the 

town of Canora, this morning was elected president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Mysak as well was presented an honorary membership in the Association for his 

many years of outstanding work in civic administration. Mr. Mysak‟s long and distinguished record of 

public service in local government and community organizations is well known and recognized. This 

was borne out at the SUMA convention when Mr. Mysak was accorded an acclamation 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1239 

in the president‟s election. 

 

Mr. Mysak has an interesting background. Following his studies in university he worked for many years 

as a civil servant with the Assessment and Land Branches of the Saskatchewan Government. For a 

period he operated a business in the village of Buchanan and during this time he took an active part in 

civic affairs, holding a position on the village council for many years. I believe it was in 1953 when he 

returned to the civil service with the Lands Branch of the Department of Agriculture. It was only a few 

years ago that Mr. Mysak was forced to leave the civil service under the undue pressure of the present 

Government. 

 

While in Canora Mr. Mysak served on the town council for many years — the last six years as mayor of 

the town. Now I am certain that all Hon. Members want to join me in congratulating Mr. Walter Mysak 

on his election and wishing him well in the high and responsible position of president of the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Premier Receives Second Highest Award at Bull Sale 
 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, as a supplementary comment to the 

remarks by the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) I am sure that all Members of this House will be 

glad to hear and interested to know that the Member for Morse (Premier Thatcher) sold the second 

highest bull this morning at the bull sale for $4,400 following that one from Yorkton. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Reserve Grand Champion Bull 
 

Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wish to inform the 

Members that Neil McArthur and son of Watrous won the Reserve Grand Championship with their two 

year old polled Hereford bull, TH Beau Mode Supreme 011A. I should also like to add to the Hon. 

Minister of Education in congratulating the Premier on selling his bull for one of the second highest 

prices paid for a horned Hereford. 

 

I think that all Members of the House will join with me in congratulating these men on their fine 

animals. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to All Winners at Regina Bull Sale 
 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve celebrated St. David‟s Day, St. 

Patrick‟s Day and now we‟re celebrating bull day so I should like to get my little licks in here as well 

and congratulate the different ones throughout the province who have won these meritorious awards but 

I think the recent sale, which is not as yet completed, indicates once again the tremendous advances that 

the livestock breeds have made in our province. The Regina 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1240 

Bull Sale is now recognized as the largest sale of its kind in the world. 

 

I think two things are important in the sale this year: (1) it is the tremendous increase in quality of all the 

exhibits; and (2) the optimism of the people in the cattle industry because they are going out there and 

they are paying these high prices that were announced here this afternoon, not only the high prices but a 

real good average price right across the board, not only in Shorthorns, Aberdeen Angus but Herefords as 

well. More important still I think are the prices that were paid for boars and for sows. This surprised 

everybody and I think it bears out once again the tremendous optimism in the agricultural industry in 

this great province of ours and I congratulate all the exhibitors. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Welcome to Students and Guests 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to introduce to all Hon. Members the following groups of visitors in the 

galleries: from the constituency of Regina South West, represented by Mr. McPherson, 14 members of 

the Girl Guide No. 7 Company from the Athabasca School, under the direction of their troop leader, 

Mrs. Thurman; from the constituency of Elrose, represented by Mr. Leith, six high school students, one 

from each of the high schools in the Elrose constituency, accompanied by their drivers, Mr. and Mrs. 

George Wilkie of Wiseton, Mr. Albert Mewis and Mr. Dave Shaw, both of Forgan; from the 

constituency of Melville, represented by Mr. Kowalchuk, 11 boy scouts from the Third Troop from the 

city of Melville, under the direction of their scout leader, Mr. Alex Yachyshen and their driver, Mr. Earl 

Radcliffe. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members will wish to extend to these visitors in the galleries a very warm welcome 

and to express the very sincere wish that they will find their stay here enjoyable and educational and 

wish to all of them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

SPC Bonding Hog Procedures 
 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to ask a question of the Hon. 

Minister of Industry but he has just stepped out. However, possibly some other Member of the 

Government could answer my question. Is it the policy of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to 

require large hog producers to be bonded at a cost of some $20 or $30 a year in order to ensure payment 

of their power bills? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will relay your question to the Minister. 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Additional House Sittings 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, this is a motion which we seem to come along 

with about this time in each session and I would move, seconded by the Minister of Education (Mr. 

McIsaac): 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1241 

That on Wednesday, March 31, 1971, and on each Wednesday until the end of the Session, Rule 3(3) 

be suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 o‟clock p.m. until 9:30 

o‟clock p.m. 

 

That on Friday, March 26, 1971, and on each Friday until the end of the Session, Rule 3(3) be 

suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 o‟clock p.m. until 9:30 

o‟clock p.m. 

 

Notwithstanding Rule 3(4), on Saturday, March 27, 1971, and on each Saturday until the end of the 

Session, the Assembly shall meet at 10:00 o‟clock a.m. until 5:30 o‟clock p.m.; that there shall be a 

recess of two hours at 12:30 o‟clock p.m.; and that the Order of Business shall be the same as on 

Thursday. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, in moving this motion that after discussing the matter with some of the 

Members, I can give the undertaking of the Government that we shall not be invoking this motion if it 

passes so far as Friday of this week and Saturday of this week is concerned and we are cognizant of the 

fact that some Members, perhaps on both sides of the House, have commitments for next Wednesday, 

March 31st in the evening which we shall try to honor and we shall be having discussions. We want to 

get this motion in but we certainly shall try to take cognizance of any commitments that Members 

already have in some of the hours that are referred to herein. 

 

So with that short explanation, I would move this motion. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, with the assurance given by the 

Attorney General that this will not be invoked this weekend, we find ourselves in reluctant support of 

the motion. We support it because we want, as much as does the Government side, to expedite the work 

of the House. We are reluctant in our support of it because of the fact that basically we feel that this sort 

of conduct of the business of the House is undesirable. We think that preparation time is necessary for 

all Members of the House and a little relief from the pressure of the House is necessary. In addition, 

many Members feel that, on occasion, during the weekend they must go back to report to their 

constituents and otherwise to deal with constituency and perhaps personal matters over the weekend. 

 

We feel that this could have been avoided had the Session been convened when it was, in fact, first 

called. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We acknowledge the fact that there were Federal-Provincial conferences and Winter 

Games which would have required some adjournment but the three or four or five or six days which 

could have, at that time, been spared by most Members a good deal more easily than it can be spared in 

April, would have allowed us to carry on our business in a more orderly way. However, it‟s no use 

crying over that spilt milk. We made our point at the time. Various people saw fit, I thought 

unfortunately, to ascribe to that position of ours a lack of enthusiasm for this or that public venture. It 

was not that at all, it was to avoid the very situation which we are now faced with. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1242 

We do, however, want to expedite the business of the House. I want once again to know that I am clear 

on this: that we shall not sit this Friday; as I understand it, we shall not sit this Saturday. Next 

Wednesday is the Lieutenant-Governor‟s dinner and accommodation will have to be made for that. I 

think all Members would agree with that. The following Wednesday we on this side have some 

commitments and we shall discuss this with the Attorney General and House Leader. And with respect 

to Saturdays I should respectfully suggest that an effort ought to be made to organize the business of the 

House on Friday night and Saturday to meet some conveniences. We admit the problems which the 

Government has in this regard and it must have the carriage of the business of the House because it has 

the basic responsibility to get the business through. But on the other hand it will be acknowledged that 

there will be commitments over weekends which will cause some Members to necessarily absent 

themselves and I know we can look to the Government to attempt to schedule the work of the House so 

that Members will not be deprived of their right to participate. 

 

Then with those comments, Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves in reluctant agreement with the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I would confirm what the Leader of the Opposition said and what I said 

earlier, that we shall not be sitting tomorrow night, being Friday night; we shall not be sitting Saturday 

of this week; we shall not be sitting Wednesday of next week because of the Lieutenant-Governor‟s 

dinner. So far as other dates are concerned, they will be discussed through the usual channels. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. D.G. Steuart 

(Provincial Treasurer) that Bill No. 36 — An Act to assist Athabasca Forest Industries Ltd. in 

establishing a Pulp Mill in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking on this Bill, An Act 

to assist Athabasca Forest Industries Ltd. in establishing a pulp mill in Saskatchewan, I think that it is 

significant that this Government has taken every precaution to be sure that we have a good deal for the 

people of this province. 

 

The Opposition would like it to appear that this is a bad financial deal. It is not. It is a good financial 

deal. The NDP claim it does not mean much as far as employment is concerned for our people. This is a 

most ridiculous claim and they should be ashamed for trying to belittle this aspect. 

 

This Athabasca Forest Industries deal has been examined and dealt with very carefully by our 

negotiating team. They have had the deal with the Prince Albert pulp mill as a guide. The Prince Albert 

mill is proving itself as a successful and profitable operation and a good deal for the people of this 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1243 

province. The terms of the agreements for this project were well laid out and it is therefore an excellent 

guide for the agreements we are now considering. Besides this, in order to be doubly sure that we have a 

good deal, independent information has been obtained and this has been obtained from reputable 

consultants, each one recognized as the best in their field. 

 

The NDP would like to create an image of Parsons and Whittemore and Mr. Landegger as nothing but 

promoters who do not care if the Athabasca venture is a success or not. I say this is a deplorable attitude 

and is done only to disturb our people and create an unjustifiable impression that the agreements are a 

lopsided political deal. 

 

Let‟s get straight on one thing right from the beginning. Parsons and Whittemore are producers. They 

are proven producers with viable pulp mill operations in many countries throughout the world. To claim 

that they do not care if the Athabasca Forest Industries Limited is successful or not is utter nonsense. 

 

These people who are recognized experts in the pulp industry have made a very careful feasibility study 

and back of this study is not only a wealth of knowledge from world-wide pulp operations but also their 

experience in the Prince Albert operation. This feasibility study must therefore be treated with respect. 

This Government has not taken the Parsons and Whittemore study for granted. They engaged an 

independent firm of consultants, Associated International Consultants Incorporated, to examine and 

criticize this study and their report is a very favorable one indeed. Not just on the mechanics of the 

operation to ensure a viable industry in perpetuity but also as far as the financing of the project is 

concerned. 

 

The impression that the Leader of the NDP is trying to make is that Parsons and Whittemore is putting 

up practically nothing and that the Saskatchewan Government is putting up everything is a deliberate 

attempt to mislead our people. Mr. Blakeney claims that Parsons and Whittemore are putting up less 

than $20 million for a 70 per cent equity. Actually they are putting up $31.8 million and their exposure 

is $149.5 million. He tries to confuse the issue by referring to the Government guarantee as if it was 

money actually put into the project by the Government at this stage. No one argues the risk, the risk is 

there only if the venture fails and this venture has been checked out in every manner possible to ensure 

against failure. 

 

Certainly the Prince Albert pulp operation is proof of the confidence that we should have in this project 

as far as risk is concerned. Many other justifiable concerns have been very carefully checked out by 

independent firms. 

 

The water supply has been properly evaluated. We are assured that $10 million will be spent on 

pollution control. This will provide a system that will be one of the best ever known to this industry. 

Management consultants are engaged to advise on a complete new townsite. The estimate of the 

population of this townsite is 4,000 and surely this alone must be recognized as a very practical 

contribution to the economy of our province. 

 

The matter of employment was raised by the Leader of the Opposition and referred to as if it was not 

very significant and he referred to the employment of our native people in the 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1244 

same way. When we speak of the employment of native people, the record of this Government stands 

unique in Canada. We have made a very sincere effort with very practical applications and the result is 

certainly commendable. At the same time we must recognize some of the difficulties. Anyone who has 

had experience employing native people knows full well that in general terms it is a difficult thing to 

have these people remain steadily at any one job. While there are many examples of success in this 

regard there is still the fact that in a great many cases it is not an easy situation. 

 

Let me say this, that we can be sure that as a result of this pulp mill operation, a great many job 

opportunities will be created for our native people as well as for others of our people. I think it should be 

noted, Mr. Speaker, that a training program is already under way right now in the Athabasca mill area 

predominantly for the Indian and Metis people. 

 

I think we should note, when discussing the employment of the native people at the Prince Albert mill 

— and this was raised by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) — that there are a very few 

native people at the Prince Albert mill. I should like to remind this House that the union insists on a 

grade eleven education as a requirement for employment. This is not a Parsons and Whittemore idea, 

this is a union requirement. Certainly it speaks for itself as far as Indian and Metis are concerned. I 

should like to refer to the infrastructure agreement for the Athabasca project, Article 4, page 10, under 

personnel. 

 

Athabasca and Parsons and Whittemore contractors agree to make maximum use of available Indian 

and Metis personnel both in construction and operation phases of the pulp mill. It is the objective of 

the Minister that at least 20 per cent of the personnel providing services to Athabasca and Parsons and 

Whittemore contractors, as the case may be, will be of Indian or Metis extraction and, therefore, the 

Minister shall undertake the training of said personnel for these purposes. 

 

This may be criticized as a matter of intent only but surely no one doubts the sincerity of the intent. 

 

In regard to the employment of this project, I think we should commend both management and labor for 

the agreement that will be in effect on this project. Both labor and management are co-operating to 

co-ordinate and harmonize the activities by the unions and the companies, working together to assure 

that this tremendous undertaking will proceed with a minimum possibility of delay. 

 

The Northern Saskatchewan Allied Council, which is composed of international building and 

construction trade unions, is working on a project-type collective agreement with Parsons and 

Whittemore. This project agreement is intended to prevent work stoppages due to jurisdictional disputes, 

strikes or lockouts. A full-time council representative will be appointed by the council to represent all 

employees and to assist in carrying out the terms and conditions of the agreement. 

 

The council representative will work with the company labor relations officer on the project to abate any 

problems right on the site. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1245 

I think it is very regrettable, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition, while speaking in this 

debate, objected to people from Quebec working in this province and quite clearly he indicated that he 

didn‟t think they belonged here. Let me remind him that these people are Canadians and they are 

Canadians every bit as much as he is and have as much right to come to this province as he had when he 

came. I am sure that they will contribute as much in their way as he ever will in his. I should like to say 

this — they are here as producers in our society and not as parasites. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my forebears came to Quebec from France in 1685 and the family has been in Canada ever 

since. And while I was born in Saskatchewan I should hate to think that anyone in this House would 

ever rise again and take the attitude that this province is not open to all Canadians, especially when he 

himself has had the privilege of this very opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — The Leader of the Opposition refers to the fact that no competitive bids were asked 

on this project. Certainly other companies, and particularly Canadian companies, were asked for 

proposals but, Mr. Speaker, on projects of this magnitude it is standard practice to have the project 

handled on a turnkey basis. This has already been done in this province on such projects as the Potash 

Company of America, Allan Potash Company, Duval Mine, International Minerals and Chemicals and 

Kalium. It is also likely to be the method adopted for the Gulf Minerals project at Rabbit lake. There is 

certainly nothing wrong or unusual about this manner or procedure on a project of this magnitude. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition, being a relative newcomer to Saskatchewan, is probably not aware of 

the policy adopted by his own Party when they were the government. But let me remind him of the 

University Hospital in Saskatoon. This building was built on a fixed fee basis by Smith Brothers and 

Wilson at the request of the CCF Government of that time. 

 

Certainly I am not indicating that anything was wrong with this procedure at that time, neither is it 

today. But I do say it points to the very deliberate misleading statements by the Opposition. 

 

I should like to refer to the Reforestation Program which will assure that we shall have with this 

industry, an industry in perpetuity. I think it is important that we realize that this project is not like a 

mine which usually has a span of existence that is related to a specific deposit. 

 

First of all stumpage is paid to the Government at the rate of 75 cents per cord for softwood and 35 cents 

per cord for hardwood. There is a charge of 20 cents per cord on softwood for reforestation. This pulp 

mill will process both hardwood and softwood. And because of this, the clear-cut method will be used. 

Many people, when they first see a clear-cut area, are alarmed at what they see and are prone to jump to 

the conclusion that vast wastelands are being created. This is another impression that the Leader of the 

Opposition has tried to create and also the Deputy Leader (Mr. Romanow). I say this is purely a display 

of ignorance. They simply don‟t know what they are 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1246 

talking about. We can cite as an example the Province of Newfoundland where the 1905 clear-cut is now 

excellent forest and habitat for wildlife. But far better, let us take the examples in our own province. The 

Member from Kelsey (Mr. Messer) referred to the devastation caused by the logging operations of the 

old Le Pas Lumber Company. His claim is clearly nonsense. When we look now at the areas they logged 

off in the era of 1904 and the succeeding years, there we have some of the most beautiful forests in our 

province today. 

 

I refer here to the Prince Albert National Park. My goodness, if you have ever gone through that park, 

you can see what a beautiful forest country it is. To the Emma Lake area, the Christopher Lake area, the 

Candle Lake area and similar areas, I say that clear-cutting when properly allowed to rotate is definitely 

not a devastation. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — They didn‟t clear-cut! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What do you know about it? 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — You clear-cut this guy from Kelsey who made the statement. I am telling you where 

these people logged and where he claimed there was devastation of our forests and it is absolute 

nonsense. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Prince Albert Company never . . . 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Then shove this down the throat of the Member who sits next to your seat, the 

Member for Kelsey, he is the one who made the statement in this House. I should like to correct that 

statement because these are simply the most beautiful forests that we have today, where these people 

had their logging permits. You had better write his speeches for him so he knows what he is talking 

about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are four plans in particular that are being considered in this province at this 

time and will be considered for the Athabasca project and each one of these methods has merit. Besides 

our own Department of Natural Resources foresters, a team from Ottawa from the Federal Government 

Forestry Service are researching the merits on the site and they have a lab on the site. They have it right 

in the present cutting area. The Canadian Forestry Association is interested in what we are doing and 

also the Forestry Research of British Columbia. There are many others and they have offered every 

assistance and they are conversant with what we are dong and they recommend what we are doing as 

being the very best that could possibly be done. 

 

Of the four methods, two that are looked at with the most favor at this time are the transplanting and the 

scarification methods. The techniques involved will assure the rotation of a pulpwood crop every 60 

years. 

 

The scarification is a very simple but very effective method where they use a heavy four-wheeled 

vehicle which drags heavy anchor chains with welded spigots over the cutoff area. This serves to scrape 

down through the moss and it allows the seeds to germinate in the soil rather than in the moss and 

thereby get the full benefit of the necessary nurture and moisture of 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1247 

the soil. This method has been concentrated on the jackpine cutover areas and the results of this method 

so far have been very highly satisfactory. 

 

So, too, with the planting method from nursery stock. So far about 790,000 trees have been planted but 

this method is now going to be accelerated and in the coming season a minimum of 800,000 trees will be 

planted. For anyone to declare that we are ravaging our forests is simply complete and utter nonsense. 

 

The new second growth will produce beautiful forests and because of the program here in Saskatchewan 

we shall have forest and wildlife habitat in perpetuity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — There are more deer and moose in North America today than when the first settlers 

arrived and the reason is the harvesting of mature timber stands and the creation of young forests with 

abundant food and cover for big game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a resource unused is a resource that is lost and such waste should not be tolerated when it 

can be prevented. 

 

I think that here, besides the greatest industrial complex ever to come to this province, we shall have not 

only new jobs for our people, we shall have it with clean environment, new forests, greater wildlife 

habitat — a whole new era for our North country. And believe me, Mr. Speaker, I am all for it and I am 

certainly going to vote in favor of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald), who had 

adjourned the debate prior to today, began his talk last Monday, he noted the complexity of the financial 

arrangements and then announced his intention to clear up the confusion. I felt that by the time he had 

finished that he had somewhat over-complimented himself in his opening statement. What he did do, it 

seems to me, was to succeed in demonstrating that there are still some aspects of the financial 

arrangement about which the Government itself is confused. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I am happy to be able to announce to the Legislature, Mr. Speaker, that it is neither my 

intention nor my responsibility in this debate to attempt further clarification of the financial terms and I 

say this, I may say, with heartfelt thanks. I do want to note that my colleague, the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) will take a later opportunity to explain again the financial implications of 

this proposal for Saskatchewan. When he does so, he will do so against the background of experience 

and of competent knowledge about corporate law and corporation structure . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . about economics and about public finance and I 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1248 

commend those later remarks to the attention of the Government. 

 

But there is more, Mr. Speaker, to this Bill than the financing details and the public risks. There is more 

even to this Bill than the way in which the Government is playing poker and shooting craps with 

Saskatchewan‟s resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — There is more to this Bill than the way it is mortgaging some of Saskatchewan‟s future to 

buy chips to stay in the game. I suggest in support of these comments that the Government‟s own 

statements made earlier in this debate admit that it is taking part in that kind of a game. The name of the 

game is then in fact identified; the fact of the risk being taken has been admitted; there is some haggling 

to be done about the possible total price but unfortunately only in later years will all of the facts be 

known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill must be looked at against the total spectrum of current Canadian and 

Saskatchewan problems. These problems include some serious and some hurting unemployment in 

Canada and in Saskatchewan, they include the development of resources to improve quality and quantity 

of Canadian life. 

 

The list of problems includes more than just more employment, it includes, equally important, how we 

provide that additional employment. The list includes more than just more development, equally 

important is the question of how we create that development. And the list includes consideration of the 

possibility of transferring the support proposed for the pulp mill to other segments of the economy and 

consequently creating other kinds of employment as an alternative to the whole effort as proposed by 

this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the stresses and strains of today‟s society require and demand a reappraisal 

of our goals and our methods, a reappraisal of our means and ends of development. This may indeed be 

an agonizing reappraisal but I submit there is a growing demand by Canadians of all political parties that 

governments and politicians take the lead in such a reappraisal; that governments and politicians at least 

do better than we have to document the need for such reappraisal. 

 

Politics has been called by some as the “art of the possible” and by some it is considered “the art of 

attempting to avoid the inevitable”. I suggest that the greatest threat to democracy lies in that limited and 

limiting definition. Politics and government have much wider application and implication than just that. 

 

There is a prime need for governments and politicians today to broaden and make more comprehensive 

the facts we use with which to make decisions. There is a prime need to broaden and make more 

comprehensive the effects we consider when making these decisions. There is a prime need to devise 

new agencies and new organizations and new models for action. This need is particularly pressing in 

respect of resource development from one end of Canada to the other. It is particularly pressing here in 

our Province of Saskatchewan. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1249 

This Bill, I submit, ignores the facts of the 1970s. It ignores the need for some agonizing reappraisal of 

ends and means of development. I say that because the Bill makes a recommendation on a decision 

which is based exclusively on facts which are non-comprehensive. It makes a recommendation based, 

too, exclusively on short-sighted consideration of the effects of the Bill. It relies on yesterday‟s agencies 

and organizations and models of action. It is true, as has been argued, that it will affect many people. It 

is precisely for that reason, the extent of effect on people and kind of effect, that it is inadequate; it is 

precisely for that reason of great and broad effect that we have taken the position that we have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And I submit that the Government which sits to your right, Sir, is unwilling, if not unable 

because of its philosophy, to look at all the facts and weigh all the effects for the future. It is precisely 

for that reason that this Government does not have the confidence of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — There are several specific areas in which Canadians are demanding this reappraisal, this 

agonizing reappraisal — if you like — by governments and politicians. Let me suggest three of those 

areas which are pertinent to our discussion here: 

 

First, the management of our total environment — productive, civilizing, people-satisfying use of our 

resources, if you like, frequently condensed into just “pollution control” or “pollution prevention”. 

 

Secondly, they are demanding reappraisal of what I want to call the „growth gospel‟, the assumption that 

growth for growth‟s sake is automatically good — regardless! They are demanding reappraisal of the 

idea that just because something is technologically possible, it must be done and should be done. They 

are demanding reappraisal of the idea of holding out the Gross National Product as a kind of Holy Grail 

for society which must be pursued with complete dedication and devotion and all our resources. 

 

Thirdly, people of Canada are demanding a reappraisal with respect to the ownership of our resources, 

with respect to the incentives which ownership gives, or does not give, to reasoned resource 

exploitation. They are demanding reappraisal of the flow of benefits from resource exploitation. They 

are demanding reappraisal because they are worried about the political control, or loss of it, which 

frequently follows ownership. 

 

I submit that more and more Canadians, united in larger and larger groups, are saying with louder and 

louder voices; “for the sake of Canadian people today and tomorrow, reappraise the ends and means of 

environmental management, of economic growth and of ownership of resources”. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — This Bill, I submit, Sir, ignores that growing Canadian plea. This Legislature has a 

responsibility to listen 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1250 

and if the Government fails to listen to growing Canadian and Saskatchewan voices, then we must vote 

against it. The position we take on this Bill and the direction that we must go was indicated some years 

ago in a statement by the last President Kennedy. I quote that statement and ask the House to listen and 

to heed it. President Kennedy wrote: 

 

Each generation must deal anew with the raiders, with the scramble to use public resources for private 

property, and with the tendency to prefer short-run profits to long-term necessities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — That call goes out to this generation. That call goes to this Legislature. That call 

implicitly and emphatically refers to this Bill. That call recommends the defeat of this Bill and the 

replacement of the Government that proposes it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The position of the party on this side, Mr. Speaker, is that public good has priority over 

personal profit; that long-term necessities have priority over short-term groping for growth; that there 

are alternative methods which will provide employment and protect environment. To achieve these, to 

appraise how we preserve benefits and extend opportunities for people, we need new agencies for 

development, we need new models for organization and we need most of all new leadership from 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I think it is instructive to note that the reasons given by the Government for support of 

this Bill are very similar to the reasons given for supporting the Federal Government‟s Task Force on 

Agriculture. These reasons, as Members of this House will know, have been rejected as invalid by a 

great majority of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In supporting that claim I draw attention to the comments of the Federal Minister of Agriculture, the 

Hon. Mr. Bud Olson, when he was addressing some closing remarks to the Second Canadian 

Agricultural Conference meeting in Ottawa in November of last year. Mr. Olson had been listening to 

the dialogue that went on in that conference and he stated his opinion as to the main point emerging 

from that dialogue and discussion about the Task Force. He said to this effect, “that the Task Force had 

given insufficient attention to the social dimensions of development and overstressed purely economic 

considerations.” So, too, I submit is the case of this proposal. The Task Force on Agriculture and this 

Bill must be resisted for many of the same reasons. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Let me turn then to some more specific comments with respect to the problems posed for 

environmental management if the Government proceeds on the course proposed by this Bill. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1251 

The information tabled by the Government, the information used by Government speakers in this debate, 

has been the balance sheet of accountants and economists. The balance sheet of accountants and 

economists. Now those sheets are necessary admittedly, but, Mr. Speaker, in the same breath those 

balance sheets are not enough on which to make a judgment of this kind. 

 

Canadian people and Saskatchewan people are asking for consideration of a more comprehensive, more 

accurate balance sheet, a balance sheet — if you like — which is more people-based and more 

people-biased. Lacking in the information tabled in this House, lacking in the arguments used by those 

on the Government side are what might be called “the balance sheet of the social accountant.” 

 

It is true that some jobs will be added, that some dollar values will be increased, that some short-term 

returns will be provided. All those are true but even with regard to these, I think we need to look at some 

recent experience because we recall the statements made by the Government when they were first 

talking about a pulp mill near Prince Albert, we recall the euphoria — if you will — produced by the 

sniffing of the first pulp mill and the extended exaggerated comments made at that time with regard to 

what we might look for in employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, take those promises by the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and others, 

as to the number of jobs that would be provided. You can comb the bushes or you can count all the 

heads in the pulp mill and we get nothing that comes close to the promises made at that particular time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I submit that since this is documented by recent history, we need to look at their 

promises with respect to employment in this Bill having in mind the discount to be used based on that 

history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — On this second trip from the euphoria of a second pulp mill, the dream is described as 

being sweeter and deeper but we have reason for doubts. 

 

While it is true that some of these can be demonstrated as improvements, if you will, we don‟t know the 

other side of the balance sheets. We don‟t know jobs lost. We don‟t know about total costs including 

public and long-term costs. We don‟t know and nothing is said about the total effect on people. We 

don‟t know about the possible disruption and destruction of environment. We don‟t know about the 

erosion of other and future developmental opportunities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — These have neither been listed nor totalled. May I make again the emphatic point that the 

balance sheet of accountants and economists is not enough. That‟s not good enough evidence on which 

to support a large commitment of public money, tens of millions of dollars worth; on which to support 

an even 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1252 

larger commitment of public resources, thousands of acres of forests; on which to commit a larger and 

longer commitment of future living conditions. 

 

Let me look, Mr. Speaker, at five facts which are not on the balance sheet of the accountants and the 

economists submitted by the Government. 

 

First of all there is the fact of the pulp mill industry which, in part by its very nature, is recognized as 

one of the most destructive spoilers of our environment. That is a Canadian fact and that is more than a 

Canadian fact. The experience in this respect of other Canadian pulp ventures is not included in the 

balance sheets submitted by the Government. That experience, if it were included would be a negative 

factor, a minus factor, on the social and public and long-term balance sheet. 

 

Secondly, there is the fact that most Canadian pulp ventures have access for effluent disposal to bodies 

of water which are larger or faster moving or less cold than that which we are considering here. That, 

too, would be a negative or a minus factor which is not included in the balance sheet but which should 

be on our social balance sheet. 

 

Third, there is the fact that none of the other Canadian ventures intrude the effluent into a water or an 

area so largely unspoiled, so largely unpolluted as will be the case of this pulp mill in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — We deal here with the great expanse of the relatively clean and pure Churchill River and 

the area surrounding it. The fact that this is not included is another negative factor on the social 

accountants balance sheet. 

 

Fourth, there is the fact of Saskatchewan experience with the Prince Albert pulp mill. Pollution facts 

there, pollution potential there, are not yet known and not yet all evaluated. Enough is known, I submit, 

if we want to admit the truth to frighten us. We know that the situation is worse, much worse, than has 

been admitted up to this time. One year ago in this House the Government was maintaining that there 

was no cause for concern in this respect. “God‟s in His Heaven and all‟s right with the world” was their 

attitude, particularly with respect to the Prince Albert pulp mill and the Saskatchewan River system. 

Now, one year later, the Government denies its own words then, by its own actions proposed now. Now, 

one year later it has become necessary to add expensive equipment to purify water which according to 

advertising that went all across the continent a few weeks ago, was already purer than when it went into 

the mill at Prince Albert. This, Mr. Speaker, experience within one year shows the uncertainty of 

Government standards with respect to pollution prevention. It shows the inadequacy of its 

measurements. It shows the unreliability of its intent. All of this is proven by the Government‟s own 

words and action within a period of less than one year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I said in this House last year and I said 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1253 

in this House the year before and I say now: we don‟t know what is actually happening to the 

Saskatchewan River system because of the pulp mill effluent being put into it. We don‟t really know the 

effect of what is happening to environment and other productive possibilities for people. I am glad that 

the Government is more concerned now than it was one year ago. I am not convinced that it is as yet 

anything like concerned enough with finding the evidence or acting on it. 

 

That fact is another factor, negative and missing from the balance sheet proposed as supporting another 

mill on a much less contaminated Saskatchewan water. 

 

Fifth, there is the most important, most monumental minus factor on the social accountant‟s balance 

sheet. That is the lack of information about pollution potential of the proposed mill or about steps to 

prevent pollution. The Government has talked in wide, general, sweeping terms about “X” millions of 

dollars to be spent. But let‟s read, as has been recommended to us, the comments of the consulting firm 

employed by the Government. As you will recall this is a consulting firm which in the words of the 

Premier, “was the best in the world.” 

 

I submit that if the Government reads what is in the report of that consulting firm it can get from it 

neither confidence nor comfort with respect to pollution prevention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The report frequently uses the equivocating language which consulting firms too 

frequently use. The report raises questions between the lines and indeed in the lines about pollution 

control. The report refers to the feasibility study of Parsons and Whittemore, a study which is not 

available to those of us in the Legislature. The report makes no mention of having referred the 

possibility of environmental effect to competent, disinterested scientists. It examines, in other words, 

only through the eyes of one more group of accountants. But the discipline and the essential point of 

view of the informed, concerned scientist and the conservationist is lacking. There is no perspective 

such as would come from the balance sheet of the social accountant. 

 

In support of those words, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the House to note some 10 direct quotations from 

the report of the Associated Consultants International which the Government had tabled in this House. I 

ask the Government to be warned and to be guided by what seems to be the real meaning of the report 

which the Government itself commissioned. 

 

The Consultants say, and I quote: 

 

1. It is unfortunate that information on water flow is so sketchy and actually non-existent at the 

probable mill site. 

 

Now that is hardly a reassuring comment! “Information on water flow is so sketchy and actually 

non-existent at the probable mill site.” 

 

2. There appears to be adequate quantities of water for operation of the proposed mill. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1254 

Not there is, but there “appears to be adequate quantities of water”. Surely this suggests a lack of 

investigative confirmation of opinion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — 3. The consultants comment on Parsons and Whittemore feasibility study, a study not 

tabled here, and they note some of their findings in regard to chemical properties of the water. They add 

a footnote saying this: 

 

Omitted are single readings for iron and manganese. Both of these are so far from the average that 

they are questionable. In fact it is not unreasonable that they are typographical errors. 

 

I ask you, reading that, how much confidence can we have in the accuracy of the Parsons and 

Whittemore report when the consultants say, “The error is of such a magnitude that it must be 

questionable, maybe they were typographical errors.” 

 

The consultants say and I quote: 

 

Analyses indicated that the water will require substantial chemical treatment. 

 

More chemical treatment, more pollution potential. All of these are admittedly comments on water 

adequacy for use in production, but they have meaning for pollution prevention as well. 

 

Note again, in those that I have already read, the questioning comment, “Information sketchy and even 

non-existent.” Note the equivocating statement — “There appears to be enough water,” and not that 

there is enough water. Note the direct reference, “Questionable information in the Parsons and 

Whittemore study,” of such magnitude that it must be assumed that it is a typographical error. This in a 

document about tens of millions of dollars and forever for environment. 

 

Note the specific mention of more chemical additions. I submit that all of these, and I have only read 

four out of the ten, all of these shout, “Whoa, back up and look again. The next step is irreversible.” 

 

To continue with quotations from the Associated Consultants International Report: 

 

5. The effluent treatment system proposed is the one most commonly used in North America. 

 

Good enough, I ask the Government? I ask the Government, where in North America have they found a 

system which is really satisfactory according to the opinions of detached and qualified observers 

thoroughly conversant and convinced about the need for better man-nature balance? Perhaps the 

Government does know of some system that I haven‟t heard of. 

 

I quote further: 

 

6. The details of the system must be worked out and specified. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1255 

This refers to the details of the system for pollution control. In other words, not yet worked out, not yet 

specified. In other words, we don‟t really know what it is proposed that the company will install. The 

proposals are incomplete, not fully bought out. The information is not comprehensive. 

 

More quotes from the Associated Consultants International Report: 

 

7. Releasing the treated effluent into Durocher Lake is an interesting proposal which should receive 

consideration. 

 

In other words the plan is not yet finalized. Some alternatives should receive consideration. I submit that 

reading that, the warning lights should flash again. We are asked to buy a pig in the poke as far as 

pollution control is concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The consultants say that, if they didn‟t study this why in the world did the International 

Consultants make a report on it and why did the Government table it in this House. They have said to us 

that this consulting committee is the best in the world. I am reading back to them now statements from 

the “best consultants in the world”. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, the best consultants in the world say, and I quote: 

 

8. The volume of mill effluent would be a very substantial portion of the flow in the Beaver River 

during low flows in winter and dilution would be minimal. 

 

In other words, with spring thaw, there would be an accumulated mass of undiluted effluent into the 

beautiful Beaver River as the result. 

 

This one I think is particularly important to look at and I quote: 

 

9. There should be no serious effect on the fish in the lake. 

 

Note the wording, no “serious effect”. I ask the Government this question: how much is serious? One 

year ago the Government said the same thing about effects after discharge from the Prince Albert pulp 

mill. A few months ago, Parsons and Whittemore, in full page advertisements displayed across this 

continent, were saying the same thing. Now they are going to add new treatment and that is to be 

welcomed. But how much is serious, I ask the Government? When should we find out whether it is 

going to be serious or not? 

 

A few years ago the Hon. Jack Davis was making a speech as Federal Minister of Fisheries. He was 

talking about pollution and he talked very well about pollution in many cases. He quoted or made this 

statement, “Fish are our first line of defence.” About that time we had the catastrophe of Placentia 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1256 

Bay in Newfoundland with tremendous loss of employment and other benefits. Since that time we have 

had the catastrophe of pollution in the Saskatchewan River because of mercury with tremendous loss of 

employment and revenue and destruction of future possibilities. “There should be no serious effect on 

the fish as a result of what is proposed to do,” say the world-wide famous consultants. 

 

The question is: how much is serious? Fish have been the first line of defence. May I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that too many fish have died in vain. The policy of this Government, the policy should be, “get 

facts first and fish later.” Instead of that this Government is proposing that we act on guess and wait 

until the fish are lying belly up on the banks of the Beaver River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Item 10, quoted from the consultants, the best consultants in the world: 

 

Durocher Lake has been described to the writer as being highly colored. 

 

Note that: “has been described”. Described by whom? By the same people who made a report about 

some chemical properties of water that the writer of the report was forced to assume it must have been 

so badly in error that it was a typographical error? I submit that it again shows a lack of independent 

investigative observation, the indication again of too sketchy information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you take those 10 points, I submit that this consultant‟s report, the report of the best 

consultants in the world, says the Premier, raises questions about pollution control, notes errors in the 

Parsons and Whittemore feasibility study, points out the incompleteness of that study. The report of the 

consultants chosen by the Government provides not enough confidence and not enough comfort about 

protection of environment to proceed with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the final analysis, of course, problems of environmental control go wider and deeper 

than the problems created by any one enterprise. Many of our existing values are being challenged and 

are being shaken by information we now have. The signs of, “Stop, Look and Listen” are flashing with 

demanding urgency on every front. 

 

I think I read last year in one debate in this House some quotations from Look Magazine, January 13, 

1970. I want to reread them. I reread them because they dramatically express what we have done 

because of our way of doing things and what we should do. This, they comment, as to what we have 

done: 

 

The West has told its sons, “take from this earth as you wish, the more the better, consume what you 

wish, the more the better. Build what you wish and where you wish, the more the better. Dominate as 

many markets and as many people as you wish, the more the better. Make as much profit as you wish, 

the more the better.” 

 

That is what we have done. The article goes on to suggest this we must do: 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1257 

The living planet answers: “Please stop. Turn around. You can‟t keep on doing these things. Just for 

you and your children to survive, you‟ll have to stop grabbing at every natural resource; they are 

running out. You can no longer build, dominate and profit without considering the true, long-term 

consequences of your acts.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — It is, Mr. Speaker, consideration of the true, long-term consequences that we ask in 

respect to this project. 

 

The second way in which I suggested Saskatchewan and Canadian people were urging reappraisal, and 

the second request which is being made but being ignored by this Government has to do with making the 

Gross National Product into a kind of Holy Grail. 

 

John Kenneth Galbraith who was once United States Ambassador to India, a leading academic in the 

United States and advisor to President Kennedy, a former Canadian, was recently interviewed by the 

London Observer. I read one of his comments as appeared in that magazine on November 22, 1970. I 

read it because it provides a direct relationship between discussions of civilized development of our 

environment and this pursuit of the Gross National Product as a Holy Grail. Here are Dr. Galbraith‟s 

words: 

 

The editors of the Economist and the Wall Street Journal, the archbishops of our economic faith, still 

hold that St. Peter asks applicants only what they‟ve done to increase the Gross National Product. But 

the consequences are no longer theoretical. We can now see what a single-minded preoccupation with 

growth does to the environment. Expanding consumption isn‟t the guarantee of utter happiness that 

my friendly critics once held it to be. 

 

Later on Galbraith adds: 

 

The goal in this world is not consumption but the use and enjoyment of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that to be realistic in the 1970s and to be fair to the 1980s and the 1990s, we more 

and more have to challenge the idea of growth of the Gross National Product as an acceptable Holy 

Grail for our society. We have to challenge more and more the idea of growth for growth‟s sake 

regardless of other consequences. 

 

In particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to argue we have to challenge the extent to which we give public 

resources away to private enterprise and bonus them out of public funds for the taking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — In this, there is in this society of ours too much savage competition between provinces. 

In this province it has used public resources as an ante and it used tax bonuses and other public services 

as chips to stay in the game. I want to refer to an article in the magazine, Saturday Night. This is 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1258 

in the issue of October 19, 1969. The article is written by an Industrial Commissioner of one Canadian 

city. The article quotes an editorial from the magazine, Trade and Commerce, a Canadian publication. 

Here is the quotation from the Trade and Commerce magazine: 

 

Our Canadian industrialist never had it so good. He‟s been given more keys than a burglar could 

purloin in a lifetime. Provincial governments and cities are shelling out millions to woo and win him. 

With inducements and incentives pouring in from every part of the country, he figures that sooner or 

later he will be tempted by the big prize: an outright gift of plant, building and equipment and a firm 

guarantee of profits. 

 

I am emphasizing again, those aren‟t my words, Mr. Speaker, those are the words from Trade and 

Commerce magazine which is not really a journal of Socialist thought. 

 

And Saturday Night adds its own question or commentary. It says, “Preposterous? Not a bit.” It goes on 

to give examples from the pages of the Financial Post based on actual Canadian experiences of this 

poker game with resources from which private enterprise takes the rake-off. Now admittedly Parsons 

and Whittemore probably didn‟t get the entire big prize at Prince Albert but they did well enough. Now 

the Government proposes to renew the game using as ante and chips the forests and environment in 

another area of the province. The dangers of misuse of public capital and resources without 

commensurate returns of employment and public benefit should be obvious. That danger is so great, I 

submit, in this proposal, Mr. Speaker, as to demand the defeat of this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — So great is that danger as to demand the defeat of this Bill if not by this Legislature then 

by the people of Saskatchewan at the ballot box when they get a chance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The third area in which I‟ve said Saskatchewan people and Canadian people are asking 

for a reappraisal by governments and politicians has to do with the ownership of our resources. This is a 

key Canadian question to be faced today. One key Canadian question is: “Can we afford to own our own 

country?” Put it in another way if you will: “Are we willing to continue turning over increasing 

ownership to outside corporations, losing in each case some economic and political benefit and control? 

But the even more pertinent question: “Do we have to do this in order to get development of our 

resources?” Our answer to those pressing Canadian key questions very obviously differs from the 

answer given by our colleagues on the Government side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether this Government admits it or not, there is widespread concern with respect to the 

extent of non-Canadian ownership of Canadian resources. This concern is expressed with varying 

degrees of urgency by some people within every political party. That doesn‟t exclude the Liberal Party. 

That concern is not confined, as Saskatchewan Liberals would have us 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1259 

believe, to Walter Gordon in the Liberals or the Waffle group in the New Democratic Party. Let me note 

the concern as expressed by other people in other groups. 

 

Hon. Members will have heard of the Committee for an Independent Canada, which is very active in 

expressing this concern. It is made up of well-known Canadians drawn from every political party living 

in various geographical areas and employed in various occupations in Canada. 

 

Secondly, let me use the name of one whom I think my friends opposite will be acquainted with. The 

name is that of Mr. Mel Hurtig, an Edmonton book publisher. He is a well-known Liberal; he is or was, I 

believe, chairman of the Liberal Party Committee on Resource Development. I heard Mr. Hurtig 

commenting in a CBC commentary a few weeks ago. He was quoting a book called “Silent Surrender” 

by Dr. Kari Levitt. This is a book which insists we are in grave danger because of the extent of 

non-Canadian ownership. This is a book which insists that we, the Canadian people and our Canadian 

governments, can do something about it. Mr. Hurtig, this leading Liberal, recommends this book to 

Canadian people and he commented to the effect that if Canadians were familiar with the contents and 

the facts of that book, there would be a social and economic revolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Thirdly, let me indicate that concern from an even less political source. I read a 

paragraph from the Hall-Dennis Report, the Ontario Royal Commission on Education, non-political, 

non-partisan. You may recall that the chairman of this Report was the very well regarded Justice Hall, 

for many years a citizen of Saskatchewan. Here is the comment which this report on education made: 

 

There are significant number of Canadians who are disturbed about the way in which the country is 

maturing. One matter about which they are disturbed is the economic and cultural dependence on 

foreign countries, particularly the United States, that present Canadian circumstances reflect. They 

document the extent to which Canada has surrendered independence. They recognize that the „one 

world‟ concept demands some surrender of national sovereignty. At the same time, however, they 

believe that the nation which cannot control its economic resources cannot control its economic 

destiny or its culture and that of all the economically advanced nations, Canada is the one with the 

largest proportion of its industry and resources controlled from outside its borders. 

 

That‟s from the Hall-Dennis Report. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Government to recognize the legitimacy of this concern of many, a 

growing number of Canadians, and to give it the importance it deserves. This Government, taking the 

position that there‟s nothing wrong that more unrestricted foreign investment won‟t cure; this 

Government in its willingness to subsidize such investment to the limit, goes against much of the best 

political and economic thinking in Canada today. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1260 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — There is a growing amount of such thinking being endorsed by people in all political 

parties, including the Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — If this Government refuses to discuss the problem in rational terms, then this 

Government indicates a lack of concern for Canadian identity and Canadian independence; it indicates a 

lack of understanding of how the needs of the individual Canadians and of the Canadian nation will be 

met. It indicates an unwillingness to take the Canadian initiative which we must take if Canadians 

indeed are to be masters of our own destiny and fully respected in the world family of nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party believes that there are resources of the Canadian spirit; there are 

resources of the Canadian pride; there are resources of the Canadian wealth; there are resources of the 

Canadian hope, which we can draw on if we will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The way, however, of making use of these resources is blocked by the attitude of the 

Government which runs this province. 

 

Admittedly, Mr. Speaker, the problem of capital purposefully to develop resources isn‟t going to be 

solved completely by any one government of any one province. But I add this, that the problem of 

capital to develop resources never will be solved by a government which subscribes to the philosophy of 

the Government that sits opposite. Reliable economists now state without hesitation, and they document 

the evidence, that it is simply not true that Canada is short of capital. Let me refer again to the book, 

“Silent Surrender,” which your colleague, Mr. Hurtig, recommended for all of you to read: 

 

Over the period 1957 to 1964, United States direct investment in manufacturing, mining and 

petroleum secured 73 per cent of their funds from retained earnings and depreciation reserves, a 

further 12 per cent from Canadian banks and other intermediaries and only 15 per cent in the form of 

new funds from the United States. Furthermore, throughout the period, payout of dividends, interest, 

royalties and management fees exceeded the inflow of new capital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what that comment says is, Canada was an exporter of capital, not an importer. It says also 

that Canadians are increasingly being bought out using our own money with which to do the purchasing. 

This Bill which we are asked to approve would facilitate and accelerate the selling out of our resources 

and the exporting of Canadian capital. That comment which I just read says that much of the expansion 

and the control of Canadian resources by non-Canadian corporations has been financed by profits from 

the sale of Canadian resources, on goods produced by Canadian labor. It says that the lion‟s share of 

recent new investment of these companies has come from the reinvestment of profits made in Canada 

from Canadian resources 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1261 

processed by Canadian workers, from depreciation and depletion allowances on Canadian industry and 

from borrowings from Canadian financial institutions. 

 

I submit that to deny that such facts exist, to close our eyes to the effects of them, is to neglect the job of 

defining Canada‟s future and developing our capacity to build it. That doesn‟t say, Mr. Speaker, that 

there haven‟t been immediate economic benefits in the past which have come to us because of foreign 

investment. But Canada today has financial, technical and management competence which Canada 

didn‟t always have. I read again from the book, “Silent Surrender,” recommended to my colleagues 

opposite by the Chairman of the Liberal Committee on Resource Development: 

 

American investment has accelerated the pace of economic development in Canada but it seems likely 

to convert Canada into a hinterland of United States industry. To each spurt of expansion there is a 

corresponding shrinkage in Canada‟s own freedom of action, in its self-reliance, and in its ability to 

chart its own course for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge this Government to admit the problem, to discuss it rationally, at least slow down its 

part in being a part of the problem if it isn‟t willing to be a part of the solution. This Bill would add to 

the problem of building Canada according to our own made-in-Canada specifications. 

 

Let me recall again some of those words from the Ontario Royal Commission report on education: 

 

The nation which cannot control its economic resources cannot control its national destiny or its 

culture, and that of all the economically advanced nations, Canada is the one with the largest 

proportion of its industry and resources controlled from outside its borders. 

 

I come now to a few comments in conclusion. I have discussed only three aspects of the problems posed 

by this Bill. 1. The management, the responsible management of our total environment. I can find 

neither comfort nor confidence in the measures proposed to protect our environment. 2. I have discussed 

where we go, where we end up if we continue to set the Gross National Product as our Holy Grail. That 

voyage, I submit, leads to disaster. 3. I have discussed further alienation of natural resources to 

non-Canadian corporate ownership. The continuation of that Canadian pattern more and more takes the 

handles of decision-making about Canada out of the hands of the Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before we can properly judge this kind of development we need not just the balance sheets 

of accountants, we need a total balance sheet. We need a balance sheet including all public costs. We 

need a balance sheet including all social and political costs. We need a balance sheet including all 

environmental costs. We need a long-term balance sheet, not a short-term one. We need a balance sheet 

which reports to the people of Saskatchewan as the owners of our natural resources; a balance sheet 

which reports to the people of Saskatchewan as the responsible directors of the development of our 

natural resources; a balance sheet which reports to the people of Saskatchewan as the major finances and 

risk takers of this particular project. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1262 

Above all, I ask this Government and this Legislature to listen again to the statement of the late 

President Kennedy: 

 

Each generation must deal anew with the raiders, with the scramble to use public resources for private 

profit, and with the tendency to prefer short-run profits to long-term necessities. 

 

This Bill does not deal with the scramble to use public resources for private profit. This Bill accelerates 

rather than controls the tendency to prefer short-term profits to long-term necessities. Accordingly, in 

my opinion, it does not merit public support and accordingly, I will vote against it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.E. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite never cease to amaze me 

with their flip-flopping. It was a wonderful thing when they were getting a pulp mill some years ago . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — When did they get one? 

 

Mr. Coupland: — They never got one . . . but very bad when the Government has one and is getting the 

second one. They are for the people, if it suits their political purposes, but when we bring in programs 

that help many, many people, they oppose it. It is all very well for the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) to 

say we should tighten our belts. That may be fine for the people in the South who have jobs but, Mr. 

Speaker, we in the Northwest have been doing that for a long time. Maybe now, Mr. Speaker, we shall 

get on the balance sheet that the Member for Biggar talks about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) has said he will oppose this Bill and all his 

Members seem to be in agreement. I can see this from some of the Opposition Members from the 

southern part of the province where they feel it will not affect them politically, but, Mr. Speaker, it will 

shock me if the Member from Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) or the Member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk), 

or the Member from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman), and especially the Member from The Battlefords (Mr. 

Kramer), stand up and vote against this Bill. I‟m sure the Chamber of Commerce from North Battleford 

won‟t think too kindly of it. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, by voting against this Bill, in plain English they are saying to the people of 

Northwest Saskatchewan which they are a part of, we don‟t care if you starve to death, we don‟t care if 

you have job opportunities in the northwest so that people can earn a decent wage to feed and educate 

their children, build better homes and, yes, help some of them get off welfare. Mr. Speaker, they are 

saying to the people of Beauval, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, LaLoche, and all those settlements in 

that area, we don‟t care if you don‟t get better roads, better telecommunications, TV and jobs. This is 

what you are saying if you don‟t want development in the northwest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is saying we did not make a good deal financially. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the Opposition are all good at confusing the issue with figures. He 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1263 

tried that with the Prince Albert pulp mill but it turned out to be a tremendous success so now they are 

zeroing in on the Meadow Lake pulp mill. This is nothing but politics at the expense of the people who 

need the work. Mr. Speaker, this is the greatest thing that has happened in Northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — You know, Mr. Speaker, from 1944 to 1964 we stagnated in the northwest part of the 

province under the Socialists. We couldn‟t get roads, we couldn‟t get tourists, we just couldn‟t get 

anything. In fact, Mr. Speaker, a group of far-sighted businessmen of the Meadow Lake area convinced 

the Government in 1958-1959, with a lot of their own money, that a road to Uranium City was feasible. 

But where did the CCF and the Conservative governments of that time start the road? Over on the east 

side of the province. This is the kind of thing that we have been continually getting. I think the Member 

from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) was a Minister at the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite are always condemning clear-cutting of our forest. There is nothing 

wrong with clear-cutting as they well know. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of clear-cutting going 

on in the Meadow Lake area when the Member from The Battlefords was a Minister. It‟s beyond me, 

Mr. Speaker, why he condemns it now. Sweden and Norway have been clear-cutting their forests for 

over 50 years and they find it improves the forest and has increased wildlife by 60 per cent, according to 

a noted ecologist. They also condemn our Government for fighting fires, Mr. Speaker. I wonder what 

they would say if we, as a Government, let the North burn whether it be rock, tundra or whatever. It 

would be a desolate looking place and would destroy the cover for birds and wild animals. Mr. Speaker, 

the Pulp Mill Company will contribute large sums for fire protection and roads that will be constructed 

into the forest will help considerably in keeping fires under control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this development will mean an economic contribution to the province of some $46 million 

yearly, most of which will be spent in the Meadow Lake area and how the Opposition can deny us this is 

incomprehensible. We have heard the figures before but just to refresh your memory, this $46 million 

breaks down as follows: payroll — $15 million yearly; payments to contractors and suppliers — $22 

million; payment for chemicals — $4 million yearly. These are produced in Saskatchewan. Payment to 

Saskatchewan Power for natural gas — $2 million; payment to the Government of Saskatchewan for 

taxes and stumpage, etc. — $1.5 million per year; repairs and services — $1.5 million per year. 

 

On pollution, Mr. Speaker, and some of my colleagues have gone over this fairly thoroughly, the 

Company has promised to spend $10 million on pollution control to make it odor-free and control of 

water effluent will ensure no deleterious effect on fish or negative impact on the environment. All 

Provincial and Federal regulations respecting pollution will be strictly adhered to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our tourist industry will improve. As I have said in a former debate, a Liberal Government 

has provided dust-free roads into the Meadow Lake area which they never had under 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1264 

the Socialists. With this great expansion up there every tourist resort will flourish and have to expand to 

accommodate the increased tourist trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Members opposite are really concerned about unemployment in Saskatchewan, if 

they are really concerned about people and people having a chance to improve their standard of living, 

they will not oppose and hold up this Bill but vote for it and let the Government get on with providing 

jobs for the people in my area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Bill and hope we can get on with the job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few remarks with regard to what the last 

speaker for the Government has said, with regard to the statement that from 1944 to 1964 they were not 

able to get any roads into the northwest part of the province. I wonder how long the Member for 

Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) has lived in that part of the province. I can recall going to Buffalo 

Narrows in 1948 when the only way you could go was in the winter time on an ice road. It was simply 

the only way you could go and the roads into Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval and any other 

place that you want to name, were built in the years before 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — He mentioned the road that was suggested to go to Uranium City from Meadow 

Lake and he said that they put that road on the east side of the province. I suggest to the Hon. Member 

that that road did begin proceeding from LaRonge from the central part of the province and as a result is 

not as yet built today. It will, in fact, go up through the Wollaston Lake area. 

 

In regard to clear-cutting of forests, he indicated that there was clear-cutting going on in the forest areas 

over in the Meadow Lake area while my hon. colleague was then the Minister of Natural Resources, and 

I defy the Member or any Member on that side of the House to show us or give evidence to this House 

that there were any clear-cutting practices from 1944 to 1964. 

 

The Member from Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) also referred to some forest 

practices. He referred to the utilization of the old Prince Albert Lumber Company and to the devastation 

and the depletion of forests under that particular company. He indicated, of course, that this forest had 

all recovered since that time and in fact criticized the Member from Kelsey (Mr. Messer) for not 

bringing this to light. I want to say to the Member from Saskatoon City Park-University that perhaps he 

has forgotten or perhaps he never knew that the Royal Commission report on Forestry Resources of this 

province which was made by a Liberal Government, did in fact say that we were over-utilizing our white 

spruce stands in the province. This is certainly evidence that is clear, it is on the records yet, if the Hon. 

Member wants to review the record. I suggest to the Hon. Member that had there not been 20 years of 

CCF government in this province we, in fact, should not have a white 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1265 

spruce stand in this province to utilize today. If he wants to check the records he can certainly do so. 

 

Mr. Charlebois also referred to the fact that projects of this magnitude do not necessarily need to be 

tendered for. I should like to suggest to the Hon. Member that the whole South Saskatchewan River dam 

project was tendered in all its details. All its details were tendered and I wonder how the Member so 

conveniently . . . 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — So what . . . 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — It sounds as if I finally got through to the junior Member from Saskatoon City 

Park-University. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to touch briefly on only one or two subjects with regard to this Bill. They have to do 

with the potential employment of this project and the way the people are receiving the news of a pulp 

mill in the communities of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves in a debate that involves the usual haste which results in considerable 

waste of resources which has become the traditional trademark of Liberal legislation. This Bill will 

require the people of Saskatchewan to back an expenditure exceeding the total cost of the South 

Saskatchewan River dam project of the sixties. Now I ask the Members of this House to reflect on the 

time that it took, on the research which was necessary and was required and the preparation that was 

made by two governments, by the Federal Government and the Provincial Government, before we could 

undertake a project in which we had 100 per cent ownership and the benefits which accrue to all the 

people of this province as does the South Saskatchewan River dam project. Let‟s not forget, Mr. 

Speaker, that it wasn‟t the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan and Ottawa that built that South 

Saskatchewan River dam project but it was a Conservative Government and a CCF Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — A project, I suggest, Sir, that will far exceed in every conceivable way benefits, if 

any, that will accrue from a pulp mill industry either in Prince Albert or in the northwest part of this 

province. Yet today, after two weeks or less, we are debating the principle of a Bill calling for an 

expenditure over $170 million without the benefit of even the principal feasibility study. 

 

Yes, the report of the Associated Consultants International has been tabled and it‟s a grand total of 38 

single pages, a dozen or so of which have been taken up by the usual covering letter, title page, table of 

contents, and the usual preamble to what is not the feasibility study per se but rather a review of the 

feasibility study. Mr. Speaker, I ask the question, why don‟t we have the benefit of the original study 

that was done? Why haven‟t we some confirmation of timber utilization methods that will be undertaken 

and some confirmation of the timber inventories that have been done by the Department of Natural 

Resources? Why haven‟t we our own expert analysis that will assure us and the people of this province 

that all is as the 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1266 

promoters have said it is to be? I say again, as I have said before this year, that the Stanford Report does 

not substantiate this extensive a project for Northwest Saskatchewan, nor has this House, either through 

the Department of Natural Resources or by the principal feasibility report, been given any evidence to 

support the position that our forests are not, in fact, in jeopardy from over-utilization. 

 

I say that on the basis of every report that has been supplied to us by the Department of Natural 

Resources to date, which were given on the basis of a request to know what updating had been done of 

the inventory from the Stanford Report, suggests that there is a danger of overharvesting the forests of 

Saskatchewan at the proposed rate. To debate the principle of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is 

necessary to call upon the experiences of the pulp mill industry that we now have in operation. I say, 

let‟s look at the Government‟s performance and its prophecies about that mill in its pre-development 

stages. I think we shall find the pronouncements are strikingly interesting and when we find, I say, the 

results of the Athabasca Forest Industries are to be similar to the Prince Albert Pulp Company, then the 

principle of this Bill I suggest is wrong and I call upon this House to defeat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — In dealing with employment I want to quote the Hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher) from 

different sources to show that his own mind is confused and that he is misleading the people of the 

province by the different statements which he makes. In the December, 1965 issue which my colleague 

quoted from in this debate earlier in “Saskatchewan Today”, the Premier said and I quote: “The 

development will mean employment for 5,000 people.” In August, 1968 he had dropped that figure by a 

staggering amount of 1,000 jobs. In the Saskatoon Star Phoenix headline, August 31, 1968 he is quoted 

as saying: “Full pulp mill production to involve jobs for 4,000.” Now before the mill had even 

commenced operation we had lost 1,000 jobs. From the time the pulp mill was announced in 1965 to 

when the mill was started in October, 1968, as I have said, the Premier was down over 1,000 jobs. Now 

that the mill has been operating almost three years and has increased its original capacity from 650 tons 

per day to almost 1,000 tons per day, how do the Premier‟s employment estimates stand up? 

 

Remember that in 1965 during the excitement of the announcement of the Prince Albert pulp mill he 

announced 5,000 jobs. In 1968, closer to the completion of the mill but before operating commenced, he 

announced 4,000 jobs. In 1971, Mr. Speaker, after the mill had been operating for nearly three years, we 

now realize that there are only 420 persons in the mill, that there are only an estimated 210 persons in 

the woods operations and perhaps there are another 100 persons in ancillary services for a total of 730 

jobs in the mill at Prince Albert. If the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has any different figures than 

these I hope he will give them to the House. 

 

That‟s not 5,000 jobs, that‟s not 4,000 jobs, nor is it 2,000 but in reality it is only 730 employees or 

thereabouts. This figure on full employment of between 700 to 800 jobs is more in keeping with other 

mills of similar status in other provinces where at $80 million is estimated to employ 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1267 

approximately 700 persons. The Premier in this debate last Monday evening gave a figure of 5,000 jobs 

in the Churchill Forest Industries complex. What do the Associated Consultants say in their review of 

the feasibility study? Under a sub-heading entitled “Labor” they say and I quote: 

 

Plans are to use a single production line at Athabasca, as at Prince Albert, but with larger equipment. 

This means that the number of employees in the two mills will be nearly the same. 

 

From the consultants‟ review of the operation of Athabasca Forest Industries, employment will not be 

significantly increased over Prince Albert Pulp Company although we are increasing the capitalization 

by nearly $110 million on this new mill. I say again, when the working results of Athabasca Forest 

Industries are going to be similar to the Prince Albert mill, then the principle of this Bill is wrong and I 

suggest that we should defeat it. 

 

The Premier knows he is misleading Saskatchewan people when he uses the figure of 5,000 jobs and he 

is therefore perpetrating an untruth on the people of Saskatchewan in hopes that he can pump this mill 

into an election issue. Using the Premier‟s stock phrase let me refer to his pious platitudes about 

Northern residents and Indian and Metis people whom he says are going to be largely the major 

beneficiaries of this industry. I quote the Premier from the Saskatoon Star Phoenix of August 31, 1968: 

 

Our Indian and Metis people will be among those receiving the greatest benefits because a vast area of 

employment in the woods area will provide them with an opportunity to obtain steady well-paying 

jobs and the type of work they prefer. 

 

That was back in 1968. 

 

Let me quote the Provincial Treasurer from the Prince Albert Daily Herald, January 21, 1966: 

 

Speaking of some of the economic benefits the city and the area will derive from the mill the Minister 

said that a great number of Indian and Metis people in Northern Saskatchewan live on welfare today. 

This will change, Mr. Steuart said, as 3,000 persons will be employed in bush cutting operations and a 

great number of them will be Indian and Metis. This will give us a real opportunity to do something 

with and for these people, Mr. Steuart stated. 

 

This, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, was back in 1966. It has a familiar ring indeed to what we are hearing in 

this House today. But what is the story in the Prince Albert operation today? 

 

From my contact with Northern people, I am informed that from Waskesiu to Lac La Ronge there are 

from 35 to 50 local Indian and Metis people employed in the Prince Albert Pulp Company bush 

operations and that the total employment for Indian and Metis people in the pulp mill operation is 

approximately 67 persons. This is an area where there are equally as many resident Indian people as 

there are in the northwest area. I speak of the reservations of Round Plain, Sturgeon Lake, Little Red 

River, south end Montreal Lake, Lac La Ronge and the Metis 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1268 

settlement of Molanosa. I could go into John and James Smith Reserve, into the Misstowasis and 

Muskeg Reserves if you would care to do that. But I say again, that there are plenty of people there who 

need work. The information which I have suggests to me that the total employment of Indian and Metis 

people in the pulp mill operation is about 67 people and in the woods operation from Waskesiu to Lac 

La Ronge, between 35 and 50 Indian and Metis people. Now the junior Member from Saskatoon City 

Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) said that this was the problem that was created by labor. Yet he went 

on to say that over in the new area where the new mill will be built, here labor and management, and he 

commends them for doing so, are getting together in order to work out a mutual solution regarding this 

problem. I say if they are prepared to do that in the northwest area, how come they are not prepared to 

do it in the Prince Albert mill? 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — You sure misinterpreted what I said . . . 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Isn‟t that what you said? 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — You didn‟t listen to what I said at all! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — All the Members who heard the Hon. Premier, the Provincial Treasurer and the 

Minister of Welfare in this debate know how much they have dragged the people of Northwest 

Saskatchewan around through the public eye by continually referring to the people of the Meadow Lake 

area as being 90 per cent on social welfare and that they have been on welfare almost all of their life. 

 

Then they say that this pulp industry is somehow going to lift them from the morass of their social 

disparity. This is, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, an indignity on the intelligence of Northern people as it is on 

this Legislature. Native and Northern people are already saying to the Government and to Saskatchewan 

people, that while a pulp mill may provide a few people with jobs, their greatest fear is that the rest of 

their people will have neither fish, nor fur, nor forest, nor jobs and if it must be an either/or proposition 

as this Bill seems to indicate that it will be, then my information is that they are prepared to keep the 

fish, the forests, the wildlife and await their involvement in a program for Northern resources 

development that will, in fact, be in their best interests and security. 

 

If the Government Members have any doubt about the position of Northern people, may I quote to them 

the resolution representing over 1,800 commercial fishermen who are the residents of Northern 

Saskatchewan. They are the Indian and Metis people of Northern Saskatchewan of which this 

Government so frequently and disparagingly speaks. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . throw them in jail! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Listen Davey! This resolution — and I hope the Member from Athabasca (Mr. 

Guy) is listening — this resolution was presented to the Co-operative Fisheries Annual Meeting of 1971. 

You will recall that don‟t you, Mr. Minister? Resolution No. 17 was submitted by the Lac La Ronge 

Fishermen‟s Co-op, the key community in the Athabasca constituency. I quote: 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1269 

In view of the following facts: (a) a new sawmill at Big River to provide jobs and utilize timber from 

Doré and Meadow Lake area; (b) the possible lowering of water in Doré Lake and area for use in a 

pulp mill; (c) the possibility of polluting the complete Beaver River, Paturnak, Pine House and 

Churchill River systems; 

 

Be it resolved the Government do not build the proposed pulp mill in the Meadow Lake and Doré 

Lake area. 

 

We haven‟t heard any Members of the Government, we never even heard the Member from Athabasca 

(Mr. Guy) mention that there were 1,800 fishermen who stood solidly behind that resolution. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, let me tell the House that this resolution passed unanimously after the Hon. 

Member from Athabasca, the Minister of Municipal Affairs, took the unprecedented liberty as an invited 

guest to the annual meeting to plow through the resolutions of that annual meeting and to speak 

officially to that resolution before the resolutions came before that meeting. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I did not! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I am told that the Minister spoke with great persuasion that the meeting should vote 

down the resolution. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Tell the truth! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — That‟s the Member from Athabasca, that‟s the Member who represents the people 

in the northern part of the Province. Did they vote the resolution down? No, they passed the resolution 

unanimously. They don‟t want a pulp mill in Northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Bowerman was out in the back room talking . . . 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — That‟s all right! Bowerman has been out in the back room before talking with 

people from Athabasca constituency. He knows what the people from Athabasca constituency want, Mr. 

Member from Athabasca. 

 

May I additionally quote, Mr. Speaker, from a personal letter addressed to myself from a native lad in 

Northern Saskatchewan. I take full responsibility for its accuracy as I prefer not to table the letter in this 

House. I quote: 

 

Just a short note to let you know I am fine and also to wish you and yours the best. Also to voice my 

opinion on the announcement of the new pulp mill today. 

 

Don‟t forget, just one day after the announcement, after the Premier made it, he writes a letter: 

 

Just recently I visited the village of Buffalo Narrows and I was approached on the matter and some 

people are deeply concerned on the possibility of it being the start of polluting the upper part of the 

Churchill River system and are not really too enthusiastic about taking Ross‟s word that it won‟t. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1270 

It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier and his Government are not fooling the people of the 

province or the native people in Northern Saskatchewan any longer. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who signed the letter? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Someday perhaps I‟ll tell you, Mr. Provincial Treasurer. 

 

We have heard the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) as well as the Premier and the Provincial 

Treasurer extol on the great volumes of business and population that will burgeon forth from the 

development of a pulp mill industry. I recall the Minister of Welfare especially, the other day in this 

debate, waxing so eloquent and asking us to imagine the large quantities of garages and schools, 

hospitals and businesses and other ancillary services that would come as a result of the pulp mill being 

established in Northwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Let‟s see how similar this talk which we hear today is like it was back in 1966. I quote the headline from 

the Prince Albert Daily Herald, January 21, 1966: “Pulp Mill Here Should Result in Unprecedented 

Development.” The editor‟s note will be of interest to this House, Mr. Speaker, and may I quote it in 

part: 

 

Today‟s article includes forecasts of future developments as a result of the mill by Hon. D.G. Steuart, 

Prince Albert MLA, Minister of Health and Deputy Premier. 

 

The article goes on under subheading, “Population Growth”. I should like to read for the benefit and 

information of Members to your right, Mr. Speaker, what the Provincial Treasurer and his Government 

expected the Prince Albert pulp mill to do for this community of Prince Albert and our province. I 

quote: 

 

Regarding the population of the city, Mr. Steuart, who has served as both an alderman and mayor of 

Prince Albert, said that at present the population increases from 400 to 600 a year. This will pick up in 

1966 and roll into 1967, he said. The expansion rate will double and triple until a population of 40,000 

is reached, after which the expansion rate would level off at a steady increase. 

 

The Cabinet Minister stated that this large increase in population which will be assisted by the $6 

million hospital complex, will result in a large number of new and smaller industries coming into the 

city to provide a side variety of services for Prince Albert. As well, other manufacturing firms 

connected with the forest industry are showing interest in the area, Mr. Steuart said, which will not 

only benefit Prince Albert but will result in more employment throughout the area. 

 

That is back in 1966. That was the exuberance of the Provincial Treasurer and his Government in 1966. 

Now, after five years of this staggering growth in the city of Prince Albert and the unprecedented 

development of industries in or near the city of Prince Albert, perhaps we should stop a moment and 

look at the statistics of today. 

 

If we take the population of the city of Prince Albert in 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1271 

1964 — we could have taken in from 1968 but if we had those figures they would look worse than they 

do now — but in Prince Albert, 1964, the population was 22,359. In 1971, 40,000? No, there were 

28,000, a total increase in seven years of 5,450 persons. Hardly keeping ahead of the birth rate. Let‟s 

look at Swift Current, away down in the southwest corner of the province. There, there is no pulp mill. 

No. Farmers in the southwest part of this province — half the population of the city of Prince Albert. In 

1964 (Swift Current) 12,750 population; in 1971, 15,250 or a total of 3,500 of an increase. Where‟s the 

percentage? Let‟s look at Yorkton. Yorkton, less than half the size of the city of Prince Albert, 10,756 in 

1964. In 1971 14,200 or an increase of 3,444. This will show, Mr. Speaker, that other small cities of 

Saskatchewan without a pulp mill have had similar growth statistics as the city of Prince Albert with its 

$65 million pulp mill development. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . for mayor! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — That‟s right! It may be! You missed hearing your own quotation. On the basis of 

the information from the Provincial Treasurer, the former mayor and councillor of the city of Prince 

Albert, the normal growth rate for the city of Prince Albert would have been 3,500 in that period of time. 

This means that an increase of only 2,000 may have been in part the result of the pulp mill development 

in Prince Albert in seven years or 300 a year; not even keeping up with the average increase. 

 

Of course the former mayor and council member for Prince Albert, the present Provincial Treasurer, 

grossly missed the estimated population growth — remember that 40,000 was going to roll in 1967. 

40,000 were going to roll in! He missed that 40,000 figure by a staggering 12,000 persons. This really 

sounds like the Premier‟s estimate of 80,000 jobs in 1964. 

 

We have heard it said that since the pulp mill development in Prince Albert the city is now among the 

highest average per capita income cities in Saskatchewan. Very good. Perhaps we should review the 

welfare statistics because you talk a lot about welfare, a lot about what it does. Let‟s talk about the 

welfare statistics in the city of Prince Albert which indeed presents a different picture. I hope the former 

council member and mayor of the city of Prince Albert will listen to these figures. In February, 1967 

before the mill was completed and before it was under way, the total welfare recipients in respect of 

whom welfare cheques were issued totalled 2,443. In February, 1971, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, the total 

welfare recipients in respect of whom cheques were issued is 3,022. That is an additional 579 persons on 

welfare in 1971 than there were in 1967. You spent $65 million nearly. This accounts for approximately 

30 per cent of the population gain, approximately 30 per cent of the population gain in Prince Albert in 

the last seven years who have gone on welfare. 

 

To look at the welfare statistics another way for Prince Albert, in February, 1967, Mr. Speaker, there 

were 968 family heads receiving welfare cheques. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — One head per family! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — In February, 1971 there were a total of 1,148 family heads receiving welfare 

cheques. This accounts for a total gain 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1272 

of 180 more families on welfare in 1971 than were on welfare in 1967 when the pulp mill was just 

beginning. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Think how bad it would be if we didn‟t have the pulp mill! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I can‟t imagine! The only reason that the Provincial Treasurer wouldn‟t be on 

welfare is because he is in Regina and because he is not in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Same reason you are, Ted. We‟re living off the Government down here! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — These are the statistics from the city that has been endowed with Liberal industrial 

development. 

 

Perhaps we should now look at what the Provincial Treasurer termed unprecedented development. All 

right, let‟s look at it! In the city of Prince Albert the Registrar, Mr. Joe Ward, has advised me that under 

the business licensing bylaw in Prince Albert, there has been no significant increase in business licenses 

since the development of the pulp mill in 1968. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — . . . increases! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Again, Mr. Member for Regina South or wherever it is you come from, under the 

general licensing bylaw the Registrar, Mr. Ward, advises for contractors, for truckers, for garages or 

service stations since the development of the mill in 1968. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Where was he when he gave you those figures, Ted, down in the Army and Navy? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Well, he was in his office. Because the Provincial Treasurer indicated that business 

would spread out, you know, it would spread out into the surrounding areas, in the municipalities, I 

chose to contact the Rural Municipalities of Prince Albert and Buckland regarding the increases in 

business assessment tax since 1968. In the Rural Municipality of Prince Albert the business assessments 

from 1968 to 1970 have increased a staggering, or meagre, depending on which side of the House you 

sit on, $13,280. $13,280! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — How about some 1965s? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Listen to this one — in the Rural Municipality of Buckland the business 

assessments from 1968 to 1970 have increased approximately $3,000. Tremendous! Unprecedented 

development. This is what the Provincial Treasurer calls unprecedented development in a city the 

population of which was to roll forth into 1967 at 40,000 as a result of the mill development in that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province find little comfort in the announcement of Athabasca Forest 

Industries pulp 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1273 

mill in Northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — After reviewing the practical results of the mill already established, the evidence 

clearly indicates that Athabasca Forest Industries will indeed be similar to the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

Therefore, it is not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people for us to now approve this Bill. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, may I suggest that the cutting lease of this new industry will include the 

headwaters of the Churchill River system. We have, in the Churchill River system, one of the few 

unpolluted river systems on this continent and perhaps in the world. It is unique and its great potential 

has not been adequately considered. That great and mighty river is composed largely of a chain of 

beautiful lakes linked by short stretches of river and islands of calm. This area could be developed into 

one of the greatest summer playgrounds of the world . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — . . . if only half of the money was spent on it that is now being planned to be spent 

on a pulp mill. The Churchill River system is Saskatchewan‟s waterway to the Hudson Bay, as well as it 

is through the Fond Du Lac and Athabasca Rivers to the Arctic Ocean. This majestic beauty and 

bountiful natural resource, I say, must never become the garbage pit of an industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, before we so hastily proceed on an industrial course that could 

liberally destroy our Northern heritage for generations to come, I suggest that we establish a Northern 

Development Authority to plan for the long-term development of the whole northern region of our 

province including the sustained yield industries of forests, fisheries and wildlife. It would be an 

authority to set standards for town and city development resulting from industries, an authority that 

would encourage and plan development of tourist business, plan road development, docking facilities, 

restoration of historic sites, fur trade routes, power portages and canoe routes. 

 

I say with proper planning and development over the long period, such a program will far exceed in 

financial and other real values the benefits, if any, that might accrue from a single industry approach and 

we shall still have, Mr. Speaker, our renewable resources to utilize in the best interests of the people of 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to urge again the fact that the Athabasca Forest Industries major operation will 

centre at the headwaters of the Churchill River system. The denuding or clear-cutting of forest cover 

from these lands will seriously jeopardize, I suggest, water tables in the future. Evidence from the 

clear-cutting of the St. John, New Brunswick watershed has clearly demonstrated what can happen and 

that, I say, is ample grounds to project that the Churchill River may one day 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1274 

become a minor polluted water tributary should we proceed with this pulp development. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I most sincerely and urgently appeal to all Members that we now opposed this 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to enter this debate pretty 

well along the topic of environmental effects of the proposed pulp mill. I was really quite happy to hear 

all these figures and statistics on Prince Albert. I don‟t know what they meant but they sounded quite 

impressive. They proved really nothing at all when the Member who just took his seat said that the 

population hadn‟t risen very much. He didn‟t have any way of telling us what the population would have 

been had there been no mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — It‟s just the sort of statistics that are meaningless. They have nothing to do with the 

basic issue before us. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Better than Davey‟s figures! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Yes, I suppose it really proves that the former mayor of Prince Albert couldn‟t add 

very well and he ended up with 40,000 when he might have done something else but some of the 

Members, I understand, who had been candidates for mayor didn‟t even get to the point where they were 

allowed to add up balance sheets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — So that‟s the way it goes. I really don‟t want to say very much more about Prince 

Albert. As usual I enjoyed the remarks of the Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd). He added a 

philosophical note and if you wish to grant the thesis which he was putting forward — he made a very 

good presentation of his point of view. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — I, of course, question very much whether you can apply the thesis that the Member 

from Biggar was using in terms of the economy or the society as we know it in Saskatchewan. He‟s 

talking about the management of the total environment and the total environment in Saskatchewan 

certainly includes the northwest part of this province and I think that when we put forward the industrial 

development in the northwest part of this province, we are looking at the total environment. We are 

attempting to improve the lot of people who are living in that area and we are doing more than looking 

at the Gross National Product. 

 

I quite agree that we have to, in some parts of this country and in some parts of the world, take a really 

good look at what the Member called the “growth gospel” — that we must grow and 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1275 

grow and grow. While growth in some areas is good, growth by itself is not necessarily good and I think 

we have to make distinctions. We are looking for a broadened base for the growth of Saskatchewan, and 

we can supply that base through developments such as the one we are proposing here. It does not mean 

that the same type of development would necessarily be good in other parts of Canada and I think that 

we can‟t be led down the garden path by anybody telling us that we have reached our potential and 

should not proceed beyond that in the growth of Saskatchewan. 

 

The ownership of resources is an interesting thesis. The pulp mill, he would say, is a good thing if it is 

owned by the people and it is a bad thing if it‟s owned by a private corporation. I think we are judging 

the pulp mill here. How can the Member say that the pulp mill is good if it‟s owned by one outfit and 

bad it it‟s owned by another? This just doesn‟t . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — No, he never said . . . 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Yes, yes, this is the implication of an argument on public ownership and there was a 

strong — I read, and perhaps I am wrong but I read between the lines — that if you follow this argument 

through that the ownership of the pulp mill is an absolute way of judging whether it‟s good or bad and I 

don‟t believe that this is sound argument. 

 

The Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) was speaking of this whole matter of the pulp mill as being 

under-researched and referred to the documents which were filed as — I think he called them — an 

accountant‟s and economist‟s set of tables, a balance sheet. I am sorry that the Member really didn‟t take 

the time to peruse all that 10 pounds of documents if he really felt that this has been under-researched. 

He consistently referred to a report by Associated Consultants International and he spent a good deal of 

time in his speech in taking 10 points from that report. Now, I really don‟t think that the Member 

realized that this is only one of the reports dealing with environment and rather a minor report. 

Associated Consultants International were employed really to raise the questions and the very types of 

questions that you say they have not answered. They were saying in their report that there are other 

questions that have to be answered and when you read the Associated Consultants International report 

and then turn over to the VanLuven report, which without the maps is about 54 pages long. Have you 

seen the VanLuven study? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, but not 54 pages of it! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — I say with maps. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The maps were not tabled. 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Is that right? There‟s a set of diagrams in Dr. VanLuven‟s report. I‟m sure the 

diagrams are available to you. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, not the copies you . . . 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — No, if we‟re going to be specific the report itself is 41 pages without attached diagrams 

and I am sure that you 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1276 

couldn‟t read the full diagrams any better than I and that‟s why I detached them from my copy. 

 

But, what I‟m saying is that this, Member from Biggar, is a more definitive study, a much more 

definitive study of the pollution problem, the effluent problem and the requirements for effluent 

treatment at the Athabasca Forest Industries Limited. There are many questions still left in this report 

and there are questions that are being answered today. This is an unknown area and we are not rushing 

into this area without studying the water-flow. There are people presently in the area studying the 

water-flow on the Beaver River at a different point from which the report quotes statistics, for instance. 

At one stage of the game there was no point in taking repeated findings but now there obviously is a 

need for more information and the VanLuven report certainly points that out. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And the master was tabled with it too . . . 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Yes, I think the master was tabled. I went into the Clerk‟s office to look at what was 

tabled and certainly they can see these technical documents. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Okay. I‟ll come to that. 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — The one thing that I wanted to keep away from in the remarks that I am going to make 

and I thought the Members have kept fairly well away from it, although they hinged on it too much 

perhaps, and that is nitpicking in the line of pollution. For instance, we had a little bit of talk about the 

mercury pollution in the Saskatchewan River. Well, you know, the only reason that we know there is 

mercury pollution is that about three or four years ago, or less than that, somebody started to measure it 

in fish but the fish of the Saskatchewan River have likely been carrying mercury for many, many, many 

years. It‟s just never been measured. 

 

Back in 1954 the dissolved oxygen in the Saskatchewan River for a period of time was down to zero as 

it came into Saskatchewan. There was a heavy ice cover at the time, probably, but during the winter 

months this has happened quite frequently. It just hasn‟t been measured very often and we haven‟t really 

worried about it. But when you get a dissolved oxygen content of zero, this theoretically means there 

can‟t be any fish life. But I don‟t think we should be talking about this type of thing because for every 

argument that you can put forward, you can present new knowledge that makes it rather invalid. And the 

type of thing that I am talking about, and I don‟t want to get into, is the nonsense we‟ve had with 

phosphates where it was suggested that phosphates in detergents be replaced by a substance which is 

likely to cause infinitely more damage to the environment. This is the sort of thing that we‟ve got to be 

careful about and I hope we don‟t fiddle around with details of how this much oxygen content or that 

much oxygen content can be good, bad, or indifferent. 

 

The questions of environmental control really have loomed much larger in the public mind in the last 

few years than they ever have before. All Hon. Members are aware of the real flood of literature that has 

come out and the number of programs that 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1277 

are available on television and radio on the subject. By and large, I am very pleased that this glare of 

publicity has been turned on the necessity for us taking a good look at the level of husbandry that we are 

showing in preserving our natural resources. For too long, we, of the industrially-developed world have 

behaved as if there was no limit to the air, to the water, to the hydrocarbons and to the minerals at our 

disposal. When the Bill comes before the House setting up a Clean Environment Authority, which is the 

type of thing I think the Member from Biggar would agree must be done, it‟s another move along the 

way of establishing authority for control. When that Bill comes up I want to talk a little bit more in 

general terms about the profligate habits of our industrial nations. 

 

The Bill that is now before us is to establish an industrial plant to harvest the forest resources, and I 

underline that, that we are going to harvest the forest resources which have long lain dormant in the 

northwest portion of the province. To me there is no question that this harvest should take place. For 

untold ages before the settlement of this part of the world, nature took care of the harvesting by igniting 

the forest and by extinguishing the fires by natural means. I suppose it could be contended that we have 

upset the balance of nature by our fire prevention programs. At any rate, the results of forestry studies do 

indicate that we can harvest trees in perpetuity if we pay attention to the basic concepts of good 

housekeeping. 

 

Being satisfied that the harvesting of trees for pulpwood is justified in terms of the ecology, one must 

then turn to an examination of the effect on the environment of the processing of the resultant pulpwood. 

Here there really is a great temptation to launch into a pseudo-scientific discussion of methods of 

effluent control. The consultants‟ reports which were tabled in this House could make a very happy 

hunting ground for speechmaking. I hope that I don‟t fall into this trap. 

 

A perusal of these reports makes it obvious that there are differences in professional opinions as to the 

details of the treatment methods. Here is where all the self-styled experts can get into the act with tales 

of horror and predictions of doom, or if their views are different, they can get in with joyful 

proclamations that all is right with the world. 

 

Such discussions usually succeed only in beclouding the situation and the fact is that the Athabasca 

Forest Industries Limited must and will be held responsible for meeting the standards laid down in the 

terms of the license grated by the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission and by our forestry 

officials. I repeat, they must and they will be held responsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — A further safeguard will be the standards established by the Federal environmental 

authorities. 

 

Now, going back to the infrastructure agreement on Article 2, subsection (2) — Athabasca shall 

incorporate at the pulp mill water supply primary and secondary effluent treatment facilities in 

compliance with existing laws and regulations. In the event that new laws or new regulations require 

higher standards, Athabasca shall alter, modify, add to, or replace such facilities to such an extent as 

proven technology is available in order to comply with such higher standards. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1278 

That is a guarantee that is written into this agreement, that is a guarantee that will require policing and 

adds a guarantee that this Government is prepared to back with Athabasca. 

 

Members opposite would like to throw — this sounded funny when I wrote it — red herrings into the 

fishing grounds in Saskatchewan by making some sweeping statements about the effect of uncontrolled 

effluent. So far we haven‟t had that from Members opposite. I think that no Member of this House 

should vote in favor of this Bill if he thinks there will not be adequate control. It is the duty of all of us 

as the elected Members of this House, as the elected trustees of the heritage of this Province, to satisfy 

ourselves on this score. It is not our duty, nor should it be our function, to determine the means. The end 

result must be the concern of all of us. 

 

What this Bill proposes is the controlled harvesting of a vast forest without serious impairment of its 

functions as a recreational area and as a wildlife habitat. It is not our function as Legislators, nor is it 

within our competence, to pass judgment on the detailed procedures required to produce this result. It is 

our duty to make certain that the result is satisfactory both to this generation and to the succeeding 

generations. 

 

Public interest is not served by speculation as to what might happen if this action is taken or that action 

is not taken. The debate on the environmental implications of this Bill should centre on whether the 

regulations of the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission and our forestry management officials 

are adequate. Attempts to play on the fears of people by dragging in half-truths and personal opinions 

are nothing but attempts to confuse the issue. If any Member has any information that the regulations 

under which this proposed mill will be required to operate do not offer sufficient protection to the 

environment, let him give the details immediately. Let us not degrade this debate by dragging in side 

issues and half-digested technical arguments. 

 

We, on this side of the House, take our responsibility for the entire environment very seriously. We also 

take very seriously our responsibility to provide meaningful employment for the people of the 

Northwest. In spite of the tremendous advantages which this Athabasca pulp project offers to 

Saskatchewan residents, I should not support this Bill if I did not have confidence in the adequacy of the 

regulatory requirements under which it will operate. 

 

There can, and there will be, no relaxation of these regulations. Continuous monitoring is a basic part of 

the planning. It is outlined in the VanLuven report. It is mentioned in the Associated Consultants‟ 

International report. It will be the responsibility of this Government, and of succeeding governments, to 

maintain continuity of supervision. Our Government is prepared to accept this responsibility. 

 

As in any major industrial undertaking, there is an economic risk. In this industrial undertaking there is 

risk. My colleagues have pointed out the manner in which negotiations with Parsons and Whittemore 

have minimized that risk. They have also pointed out that the tremendous potential economic gains 

justify the financial risks involved. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1279 

However, we are not prepared to take equivalent risks with the ecology of the Churchill River Basin. We 

are prepared to enforce adequate regulations under which the mill will be licensed. Let us have no more 

political manouevering to try to confuse and frighten the people of Saskatchewan with the bogeyman of 

pollution. Again, let me emphasize my belief that the portion of this debate which concerns itself with 

the environment must hinge on the protection offered by the standards set up by our regulatory agencies. 

 

I am satisfied that these regulations will be adequate. Moreover, I am satisfied that we are prepared to 

enforce these regulations. Therefore, I am prepared to accept responsibility of voting for this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon-Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, and Hon. Members, it has been with a great 

deal of interest that all of us, I am sure, both sides of the House have been listening to the proceedings in 

this debate. We have been listening to the speeches by the Government Members with a great deal of 

interest and care, speeches about the wonderful opportunities that will exist with respect to jobs, with 

respect to roads, with respect to rail lines, with respect to tourism, which the Member from Meadow 

Lake (Mr. Coupland) brought up today, in the midst of what appears to be wholesale devastation waiting 

for the northwestern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems to be reminiscent, in particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of debates carried out in other 

Legislatures not so very long ago, about great industrial complexes involving pulp mills; these debates 

only being carried out three, four or five years ago in the neighboring Province of Manitoba. 

 

I took the liberty of looking up, just for my own interest, what the arguments were by the Government of 

Manitoba in 1966, together with some of the old clippings from the newspaper reports of those debates 

as to how wonderful a project this was going to be for the Province of Manitoba. I am talking now about 

the Churchill Forest Industries project, the project that is now, in effect, virtually bankrupt in the 

Province of Manitoba. In those days, Mr. Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), the Speaker who introduced that Bill 

in Manitoba, introduced . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — A Tory! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A free enterpriser, and there is no difference between a Tory and a Liberal, Mr. 

Treasurer. No difference whatsoever between a Tory and Liberal because as free enterprisers both 

believe that when it comes to the natural resources of our province, they are going to give away those 

natural resources and that is what the Government has done. No difference at all. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . terms were? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now the Treasurer knows what I am talking about. He doesn‟t want me to get on the 

record what the comments were of the free enterprise government in Manitoba in 1966. The Hon. 

Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) says that it‟s the 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1280 

Treasurer‟s speech, when he opened up the debate, and I believe the Hon. Member from Regina North 

West. I think that the Treasurer went to the old transcript in Manitoba to follow his fellow 

free-enterprisers and he said, “My goodness this is a good speech. It is going to sound very good when 

we go out on the hustings. I am going to take it word for word.” 

 

So I am going to give the House just a few quotes to let them know how reminiscent, in fact how almost 

identical, the words introducing the Manitoba Churchill Forest Industries complex were as compared to 

the words of the Liberals opposite when they introduced this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We are just saying grandiose promises. Mr. Evans, the Minister of Industry, said this 

on page 738 of the Manitoba debate, and I am quoting: 

 

The total investments, therefore, would finally exceed $100 million and jobs for several thousand 

people will be created over the next 10 years at the plant site and in the forest operations. 

 

It is further expected that the implementation of these projects will considerably enhance the economic 

and industrial development of Northern Manitoba and lead to substantial export from the province. 

 

Those are exactly the words that the Treasurer and the Premier and the Liberal Members opposite used 

in defence of this Bill — about several thousands of jobs, boasting about $100 million complex, just like 

they did in Manitoba. 

 

The Saskatoon Star Phoenix took up this headline, this big cry of $100 million forest industry: 

 

Mr. Evans said at that time that this great complex will see the creation of rail, truck and river 

transportation facilities, a pulpwood processing plant at Arnot . . . 

 

And on and on it goes, predicting great and wonderful things for the Province of Manitoba. And he 

continued to make more promises. He told the Members of the House about the great opportunities with 

respect to rail and trucking but he also had something for the Indian and Metis people as well. On page 

740 of the debates, Mr. Evans got up in introducing this project and he said: 

 

The project offers Indian and Metis excellent employment opportunities in all phases — cutting and 

forwarding, water transportation, sawmilling, loading in the mills. Approximately half of the total of 

ultimate workers will be Indian and Metis. 

 

And what did the Treasurer say in this debate, when he doesn‟t keep in mind, when he forgets for the 

moment that the agreement has no provision about the Indian and Metis people? When he is out to make 

a political speech in the Legislature he says exactly the same thing. They introduced exactly the same 

thing when they introduced the Prince Albert pulp mill and yet there are only 67 native people employed 

there. Less than 10 per cent of 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1281 

all the employees there are Indian and Metis people and the Hon. Treasurer knows that. 

 

Well, the Minister in Manitoba ended up with great flowing words that the Treasurer here in 

Saskatchewan adopted as the slogan, the rallying cry for the Liberal Party in the next election, Mr. 

Minister for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). The Manitoba Minister said, and I quote: 

 

This development is a major breakthrough for the North. We shall be utilizing resources that were 

going to waste. It will provide new employment opportunities in the North; top grade lumber for our 

manufacturing and construction industries, the basis for important new industries in Winnipeg and a 

boost for our export industry. 

 

And then he went on to talk in glowing terms about the developer — I‟ll use the word promoter — Dr. 

Reisser. He talked very fluently in glowing terms of the promoter of the Manitoba Churchill Forest 

Industries‟ complex. Just like the boys here talked in very glowing terms about the promotion and the 

project that is planned for the northwest. 

 

Well, the newspapers, all the financial newspapers, picked that up — $45 million. In fact, the Manitoba 

boys, following their free-enterprise counterparts in Saskatchewan, felt that they could do every bit as 

well as Saskatchewan had been doing up to that time. They didn‟t know that they were going to be 

outdone in this Athabasca Forest Industries‟ project, after the Churchill Forest Industries‟ project. I am 

going to give a quotation as to what the philosophy was of the Manitoba Government. I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is the philosophy of this Government in the introduction of this Bill. This comes from 

the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, May 14, 1966: 

 

Some weeks ago Manitoba‟s Provincial Secretary, Mr. Maitland Steinkopf was criticizing 

Saskatchewan‟s Premier Ross Thatcher for the tactics used by Mr. Thatcher to lure industry into that 

Province. Mr. Steinkopf claimed that Mr. Thatcher‟s concessions to industry were, “just too juicy to 

turn down.” It appears that he has declared open season on the taxpayer‟s pocketbook. 

 

So Mr. Steinkopf, having analyzed correctly the Liberal Party position in Saskatchewan, “open season 

on the taxpayer‟s pocketbook,” offers that are “too juicy” for the large industries to turn down. Manitoba 

said that anything Ross Thatcher can do, we can do just as well. And so they set up the Churchill Forest 

Industries‟ complex and so they went ahead and made these great promises. 

 

I have clippings here, pictures of the Premier in Manitoba, Mr. Roblin. I wonder whatever became of 

Mr. Roblin? The Premier of the Province of Manitoba at that time said what a wonderful development it 

was. All of this, just like the speakers of the Liberal Party, all of this great development and then the 

great bust came, about two months ago when Schreyer moved to take over the The Pas operation 

because of the mess created by the private enterprise boys. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1282 

Mr. Romanow: — What happened to all those roads? What happened to all the work promised to the 

Indian and Metis people? What happened to all of the control in pollution? What happened to the vast 

millions of dollars that were going to come to the Treasury of the Government of Manitoba? It all 

vanished, vanished in dreams, broken dreams, because of the manipulations of the free enterprise boys 

who controlled that government in that day, the same free enterprise boys that are in power here in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the Conservative Party, the free enterprise counterpart of the Liberal Party here in Saskatchewan 

was decimated politically as a result of that scheme. Decimated! Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of that complex they couldn‟t get hardly anybody to seek the leadership of the Conservative Party. 

Do you think Mr. Gurney Evans would seek the leadership of the Party? He introduced the mill Bill. Oh, 

no, he didn‟t. 

 

I wonder after the Premier is involuntarily retired, after the next election, whether the Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) will seek the leadership of the Conservative Party? He was the one who spoke in glowing terms. 

No, he didn‟t either. I wonder if the Provincial Secretary and the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) are 

going to seek the leadership of the Party here after the Liberals are turned out as the Government in the 

next election? 

 

I particularly had to smile when the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did you say Wilfred? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, I didn‟t say Wilfred. I said the Minister of Welfare. I had to smile at the 

Minister‟s comments. He was very laudatory in his praise for this Athabasca Forest Industries‟ complex. 

He was at his usual flowery oratorical best the other day in the Saskatchewan Legislature. Mind you, he 

was reading a speech prepared by someone else and he didn‟t quite understand the legal implications. 

But nevertheless he is a good actor and he did read the lines very, very well indeed. I thought that the 

Minister of Welfare outdid the Treasurer in reading the old Manitoba debates to get some clues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He certainly sounded as if he did. On page 744 of the Manitoba debates, the 

Minister of Welfare there talked about what this great project is going to do for Manitobans. He said, 

quote: 

 

I would like to say with respect to this development that for the native people of Northern Manitoba, 

there is no better (in terms of forest production and forest operation) than for the people who reside in 

that province. They have skills and the kind of ability which suits them well for working in forest 

industries and other industries, which have been traditionally their mainstay. I welcome this 

opportunity to take advantage of the opportunities that will be opening up for them. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1283 

Well, the Minister of Welfare in Saskatchewan took the words right out of the mouth of the Minister of 

Welfare in Manitoba, Mr. Carrol. But Mr. Carrol, Mr. Deputy Speaker, went one step better than our 

Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald). Do you know what he did when their Churchill Forest Industries‟ 

complex was announced? Why he gave out cigars to all the Members in the Manitoba Legislature and I 

should have expected that the least the Minister of Welfare of Saskatchewan could have done as well. 

No cigars from the Saskatchewan Liberals but the same old speeches about the complexes. The same 

words about the great promise in Northwestern Saskatchewan that now in Manitoba has ended and a 

financial catastrophe for the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That has now ended because of the private enterprise boys, whom you fellows 

protect, and whom you fellows represent, a fiasco of the worst kind in Manitoba because of an 

improvident deal. 

 

I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that nobody on this side of the House, and I underline, nobody on this 

side of the House, wants this deal as improvident as it is, to collapse because we can‟t afford that. We 

want this deal if it is going to have to go ahead because of the majority of the Liberal Government, we 

want this deal to succeed because financially Saskatchewan couldn‟t take it otherwise. So we are not 

saying or hoping that the deal is not to go through. We say that the deal has got to go through if it has to 

be rammed down our throats by the Liberal Government, but that will not prevent us from standing in 

our places, as we have in this debate, and try to convince the Members opposite that it is an improvident 

deal and ought not to be proceeded with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I tell the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) and I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that that does not prevent us from telling the people of Saskatchewan of the dangers of this deal as we go 

on the hustings this coming election. I‟m going to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it will not prevent us 

from warning the people about the dangers of pollution and wholesale forest mismanagement that the 

Member for Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) talked about. He called it nitpicking. He said that 

our concern about pollution and forest management was nitpicking. He said to all the Members of the 

House, “Let‟s not nitpick about the small things like mercury pollution. Let‟s not nitpick about the fact 

that all the fish are dying in our polluted rivers. Let‟s not nitpick about that pale, grey slime that comes 

down from the Prince Albert pulp mill into the North Saskatchewan River.” He says, “Don‟t talk to us 

about that.” He says, “the concern ought not to be one of nitpicking.” Well, I say that if that is 

nitpicking, then nitpicking we on this side are proud to do and we will do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Because I‟m like you, Mr. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Guy) and the Minister 

of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Estey), who I thought would have taken part in this debate 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1284 

but have not seen fit to do so, and I know why. I‟m like them. We are concerned about our ecology and 

about our structures in Saskatchewan. The Hon. Member for Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) 

said, “You know, the Government is going to make Athabasca comply with all the laws on pollution 

control.” He said, “We are going to make them comply with the laws.” How good are the laws now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? The Federal Minister of Environment, Mr. Davis, a Liberal, said in the House of 

Commons a few days ago that nearly half of all the pollution in Canada is due to the pulp and paper 

industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He says, “the laws aren‟t good enough and we are really going to clamp down on 

them.” And yet the Member for Saskatoon Nutana South says, “As long as this pulp mill complies with 

the present laws,” (which will allow half of the water resources of the river basin, Churchill River 

basin), “don‟t nitpick,” he says. That‟s the story of the Liberal Party. 

 

What prosecutions has this Party carried out with respect to pollution of waters? He says we are not to 

be worried about something hypothetical. I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the pollution of the 

North Saskatchewan River is not hypothetical, it is a fact. The pollution of 7 million CB count at Cecil‟s 

Ferry. What is it, 48 million CB or about that, due to the Prince Albert pulp mill? That‟s not 

hypothetical. That is a fact. And this Government hasn‟t taken any action to stop it. This Government 

hasn‟t done one iota to protect the interest of the people. Now the Member for Saskatoon City 

Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) — I‟m sorry he is not in his seat — talked about the Prince Albert 

pulp mill and the union insisting on minimum education standards, which tend to keep out the Indian 

and Metis people. That is untrue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The union does not establish these minimum 

requirements. If the union only had that power. That power resides solely and exclusively, as the 

Member for Regina South West (Mr. MacPherson) knows, with the company, the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company of which the Government is a 30 per cent shareholder and with the directors as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a few more remarks I should like to deal with and I therefore beg leave to 

call it 5:30. 

 

Welcome to Guests 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Before we call it 5:30 I might make mention of the fact that we have been 

honored with a group of teenagers from Savage, Montana. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 until 7:00 p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Bill No. 36 — An Act to assist Athabasca Forest 

Industries Ltd. in establishing a Pulp Mill in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Hon. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1285 

Treasurer for helping to applaud me to get up. It gives me a little encouragement after such a wonderful 

dinner, the Canadian Parliamentary Association Dinner. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was saying before the adjournment at 5:30, it appears to many of us on this side 

of the House that the Government Members opposite “borrowed” if I may use the word, many of the 

arguments that were advanced at the time of the Churchill Forest Industries‟ complex being introduced 

in Manitoba, in support of the Bill that is before us today, a Bill respecting Athabasca Forest Industries. 

I‟ll have a few words to say about that later on in my remarks. 

 

I was also saying before the adjournment that, unlike the Member for Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. 

Forsyth), we on this side of the House do not feel that concern about pollution and about forest 

management, the conservation of our natural resources is, to use the word of the Member from 

Saskatoon Nutana South, “nitpicking”. The Hon. Member in effect said two or three years ago that we 

didn‟t know about mercury pollution and he seemed to imply, at least to me quite clearly, that because 

we didn‟t know anything about mercury pollution, that therefore we ought not now to express our 

concern about pollution. That was the main thrust of the argument. The Hon. Member clearly said to the 

Members of this House that what we were doing with respect to pollution and conservation was 

“nitpicking”. He used the example of mercury pollution. He asked us not to get bogged down in the 

details. He said that we had to bring specific objections to his mind and I did, before the adjournment, 

respecting the pollution on North Saskatchewan River by the Prince Albert pulp mill. I ask the Members 

of the House whether or not we can expect that type of activity with respect to Athabasca. And I say, 

with all due respect to the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Nutana South, any way you want to cut it the 

sum total of his remarks were in effect that we ought not to be complaining on this issue, on the 

pollution issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that a government is fit to govern only so long as the people that it governs believe in 

the words and the deeds of that particular government. In short, in Saskatchewan, our farmers and 

laborers in order to make this a responsible democratic government must believe in the words of the 

Government opposite or, in particular, the words of the Premier and the Treasurer. And I say this 

sincerely that I regret to say to the Members of this House and to the people of Saskatchewan that we 

have to take the position that we don‟t believe anything that this Liberal Government has to say about 

pulp mills. The Premier and the Treasurer of the Liberal Government opposite have totally lost their 

credibility with the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Let me illustrate what I mean. Firstly, the Premier and the Treasurer in their remarks throughout this 

debate, inside the house and outside the House, have deliberately made it appear, in fact have said, that 

the mill deal that we are debating is just around the corner. They have tried to say . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Oh, yes, the Provincial Treasurer . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . say that! 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1286 

Mr. Romanow: — That‟s not correct, Mr. Provincial Treasurer. The Premier has indicated to the 

Members of this House that every day the Members on this side of the House debated, they were 

delaying jobs in respect to the operation. He is leaving with those words, the clear implication that the 

mill is just right around the corner, that the deal is all but completed, thanks to the actions of the Liberal 

Government. They have tried to say, Mr. Treasurer, that only the passage of this Bill stands in the way 

of the building of this mill. Mr. Speaker, the mill which is the subject of this debate is — and I‟m glad 

that the Treasurer is softening up in his position — is a long way from being ready to start, contrary to 

the statements made by the Treasurer and the Premier. It is being delayed, Mr. Speaker, not by the 

Members on this side of the House entering the debate and putting forward the objections of the people 

of the Province, not because of interested conservation and pollution concerned citizens wanting to have 

an opportunity to make representation to the Government. It is not being delayed because of those 

reasons, it is being delayed purely and simply by the inability or unwillingness of this Government to 

finalize its very own arrangements respecting the mill. Let me illustrate. Firstly, the documents tabled in 

the Legislature have not been signed. Yet . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You would be the first to criticize that! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That‟s right! Yet when the Prince Albert pulp mill came in the last session, in 1966, 

the documents there were in fact signed and they were ready to go ahead. The Government had all the 

arrangements finalized and completed but these documents before us are incomplete and unsigned. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Do you object to that? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I‟ll come to that in just a minute. There has been no arrangement, Mr. Speaker, 

concluded yet with respect to the cutting rights of the Meadow Lake Air Weapons Range. The cutting 

rights of this range are needed if the mill has any chance of economic survival. 

 

Thirdly, there has been no arrangement completed yet with respect to the rail line that is going to 

connect with the mill. In fact, throughout this debate, neither the Premier nor the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

have really told the Members of this House at what stage the negotiations are respecting the cutting 

rights of the Meadow Lake area and the rail-line connections. 

 

Fourthly, there has been no commitment from Ottawa that this Government and the project will get $12 

million needed to get this venture going. When the Premier took part in the debate, the second time 

around, he read a telegram from Jean Marchand, a telegram, Mr. Speaker, that is now three weeks old, 

saying simply that Ottawa shows enthusiasm for the project but it must check out all the details just to 

see that the project comes within the environmental guidelines. The Premier tendered that telegram, he 

injected it into the argument in the hope of convincing the House and the people of Saskatchewan that 

the $12 million Ottawa incentive grant was in fact a “fait accompli.” 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1287 

The telegram was three weeks old and today we still don‟t have any commitment from Ottawa in this 

connection. The Treasurer himself says across the Chamber in this debate that the long-term capital loan 

of $107 million has not yet been arranged, at an interest rate “consistent with the economic operation of 

the mill.” We don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, even after the Bill is passed whether a loan with an interest rate 

“consistent with the economic operation of the mill” can in fact be arranged. I tell the Members of this 

House that such a loan will not be arranged overnight but only after weeks of negotiations. There is no 

trust deed before this House. In short, the documents that are before this House are in an unsigned and 

unprepared state. In short, Mr. Speaker, no matter what happens in this debate and this vote, tonight or 

whenever, the mill arrangements are a long, long way from complete due to the Liberals‟ inactivity and 

not due to anyone else. 

 

Now the Premier tries to convince the people that the pulp mill is right around the corner, because there 

is an election coming. The Premier has these four major problems. I invite the Treasurer to get up, as he 

will in this debate, following us, to tell this House — because it will be the first time that he will tell this 

House — at what stage the negotiations are, rail line, interest, arrangements with respect to the air 

weapons cutting range and the various other aspects that I brought to their attention. I invite him to tell 

us frankly and fully how close the mill is to completion with respect to those areas. When this 

Government says that we have a mill ready to build, when the Premier with great political fanfare 

announces the largest industrial venture that the province of Saskatchewan has ever known, I say to the 

people of Saskatchewan, as I say about all things in this Liberal Government and the pulp mills, don‟t 

believe it! Don‟t believe the Liberal Government because it is just not consistent with the facts. 

Secondly, Saskatchewan has had a terrible experience with the Premier and the Treasurer respecting past 

statements on the other pulp mill that‟s going, the Prince Albert mill. The most recent example of a very 

large credibility gap — that is an overplayed phrase but it could not be a truer phrase as it applies to the 

Liberal Government — is this question of the Liberal Government and the stockpiling of pulp from the 

Prince Albert mill. I have before me, Members of the House, a clipping from the Leader-Post dated 

March 9, 1971. The headline of it reads very grandly, “Steuart Denies Pulp Stockpiled.” On the inside of 

the story the very first sentence and headline says, quote: 

 

The Prince Albert Pulp Company is selling . . . 

 

I underline the word, Mr. Speaker, is selling. 

 

. . . every ton of pulp that it can produce and is not stockpiling it, Premier Thatcher and Provincial 

Treasurer Steuart said Tuesday. 

 

This same story with that same statement was repeated in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix on March 10, 

1971. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have two key figures of this Government saying publicly that every ton of pulp 

from Prince Albert is being sold, no pulp is being stored from Prince Albert. Yet what happens the very 

next day? The very next day the Leader-Post reports: 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1288 

Approximately 50 carloads of pulp from Prince Albert are being stored in the MacCosham Van Lines‟ 

Saskatoon warehouse, Fritz Anderson, the Company‟s office manager said Monday. 

 

Then the story goes on to say: 

 

A spokesman, Vern Bodenheimer of the Prince Albert mill, says that the storage is due to the fact that 

the whole United States-Canadian pulp market is soft. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

Not only are there 50 carloads of pulp being stored but the total amount of pulp being stored totals 

17,000 tons in Winnipeg and in Saskatoon. 

 

That is from the President of the Prince Albert Pulp Company. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Members of this House, I ask the people of Saskatchewan: how could a 

Government be out by 17,000 tons of pulp being stored in Winnipeg and Saskatoon, when the Premier 

and the Treasurer said just the day before that there was no pulp stored and that every ton of pulp was 

being sold by the Prince Albert Pulp Company? Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were the Liberals confused? 

Were the Premier and the Treasurer mistaken? Did the Premier not know the true facts about the storing 

of the pulp? Or can we say that they did know but they deliberately tried to tell the people that there was 

no storage of pulp for political reasons? I say to the Members of this House that when the Premier and 

the Treasurer tell us about storage of pulp, I say to Saskatchewan, don‟t believe it. Don‟t believe the 

words of the Premier and the Treasurer. 

 

Thirdly, the Liberal Government — and this has been stated many times — says that all the necessary 

pollution controls have been taken at the Prince Albert mill. To quote now from the very famous 

$12,000 full-page advertisement that was put in partly by the Liberal Government opposite: 

 

It is no joke when I say the water is cleaner when it goes out than when it comes into the plant. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone in Prince Albert, everyone in the northern parts of Saskatchewan 

who visited that area or knows anything about it, absolutely everyone knew of the pollution that was 

creeping down from the plant and into the North Saskatchewan River from the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company. Are we to believe that the Treasurer did not know of this pollution coming down from the 

plant? Are we to believe that the Premier did not know of that pale grey slime that I saw coming down 

from the mill into the North Saskatchewan River? Are we to believe that Mr. Karl F. Landegger, this 

man who heads Parsons and Whittemore, did not know of that pollution effluent going out of the mill? 

And if that is the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Government should stand condemned for the worst act 

of negligence towards the people of Saskatchewan, if that is the case. I don‟t even believe that of the 

Liberal Government. They are pretty negligent. They are pretty incompetent but I don‟t even believe 

that they are that incompetent. So why, why did the Treasurer and the Premier and Mr. Karl Landegger 

buy those thousand dollar advertisements all over the place telling 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1289 

the people of Saskatchewan something that they knew was an untruth? Why? Only after public pressure 

from those of us on this side of the House, and if it wasn‟t from us, it was only after public pressure 

from the Minister‟s own political seat for his own survival, and because of the election around the 

corner, that the Treasurer all of a sudden says, “Well, you know it turns out the water wasn‟t that clean. 

You know it turns out that we made a mistake in saying this and in fact we are going to put in now a 

$1.3 million new sewage treatment plant.” Now today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they come before us with 

this new Bill which we are told again and again by the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) that it 

will not pollute the only unpolluted river system in North America. We are told that same story again 

that we have been told since 1966 when everybody in Saskatchewan knew otherwise. We were told that 

about the North Saskatchewan River system. I say to the people of this province and I say to the 

Government Members of this House that when this Government talks about pollution controls, don‟t 

believe it. Don‟t believe this Government on pollution. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are told that this mill will provide thousands of jobs for people. We hear the same 

speech said here as we heard in Manitoba when the Churchill Forest Industries‟ complex was 

introduced, about several thousands of new jobs being provided for the people. Pulp mills to prevent 

unemployment, they say. Yet over 21,000 people, the highest unemployment in the history of our 

province, are walking around today without a job, thanks to the Liberal Party and the Liberal 

Government opposite, two years after the pulp mill has been going. I say to the Members of this House, 

I say to the people of Saskatchewan, that when the Premier and the Treasurer say that the pulp mill will 

provide jobs, don‟t believe them. Don‟t believe the Premier and the Treasurer because it will not and has 

not provided jobs. 

 

We are told by the Government that pulp mills will take people off welfare rolls and yet as the Hon. 

Member from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) so admirably documented this afternoon, two years after the 

Prince Albert mill has been going, the province has more people on welfare today than two years ago. 

There are more people on welfare and social assistance in Prince Albert today than two years ago. I say 

to the Members of this House and I say to the people of Saskatchewan that when the Premier and the 

Treasurer say that pulp mills will take people off welfare rolls, don‟t believe the Premier and the 

Treasurer. What can you say about a political party whose credibility is shaken at every turn? 

Everything this Government does it turns out that it is not to be believed, that there is somebody high up 

in the Government disputing the action. 

 

What do you say about the Homecoming affair, where high-ranking civil servants, the highest ranking 

civil servants, Deputy Ministers, high-ranking members of the Liberal Party, people who come from 

honored Liberal families, like the family of the late Premier James G. Gardiner, publicly take to the air 

waves and every way that is open to them, telling the people of Saskatchewan that you can‟t believe the 

Treasurer and the Premier about Homecoming? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — This is not a New Democratic spokesman saying this. This is not a Member who 

happens to be on the Opposition side. I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan to keep in 

mind 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1290 

that this is a man whose lineage, whose background, whose participation in government, although I 

disagree with the philosophy, has come from a time-honored Liberal family. Much more time-honored 

than some of the boys who are sitting opposite in the Government benches. And what does he say about 

the Minister of Athabasca (Mr. Guy)? What does he say about the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart)? What does 

he say about the Attorney General (Mr. Heald)? He is saying to the people of Saskatchewan what we are 

saying about this mill, don‟t believe the Premier or the Treasurer, whatever you do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I predict, Mr. Member from Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois), that 

we aren‟t finished yet with statements that we have to take with a grain of salt. I predict that there will 

yet be another statement in a day or two or in the weeks ahead that should be equally taken with a grain 

of salt when the people of Saskatchewan hear it, once election starts, and I for one hope that it‟s as soon 

as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I predict that we shall have another ally or “political party” coming to the aid of the 

Liberal Party in the election. I predict that when the election starts, these great developers, Parsons and 

Whittemore, aided and abetted by the Liberal Government opposite, will attempt to blackmail the people 

of Saskatchewan into voting Liberal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — They will in effect attempt to frighten our farmers who are overburdened with the 

highest debt load they have ever had under the Liberals. They will attempt to frighten the 21,000 people 

who are walking around without jobs with only want ads in their pockets. They will do it by a loud and 

expensive propaganda campaign that they have already started with respect to the pollution — full-page 

advertisements, paid partly by the people of Saskatchewan, the 30 per cent shareholders — and during 

the course of the election, Parsons and Whittemore will try to tell the people that the mill is only assured 

on the basis of the documents that have been filed here and only with the Liberal Government. If that 

statement is made, it will be as I have described it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, blackmail pure and simple, that 

Saskatchewan won‟t buy. Not only will it be a blackmail statement but it will be one that Saskatchewan 

people, as I have said, will not buy. They won‟t buy it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it will be untrue. 

Because the truth of the matter is that there is no deal yet. There won‟t be a deal for some considerable 

time after the election even if the arrangements remain the way they are. There is no deal. There can‟t be 

any deal because of the four arguments that I have advanced — the air range cutting rights, the rail lines, 

the interest rates to be negotiated, the financing from Ottawa. We don‟t even know if we‟re going to get 

the $12 million. 

 

This is an old trick of the old line, free enterprise parties — to try to use their allies. We‟ve seen how 

industry has tried to blackmail governments before. We saw it in Manitoba 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1291 

when the insurance industry tried to blackmail Ed Schreyer and they couldn‟t do it. We fought that battle 

in Saskatchewan under the CCF in 1962 when some doctors and the Liberal Party opposite tried to 

blackmail us and they couldn‟t succeed. It is part and parcel of the tactics of the old line party. I say to 

Saskatchewan, don‟t be surprised if you see this happen. I say that we on this side of the House know 

that the people of the province won‟t buy it because we have confidence in the rationality of the people 

of our province and I conclude again by saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to all Saskatchewan, don‟t believe 

anything this Premier or this Treasurer tells you about this pulp mill because their past actions belie 

them. 

 

If there is one message that I want to leave with the Members of this House today and to the people, it is 

precisely that; that this Government has lost its right to govern the people of our province; that it is not 

fit to govern because the people of our province no longer support or believe the statements made by the 

Treasurer. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I turn to another aspect of the discussion, that is the position of the New 

Democratic Party. I think it can be summarized briefly as follows: Firstly, on the basis of the documents 

filed in this House, the financial aspects of this mill are such that the people of the province are taking 

most of the risks with the benefits going to a large foreign corporation. At the same time we say the 

huge financial risks taken are not offset by adequate safeguards for our Saskatchewan people or our 

money. Secondly, we say and the Member from Biggar, the former Premier of the Province (Mr. Lloyd) 

said it so eloquently today, this proposed mill represents a cavalier and careless approach to our natural 

resources, to our forests and our streams. This negligent disregard of our natural resources will 

ultimately cost Saskatchewan people millions more in lost tourist dollars and an undeterminate amount 

in damage to the quality of our Saskatchewan way of life if this mill proceeds. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it occurs only rarely in politics or in other human endeavors that the 

arguments to support an opponent‟s case are provided by the party who proposed the argument. But the 

Liberal Party had to do just that. One does not expect the Liberal Party to prove the case for the New 

Democrats but would you believe it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) did 

precisely that the other night. Because he happened to be the major Government speaker or appeared to 

be the major speaker on the financial aspects of it, I am going to illustrate very briefly what I mean and 

show how unbelievably bad this deal is for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What did the Minister of Welfare say? He said three things. Firstly, he tried to show the House that the 

financial arrangements, in fact, provided adequate safeguards for the province. He also argued that 

Parsons and Whittemore was taking risks proportionately to those of the province. His exact words 

were, quoting from Hansard transcripts dated March 22nd, referring to the Leader of the Opposition in 

his remarks, here are his exact words: 

 

Not once, not once did he (referring to Mr. Blakeney) mention what the Province would receive in his 

entire remarks. 1. A guarantee fee of $3.6 million. 2. A first mortgage on all property owned or which 

may be 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1292 

owned by Athabasca Forest Industries . . . In other words, a first mortgage on the mill and the forest 

management license. 3. A first floating charge on all other assets of Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say to the Minister of Welfare, unfortunately he is not here, that his 

speech writer did not read the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition because in the Hansard 

transcripts dated March 17th, the Leader of the Opposition said precisely those three things when he 

talked about the guarantees. He said it precisely. 

 

Now if the Liberal Party has read those contracts that Parsons has apparently got ready to sign, as 

carefully as the Minister‟s speech writer reads my Leader‟s speech, then Saskatchewan is in more 

trouble than I think it‟s in. Now, all of those things were said by my Leader. All of those guarantees are 

acknowledged by us to be in the draft documents — $3.6 million the first mortgage and a floating 

charge. But that‟s not the point of our objection. The point of our objection is that the so-called security 

or guarantee is next to meaningless with respect to the province‟s interest. The Minister proved just that 

point. A few minutes later in his speech on March 22nd he said this: 

 

Mr. Blakeney knows that the only time that the Province‟s obligations under this guarantee would be 

enforced would be if Athabasca got into financial difficulties . . . 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, Hansard shows an interjection by myself where I shouted across to the Minister, “If 

the mill goes broke, what worth is the mortgage?” He didn‟t hear me the first time and I yelled again, “If 

the mill goes broke, what worth is the mortgage?” And do you know what the Minister, speaking for the 

Liberal Government, said, “Because we get the $107 million assets if it goes broke, that‟s what it‟s 

worth.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now I ask the Members to contemplate the answer for just a second. Why, Mr. 

Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), why would the province be called upon to meet the 

payments of the guarantee loan of $107 million? Clearly, the people of Saskatchewan would be asked to 

pay up if the mill could not be made to succeed. You can be sure that if it is made to succeed, Parsons 

and Whittemore isn‟t going to give it up. In effect, if the mill doesn‟t work and Parsons decides to walk 

away from its obligations, then guess who is stuck for the $107 million? Everyone in this Chamber plus 

a million other people, to the extent of over $1,000. But the Liberals say, don‟t worry, we‟ve got you 

protected because we‟ve got the buildings and the machinery. I‟ll repeat this once more for you, 

Member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Why didn‟t Manitoba take it over? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What good would it do for Saskatchewan to have ownership of a mill in the 

northeastern part of the province when the mill can‟t be made to succeed? It isn‟t viable. In that type of a 

case you couldn‟t make money on the pulp mill operation but you would still have to meet the $107 

million in loan 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1293 

payments. What the Liberal Party has said is this: “If the mill goes broke, the people get the mill.” 

That‟s their security. 

 

I want to tell the Members of this House and I want to tell the Member from Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald) that that‟s precisely the situation that Churchill Forest Industries in the Province of 

Manitoba is in right now. I want to tell the Member from Cannington that Churchill Forest Industries 

couldn‟t or wouldn‟t meet its financial obligations and so now that Province has realized on its mortgage 

and what has it got — a bankrupt mill in Manitoba. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell Schreyer that! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to tell the Member from Cannington, in case he doesn‟t know, that in Nova 

Scotia they have another huge multi-million dollar enterprise known as a heavy water plant that the 

Premier can thank his lucky stars he didn‟t catch for Weyburn and Estevan. I want to tell the Member 

from Cannington, the Minister of Industry and the Treasurer, that that heavy water plant hasn‟t produced 

anything since it was on the drawing boards. I ask the Treasurer and the Minister, would you take over 

that multi-million dollar water plant when it‟s a bankrupt operation? Well, maybe the Treasurer would 

take it, knowing his financial skill. After all, the former Minister of Public Works says, “What can you 

do with a government when you come into power and no one knows how to read a financial statement 

over there.” That‟s what Mr. Gardiner said. He said, “I have the Premier, I have the Treasurer, they can‟t 

read a balance statement.” Now I don‟t know but I shall take Mr. Gardiner‟s words for it that the boys 

opposite don‟t know how to read a financial statement and if he says he‟d take over the old Churchill 

Forest Industries‟ plant, that proves it to us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the same situation applies with respect to the floating charge. In short, what the 

Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) did was prove precisely the point that the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) has been saying and that is that the only real and meaningful security the 

province gets back from $107 million is a fee of $3.6 million, nothing else. The Minister of Welfare 

tried to belittle those who tried to explain to him — I wish his speech writer had explained it to him 

earlier — that what this guarantee means for the farmers and for the laborers and for the small 

businessmen of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He tried to say that this $107 million encumbrance meant nothing for our fishermen 

in our constituency of Athabasca, or our farmers in the constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch, or 

nothing for our businessmen in the constituency of Nipawin. That‟s what he tried to say. We say that if 

this mill runs into these problems, as happened in Churchill Forest Industries in Manitoba, every man, 

woman and child in this province is encumbered to the tune of at least $1,000 if not more and the 

Government says that this is really not a debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province‟s guarantee of $107 million loan places the province in the same legal 

position as the maker of 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1294 

the loan. It‟s the same as if the local farmer went down to a bank and guaranteed a note for his farmer 

friend. He stands in the same shoes as the farming friend who made the deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I say to you, Mr. Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and to the Minister of Welfare (Mr. 

MacDonald), slice it any way you want — $107 million guarantee means a legal and moral obligation 

for a huge financial payment if this thing gets into trouble. And that‟s a financial payment enforceable 

by law and that‟s an encumbrance. It‟s just not good enough to say that there is no transaction. In fact, 

this guarantee by the Provincial Government is absolutely essential, in my view, to the obtaining of the 

loans by Athabasca. Athabasca is the maker of the note but it‟s a company with relatively few assets 

compared to its financial needs in that type of an undertaking. No lending institution anywhere would 

lend a company like Athabasca $107 million on its own strength. The financing of the operation depends 

almost entirely on the strength of the province putting up the guarantee of the $107 million to the 

company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The Minister can belittle and berate and joke and mock and mimic all he wants 

about contingent liabilities. He can cover it up any way he wants, but I can tell the Members of this 

House that I and every one of the Members on this side intend to tell the farmers of our province that the 

Liberal Government is putting them on the hook to the tune of at least $1,000 for a foreign-controlled 

company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I also intend to tell the farmers and laborers and the small businessmen in Morse 

constituency, I‟m sure Mr. Gardiner will tell them, that the Liberal party can devise ways and means to 

help foreign corporations make a killing off our natural resources but somehow they can‟t find one way 

to help the farmers out of their worst economic depression. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, secondly, the Minister of Welfare tried to show that Parsons and Whittemore 

had more than $20 million exposed to this venture. The Minister says that they put up their share of the 

equity — $16.8 million, that‟s true. We agree with that. Then he says, quoting from the Hansard 

transcripts and referring to Parsons and Whittemore: 

 

They are responsible for the project and equipment financing under Article IV of the Guarantee 

Agreement to the extent of $12 million. 

 

Then the Minister implored my Leader to read the Article. I tell the Minister that the Leader has read the 

Article but the speech writer of the Minister‟s didn‟t read the Article. I read the Agreement and the 

Article. If Members will read the Article IV (3), it will be seen that Parsons is obligated 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1295 

to „arrange‟ credit facilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Note that Parsons is obligated to arrange the credit. 

When is Parsons obligated to pay the credit? Under the Agreement, Parsons is obligated to pay only 

when there is an “event of default as defined in a certain trust deed.” 

 

But we don‟t have a Trust Deed. No such document has been tabled and to my knowledge none exists. 

We don‟t know how the Trust Deed will define an “event of default”. This we don‟t know when or if 

Parsons and Whittemore will be responsible. All that we have is the Minister of Welfare‟s statement that 

Parsons and Whittemore are responsible boys, take my word for it — period. It‟s not in accordance with 

the documents tabled in this House. The best that can be said is that they may be responsible for the $12 

million if this mysterious and yet unseen Trust Deed defines “event of default” in such a way as to make 

Parsons and Whittemore liable. But as of now there is nothing that obligates Parsons and Whittemore to 

that $12 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Nothing! And I defy the Treasurer to say that there is. Then, the Minister (Mr. 

MacDonald) said that Parsons and Whittemore has committed itself to a turnkey price of $117.7 million 

for the construction of the mill. Members ought to clearly understand — I invite you to take notes, 

Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) — that $117.7 million is contracted with two subsidiaries but totally 

different legal entities of Parsons and Whittemore. It is correct to say that Parsons and Whittemore will 

guarantee the work of its two subsidiaries. That guarantee simply says that Parsons and Whittemore will 

stand behind its other two Parsons and Whittemore companies to see that the mill is built. Big deal! Has 

the Treasurer ever heard of a construction and equipment contract that does not have such a guarantee 

that a building will be built? Would any government, even a Liberal Government opposite, sign a 

construction contract that didn‟t have a simple straightforward clause saying that the contractor agrees to 

contract and guarantees to build the building? 

 

But the Minister, he tries to blow this way out of proportion. He says: 

 

They put the whole Parsons and Whittemore empire on the line because they believe in the future of 

this mill. 

 

Now I ask the Members how much is any contractor or company going to lose on a construction job 

when that contractor sets his own price for the construction job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — In this case there were no bids. Does the Liberal Party say that the company has 

guaranteed to build the mill and supply the equipment at a price so low that they will take a financial 

beating? Does the Liberal Party say that Parsons and Whittemore equipment, Parsons and Whittemore 

contractors and Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated have committed themselves to build knowing that 

they‟re going to lose their entire financial shirts? In no way. Rather than losing money, the Financial 

Post predicts that Parsons and Whittemore and 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1296 

its subsidiaries, far from losing on this $117.7 million turnkey job, will make a normal 10 per cent or 

$12 million profit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — They‟re going to make $12 million without one ounce or ton of pulp being 

produced, without one red cent going into the coffers of the Provincial Treasury and to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And even if there is no market after the mill is built or if there is insufficient timber, 

as some of us worry that there might be, even if Parsons and Whittemore and its subsidiaries say that 

we‟ve made our $12 million on the turnkey and we‟re shutting her down and we‟re going away, who 

gets stuck with $107 million? You and I do and everybody in Saskatchewan does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thirdly, the Liberal Party argues that the province has controls in this operation 

through the board of directors of Athabasca. The Minister of Welfare says that five out of six directors 

are required to approve any major decision respecting contracts, and I agree that statement is true. But I 

say to the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), that works both ways. It means that Parsons and Whittemore can‟t 

change the contract without approval of a government appointee — that‟s true. But it also means the 

province can‟t change any of the contracts without the four Parsons and Whittemore nominees 

approving. And that means, Mr. Treasurer, and Members of this House, that those agreements had better 

be pretty good as far as the province is concerned right now. 

 

What does this mean with respect to those contracts? I‟ll give you an example. In the Sales Agreement, 

Article IV, the Government commits itself to a sales commission of three per cent to the Parsons and 

Whittemore Company. But by that same Agreement, that Sales Agreement is good for — and get this, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — for five years and “thereafter for an undetermined period of time until or unless 

terminated by Athabasca”. “Until or unless terminated by Athabasca.” In other words, the moment we 

signed that Agreement, we‟re committed to paying three per cent of sales commission, so long as 

Parsons and Whittemore wants us to pay three per cent and we can‟t change that Agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it‟s found that that commission is too high, if the province should want to try to 

renegotiate it, can we do it on the terms of the Agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, our hands are tied because you need the other four Parsons and Whittemore 

directors to agree. 

 

Let me give you another example. The Management Contract. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1297 

The Management Contract says the same thing that it‟s going to be good for five years and thereafter for 

an undetermined period of time until or unless terminated by Athabasca. How can Athabasca terminate 

it? Only if all four Parsons and Whittemore nominees vote for a change. What if the Government 

discovers that it wants new management? Will we be able to terminate the Agreement if Parsons and 

Whittemore says no? All the cards are in the hands of Parsons and Whittemore. Our hands are tied by 

Parsons and Whittemore so long as Parsons and Whittemore wants them to be tied. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That‟s the Agreement that the Treasurer would want us to sign and to consent to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that the Minister of Welfare‟s arguments only prove the arguments of the New 

Democratic Party and my Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say his attempt to get into the political area of the argument was shallow. We say, 

admit to the true nature of the deal. We say, admit that it‟s a financial giveaway. Admit, like the 

Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) admitted in Moose Jaw on March 19, 1971 with a picture of the 

candidate, Herb Taylor, and he said this — he noted with unemployment the way it is: 

 

Every fair-minded person should be pleased this Government should be willing to risk everything to 

get a second pulp mill in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of Highways says that we should be pleased to risk “everything” that we have in order to 

get the second pulp mill. Well, the Minister of Highways can risk everything but we on this side won‟t 

risk everything for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — In reality this is a public enterprise with a private front. It‟s not wise and prudent 

handling of the taxpayer‟s money. Rather it is a wanton and reckless giveaway of our natural resources, 

backed by the public purse to boot. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, come this election, we‟ll be telling the people that this may be one of the most 

financially imprudent deals in the history of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And if we did not tell the people of this province, we should not be fulfilling our 

duty as the official Opposition to the people of this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in conclusion the following: I want to raise some very few questions 

about the viability of this project. I read the feasibility report that was tabled by the Government. It did 

not appear to me that the report was 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1298 

as convincing or as convinced about the feasibility of the project as the Liberal Government opposite 

interprets it. To be true, the report said that in the end: 

 

. . . barring major unpredictable developments, the mill will be a viable enterprise. 

 

Notice, Mr. Minister, the escape hatch. But I ask the Government to weight that recommendation against 

the following points brought out in the report: 

 

Firstly, the report says that Athabasca will have a very “high cost aspect because of its location”. In this 

regard, the long-hauling distances pose a particular problem. 

 

Secondly, building costs will be maximum because of the severe weather conditions we experience. 

 

Thirdly, the United States market, our largest market, is not going to expand. This means in order to get 

markets we‟re going to have to expand to Europe and the Far East. In this regard, the mills on either 

coast of Canada are going to have an advantage because of freight in shipping the product through their 

coastal access. 

 

Fourthly, I suggest to Members that the Consultants‟ report is not decisive about the quality of the water 

to be used, as brought out by the Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd). The report says that the information 

on the river is actually nonexistent. 

 

Fifthly, because of the weather and the location of the mill, it‟s suggested that labor costs will be larger 

than usual in order to attract the skilled people needed for such an undertaking to that operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we combine these factors together with the fact that no final arrangements have been 

made in the four major areas that I have talked of, the grants, the rail, the interests and the cutting, you 

can see why any right-thinking person in Saskatchewan has grave and serious reservations about this 

project. 

 

We base our objections on these facts and the fact that this Government has failed or refused to answer 

the people straightforwardly about these questions that we have posed to them. And when you add on 

top of this the fact that we can expect huge financial commitments of all hard-earned taxpayers‟ money 

with little or no security for that money, then I say the entire deal becomes absolutely questionable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And when you add on top of this without elaborating the point of conserving our 

natural resources, so ably set forward by the speakers on this side — and I know the cutting practices of 

clear-cutting and devastation and soil that looks like sand in that area — it‟s not going to be any 

different for Athabasca. The Consultants‟ report says that every effort must be made to minimize the 

cost of wood delivered to the mill. “The most modern, low-cost harvesting methods must be used.” You 

slice that any way, Mr. Speaker, and that means clear-cutting for Athabasca like Prince Albert. I am not 

going to elaborate at 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1299 

length on the business of water pollution. We‟ve touched on that already. To have our rivers polluted 

and our lakes destroyed, I can tell this Government that the fishermen don‟t want it, as the Member from 

Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) says. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And when you add on top of this, Mr. Speaker, the potential for tourism in the North 

being destroyed, tourism and industry that is far greater and more potential for that area than a mill of 

questionable viability, then you can see why we New Democrats raise the questions that we do. 

 

And there has been some talk in the press, and I conclude from the press, about an election on this issue. 

The press keeps speculating that the Premier might call an election on this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Maybe the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) is going out to advise him to do it now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The press says that this is an explosive issue. It‟s an explosive issue, all right, for the 

farmers of Kendal and for the farmers just north of Swift Current, and the farmers even in Melville and 

the farmers in Prince Albert. Two people on an hour-long television program asking questions of the 

Premier. I say, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side would welcome the Premier to issue the election writs 

right now on this very issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Because we intend to say, when we talk about this pulp mill issue and the $107 

million commitment, we intend to tell the farmers that they give $107 million for a foreign-controlled 

company but zero for the farmers. We shall tell the laborers of this province that they give $107 million 

to a foreign corporation but zero to the laboring people of this province. We are going to tell the small 

businessmen of this province that they‟ve got money for large businesses but none for our own 

Saskatchewan small businesses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And when we talk about a $107 million mill we‟re going to tell all the people about 

the destruction of our natural resources, our forests and our rivers and our pollution by the Members 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Therefore, I say to the Members opposite and to the Premier . . . 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1300 

Mr. Kramer: — I heard the word “lie” from the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall). 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I said I heard the word “lie” from the Member for Souris-Estevan. Now you‟ve had a 

very strict rule about that, Sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I heard the word but I don‟t know where it came from. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, I heard it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Wherever it came from, I suggest it was out of order. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — If that Member would stand up and admit it. Stand up, Member from Souris-Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I only have to take into consideration where that word came from and 

it doesn‟t bother me whatsoever because he makes no contribution to this House whatsoever. 

 

As I was saying about the election, we New Democrats should be pleased to have it called. 

 

We urge the development and the spending of this money for the development of camping grounds, 

roads to camp sites, encouragement of industry to build cabins and motels. In general the development 

of what could be the most important industries in that part of Saskatchewan, namely tourism and 

recreation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has not even thought of preservation. This Government thinks only in 

terms of destruction. This Government has not even thought in terms of the needs of native and Northern 

people. This Government thinks only in terms of destruction of the resources for those native people. 

This Government has not thought it its duty to think of our children and their children and how we leave 

those resources for them. This Government only thinks in terms of destruction when it comes to them. 

 

I conclude by saying that I believe in the industrial growth of this province. I believe that we should 

rationally encourage the promotion of industry in this province. We need jobs for the young, for all of 

Saskatchewan. We on this side, when we become the government, will work to get jobs for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Above all, I believe that all planning for jobs and industry must be based on the overall 

consideration that always after we are finished with the resource, we improve that resource, rather than 

weakening our great province. I believe in jobs but I do not believe in jobs for the very short run that 

will only cause unemployment and more unemployment and destruction of our resources in the long run. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1301 

I say to this House that New Democrats will get this Province rolling again for our young and old once 

we become the government, but we‟ll do it while we improve our natural resources and our society and 

our environment around us, because I do not believe that this Bill will do that, because I believe the 

documents are incomplete and unsatisfactory and do not satisfy me that I am acting in the best interests 

of the majority of the people by supporting those documents. I cannot support this Bill. I will not support 

this Bill and I urge all Members of the House to do the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I intend to add a few comments to the 

remarks which I addressed earlier to this House on this debate. I first want to deal with a few remarks 

which have been made by other speakers. 

 

There was much talk this evening when the Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) referred 

to problems which have arisen with respect to financial transactions similar to this; the heavy water plant 

in Nova Scotia, Churchill Forest Industries at The Pas! Much talk has come from the other side of the 

House saying, what does this prove? What does this prove? The answer is simple. In both cases it is this; 

that large financial commitments were undertaken, guarantees were given and now the taxpayers of 

Nova Scotia and of Manitoba find themselves today responsible for every payment of interest, every 

payment of principal, every payment of any kind on those obligations which were originally mere 

guarantees. That‟s what it proves. It proves that a guarantee cavalierly given by a free enterprise 

government that is looking for stars in its crown for industrial development, can load on the back of 

taxpayers, like the taxpayers of Nova Scotia and like the taxpayers of Manitoba, heavy obligations of 

principal and interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few comments with respect to what was said by the 

Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald). I am sorry he is not in his seat. We are always treated to a little 

bit of mild entertainment when he addresses this House. He has got an amazing capacity for being 

surprised. He has got an amazing capacity for being indignant. I ask Members to think. Did they ever 

hear the Minister of Welfare stand up and give a speech which did not contain the phrase, “Never in all 

my time in this House have I heard such nonsense,” or “Never have I heard such political dishonesty.” 

Always, always it is a new experience for him. He is like a dewey-eyed lass of 13, each day a new 

learning experience. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is just a pity that he brought to this debate the same powers of financial and legal 

analysis as that same dewey-eyed lass of 13. He was upbraiding me because he said I hadn‟t finished my 

analysis of the documents and I still had expressed my opinion and I was going to vote against this Bill. 

Then he expressed his opinion that he was going to vote for the Bill. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1302 

He hadn‟t finished his analysis of the documents. So far as I was concerned he hadn‟t started his 

analysis of the documents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — What was the burden of his remarks? He was saying that New Democrats are 

opposed to this Bill not on economic grounds, not on social grounds but on political grounds. That is 

surely pretty remarkable because when the Prince Albert Bill was in this House, I supported the Bill, 

most Members on this side of the House supported the Bill. There wasn‟t any political objection to a 

pulp mill then. The fact are that the bitter, bitter experience of the Prince Albert mill has led us to 

believe that a new look has to be taken at the Athabasca mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — More facts are now available. It is now clear, with the documents filed as late as this 

year, that the Prince Albert deal was a bad financial deal. But even more, it is clear that there are no 

steps taken to protect our waters from pollution, and it is clearer still, that nothing is done to protect our 

forests. 

 

With respect to forests, it is useful to point out that when the Prince Albert deal was introduced in this 

House, nobody ever mentioned clear-cutting. When that mill was introduced in this House it was with 

documents requiring the delivery of wood in eight foot lengths. Elsewhere in Canada the delivery of 

wood in eight foot lengths usually is associated with selective cutting and not clear-cutting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Then the Government opposite, without telling this House, without tabling any 

agreements until years later, changed the whole basis of wood harvesting from selective cutting to 

clear-cutting and thereby endangered our forests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In my earlier remarks I pointed out that the financing of the Athabasca mill was no 

ordinary type of financing. I pointed out that in an ordinary type of financing shareholders put in their 

money first and the bondholders money goes in last. I pointed out that in the documents before us this 

wasn‟t so. The equity money, this $24 million in shares, $16.8 million of Parsons and Whittemore, the 

rest of Provincial money didn‟t go in first, it went in only on the same basis as the bondholders money 

went in. Now this is a unique way to finance any industrial venture and it is a way which increases the 

hazard for the bondholder. I need hardly say that anything that increases the hazard for the bondholder 

increases the hazard for the people of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Welfare said, what is so strange 

about that? I wish he would have referred to some other financial deals in Canada where the equity 

money only went in pro-rata with the bond money. I wish he had asked the Minister of Industry (Mr. 

Estey) whether that is what SEDCO does. I wish he had asked the Minister of Industry whether when a 

hog farmer goes to 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1303 

SEDCO and says he‟s got $20,000 and wants to borrow $20,000. I wonder if the Minister of Industry 

says to that fellow, “Oh, we‟ll put in $20,000 and you can put in your money at the same rate as we do.” 

No fear of that! For Saskatchewan farmers, they put their money in first and SEDCO puts in their money 

last. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But these little goodies about not having to put your equity money in, they are not for 

Saskatchewan farmers, they are saved for New York developers. 

 

What was the Minister of Welfare‟s “piece de resistance”? Well, his big point was that we had security 

for this $107 million. We had the security of the first mortgage on the undertaking. I don‟t want to add 

too much to what my colleague from Saskatoon-Riversdale has said, he has exposed the fact that while 

that is true in words, it is economic nonsense. The Minister of Welfare is, of course, right when he says 

that only when the mill is in difficulty that we‟ll be called upon to pay the $107 million. It is only when 

the mill can‟t meet its own payments of interest, only when the mill can‟t meet its own payment of 

principal that we, the taxpayers, will be called upon to pay. But he says, never mind, we have assets 

worth $107 million. The short question I want to ask him is this: to whom are they worth $107 million? 

To whom is the pulp mill worth $107 million when it can‟t even meet its interest payments on its bonds? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If this mill doesn‟t go, if it doesn‟t go because wood costs are too high or because the 

market goes sour or because the exchange rate goes against us, and if because of that, the mill can‟t pay 

the interest on its bonds — to whom is it worth $107 million? 

 

I have no reason to believe that Parsons and Whittemore are poor pulp mill operators. If they can‟t 

operate a mill so that it can meet its interest on its bond payments, who can operate it so it will meet its 

interest on its bond payments? Who will pay $107 million for a mill which can‟t be operated by efficient 

operators like Parsons and Whittemore, even to the extent of meeting its interest payments? In short, it 

will not be worth $107 million. It will be worth its salvage value and nothing more. Let‟s go over that 

again. If the mill makes a profit, it belongs 70 per cent to Parsons and Whittemore, 30 per cent to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and the maximum cost to Parsons and Whittemore is $16 or $17 million. But if 

the mill makes a loss, if it goes broke, if it is next to worthless except for the salvage, then it doesn‟t 

belong to Parsons and Whittemore and the price isn‟t $17 million. Then it belongs to the people of 

Saskatchewan and the price is $130 million! 

 

The Minister of Welfare described the deal very well. If the mill goes broke, it‟s ours for a paltry $130 

million. If it makes money, it belongs to Parsons and Whittemore as to 70 per cent, for less than $17 

million. 

 

Then the Minister went on to discuss turnkey contracts. He would have done better if he had discussed 

Thomas Aquinas or something with which he was a little more familiar. He 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1304 

seems to have the idea that a turnkey contract has something to do with whether tenders are called or 

not. That‟s what he said. Obviously the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) knows better than that, but the 

Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) did not. A turnkey contract, after all, is nothing more than a 

contractor agreeing to do a complete job for a fixed price. Turnkey contracts can be negotiated, they can 

be tendered, they can be tendered by invitational tender or they can be tendered by open tender. He then 

went on to say, “we wanted a turnkey contract and there wasn‟t a company in Saskatchewan or a 

company in Canada who would take this job on a turnkey contract.” Well, that is certainly a remarkable 

conclusion. There must be 50 pulp mills in Canada. Two of them were built by Parsons and Whittemore; 

who built the other 48? Who built the other 48? Whether or not there was another company in Canada 

who would take this job on a turnkey basis — it‟s not for the Opposition to provide the answer. It is up 

to the Government to provide that answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, if the Government was going to build this mill or have it built on the 

basis of a financial commitment of $130 million of public funds, then it should have canvassed Canada 

from one end to another to find out the cheapest possible price to have a mill built. It could have done 

this by competitive tender. If that wasn‟t a sensible way to do it, it could have done it by invitational 

tender. If that wasn‟t a sensible way to do it, it could have gone from contractor to contractor and got a 

price. If the Government had tried to do this and having failed, it could then justifiably come to this 

House and ask for guarantees of $130 million but it did not, it gave this plum, this contract for $117 

million, to Parsons and Whittemore without scouring this country from one end to the other to see 

whether it couldn‟t be done cheaper. For if they didn‟t scour this country, and I suggest that they didn‟t, 

then they should not come to this House and ask the people of Saskatchewan for a commitment of $130 

million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Minister of Welfare then dealt with the protections which the Government had; 

talked about the fact that two Parsons and Whittemore subsidiaries were going to undertake this work 

and we were fully protected because the Parsons and Whittemore senior company was going to 

guarantee their performance. Well, what do you know! The senior company is going to guarantee the 

performance of its two subsidiaries. Big deal! We were told we are very, very fortunate that we have this 

guarantee from Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated. We should be glad that the whole Parsons and 

Whittemore empire was on the line. Well, Mr. Speaker, is it true that the Parsons and Whittemore 

empire is on the line? Well, let‟s look at some of this Parsons and Whittemore empire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to burden the House with going through all the Parsons and Whittemore 

empire but I should like to refer to the number of Parsons and Whittemore companies that that 

Government opposite has either signed contracts with or proposes to sign contracts with. I‟ll wager there 

is not one person sitting in his seat over there who can even name the Parsons and Whittemore 

companies that they have signed contracts 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1305 

with or propose to sign contracts with. I don‟t think there is one who could do it. I did a little count and I 

may not have got them all but with respect to companies controlled as to at least 70 per cent by Parsons 

and Whittemore or bearing the name of Parsons and Whittemore, I reached a total of 10 that we have 

signed contracts with or proposed to sign contracts with. There may be some more. There may well be, 

these are the ones which we signed contracts with. I am not talking about Black, Clawson and some of 

these who are undoubtedly going to provide equipment for the mills and who are referred to in the 

contracts. I am talking about ones where we have commitments and contracts signed. How many of 

these are “on the line”? Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated? Yes. Parsons and Whittemore Industries 

Incorporated? They are not on the line in Athabasca. Parsons and Whittemore Contractors Limited? No, 

I don‟t think they are on the line. Parsons and Whittemore Mill Machinery Limited? No, they are not on 

the line. Prince Albert Pulp Company? No, they are not on the line. They are all part of this Parsons and 

Whittemore empire but they are not committed to anything in Athabasca. Parsons and Whittemore 

Equipment Corporation? Yes, I think they are on the line. Athabasca Forest Industries Incorporated — 

that‟s a Delaware corporation? No, they are not on the line. Athabasca Forest Industries Limited? Yes, 

we can say they are on the line. Parsons and Whittemore contractors Corporation, that is one of those 

Delaware corporations? Yes, they are on the line. 

 

So of all of these companies, these three Saskatchewan companies and two Dominion companies and 

two New York companies and three Delaware companies that we have entered into contracts with, or 

have proposed to enter into contract with, six of them are in no way committed at Athabasca. Yet we 

were told that the whole Parsons and Whittemore empire is on the line. 

 

Now he went on to say, “But Parsons and Whittemore had big assets in Saskatchewan.” Look at the 

Prince Albert mill. He said that Parsons and Whittemore holdings in the Prince Albert mill were a 

guarantee that they would deliver at Athabasca. Now the Minister knows that is false. He knows that 

Parsons and Whittemore Equipment Corporation doesn‟t have any interest in the Prince Albert mill. He 

knows that Parsons and Whittemore Contractors doesn‟t have any interest in the Prince Albert mill and 

he knows that the base company, Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated, doesn‟t have any interest in the 

Prince Albert mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) should have told the Minister of Welfare (Mr. 

MacDonald) that the 70 per cent interest in the Prince Albert mill is not owned by any of these 

Athabasca companies, it is owned by another company, Parsons and Whittemore Industries 

Incorporated. And so far as I know, and so far as can be shown by any public document in 

Saskatchewan, Parsons and Whittemore Industries Incorporated has no connection whatever with any of 

the other Parsons and Whittemore corporations. 

 

So it looks as if the Prince Albert mill is a success as some say it is, then Mr. Landegger is making 

himself a handsome profit. But let‟s be perfectly clear. He is not risking that profit on the Athabasca 

mill, or if he is, it cannot be shown by any public documents in Saskatchewan. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1306 

The Minister attempted to deal with the service contract. I shall come back to that in a moment. I just 

want to sum up once again. So far as any record is concerned in Saskatchewan, there is no evidence that 

any Landegger money or any Landegger interest in the Prince Albert mill is in any way committed to the 

Athabasca project. If this is false, we should have the facts. 

 

The Minister then went on to say that I was wrong when I said that Parsons and Whittemore would 

make a profit even though the mill didn‟t make a profit. Here is what he said: 

 

Mr. Blakeney said that Parsons and Whittemore will make a profit whether the company makes a 

profit or not. This is false. Athabasca must make a profit before Parsons and Whittemore makes a cent. 

 

That statement is simply and bluntly false. Mr. Speaker, that is the nub of the whole matter. Our basic 

objection to this type of financing is that Parsons and Whittemore can make a profit whether or not the 

mill ever makes a profit. 

 

This is the basis of all our objections. To go over it again: It is entirely possible and entirely probable, as 

the Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) pointed out, that the mill can be built for much 

less than $117 million. After all, no tenders were called. This is a sweetheart contract. If they can‟t build 

a little bit of profit in a sweetheart contract, they are not the businessmen I think they are. No alternative 

bids have been received, no alternative bids were even solicited. It is entirely possible that Parsons and 

Whittemore could make $12 million, $16 million, on this contract. Now suppose they made $16 million 

or close to it, then it only remains for the mill to operate for three or four years at a break-even level for 

them to make another couple of million dollars on the sales contract and the management contract. 

 

Suppose that the mill then runs into a little bit of difficulty because of wood costs, freight rates or 

exchange rates or whatever? It is entirely possible that under those circumstances Parsons and 

Whittemore could walk away with a profit in their pocket and leave the whole mess to the people of 

Saskatchewan with a $130 million price tag. 

 

Members opposite are fond of telling us that Parsons and Whittemore will sell this pulp and that they are 

good salesmen. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, when they have next to no financial commitment in this mill and 

when they have a mill in New Brunswick worth about $60 million, where the Government of New 

Brunswick has guaranteed only $28 million and when they have to decide whose pulp will be sold, say 

their New Brunswick pulp or Athabasca‟s, guess whose pulp will be sold? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — All this can certainly happen, Mr. Speaker. People of Saskatchewan can lose well 

over $120 million without having any claims on any of these performance bonds which the Minister 

talked about so irrelevantly. 

 

I want to touch again on two other contracts which the Minister of Welfare mentioned, the Sales 

Contract and the Management Contract, and what he said about my remarks being absurd. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1307 

I said that those contracts were set up so that in effect Landegger was negotiating with Landegger, and 

he said that that‟s absurd. And why did he say that? He said that it was absurd because, as he said, 

“Athabasca could not cancel that contract without the consent of five of the six directors.” He didn‟t 

know that the contract went on year after year. He didn‟t know that these were in effect contracts in 

perpetuity. The only thing that will save us — and I look to the Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre 

(Mr. Estey) and Member for Lumsden (Mr. Heald) — is maybe the rule against perpetuities. It may save 

us in this case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But on the face of it, these contracts go on indefinitely and cannot be changed unless 

Mr. Karl Landegger in his capacity as Parsons and Whittemore agrees with Mr. Karl Landegger in his 

capacity as Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said enough to indicate that with respect to the financial part of this transaction, it is 

a giveaway. I call the transaction with respect to Prince Albert the biggest sellout since Manhattan Island 

was sold to the Indians for $24. All I can say is . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . the price for Athabasca has dropped to $12. 

 

Now let‟s turn to a couple of other aspects of this. The Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) dealt with the 

water pollution matter. I want to deal with some aspects of it because Members opposite were very 

critical of the Member for Biggar because he did not quote at length from the VanLuven report. He 

relied on the other consultants‟ report. Well, it doesn‟t matter which consultant‟s report that you look at, 

this House should not pass the Bill unless the Government can give us better assurance that there will be 

protection for our waters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I put it to you and I ask the Member for Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. 

Forsyth) to agree with me, that this House should not pass this Bill unless the Government tells us not 

only that there will be pollution control but what pollution controls there will be. 

 

We are not satisfied with a Government assurance that proper steps will be taken. We are not satisfied 

because we don‟t think the Government knows what proper steps should be taken. We had these 

assurances with respect to the Prince Albert mill. We had these assurances. They were specifically asked 

for in this House and they were specifically given and then we were deceived. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We were told that the latest methods of controlling water pollution would be used. 

We were deceived! As far as we are concerned, as far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned, 

once bitten, twice shy! 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1308 

This Athabasca mill has been in the planning stage for well over a year. It was virtually announced in 

this House last year. I say, on a reading of all these documents it is perfectly clear that after one year of 

planning, nobody knows what the water pollution controls will be. And if this is so and I say it is so, 

then this means that pollution control is not very high on someone‟s priority list. The clear conclusion, 

and the only conclusion that can be drawn from this debate and from the information tabled, is that the 

Government doesn‟t know what the pollution controls are going to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And that wouldn‟t be so bad but the Government does not know that it has put itself 

into a position where it can‟t be tough. After all the self-congratulation that we have heard from 

Members opposite, after all the breast-beating the Government has engaged in with respect to this 

Athabasca mill, it doesn‟t dare back out now. It has itself into a position where it virtually has to agree to 

what Mr. Landegger says and Mr. Landegger knows it. This is exactly the same position that Mr. Duff 

Roblin got himself into with respect to Churchill Forest Industries. I want you to read that story, it is a 

very, very instructive story. 

 

In Manitoba there were big announcements about a pulp mill immediately before the election. After the 

election, there were no documents signed. Because the Government felt that it was in a political box it 

went down the road and signed whatever the promoters wanted. And they are now in the position in 

Manitoba, the taxpayers of Manitoba are in the position, where they are left holding the bag. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I suggest to you that the Government of Saskatchewan is getting itself into exactly 

the same position with respect to pollution control. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker. If the Government opposite doesn‟t have the Landegger interests tied down on 

pollution control now, then we and our resources are in deep trouble. The Government should have them 

tied down and I suspect that they haven‟t. I suspect the Landegger interests have not agreed to any 

pattern of pollution control and our resources will suffer. 

 

I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that the stakes are high. I can do no better than to quote the 

Government‟s own consultant, the one whom I was being urged to consult by the Provincial Treasurer 

(Mr. Steuart) and by the Member for Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth), Mr. VanLuven. Page 19: 

 

It is essential to consider the total BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) and the reaction times in the 

Churchill River system. It is quite conceivable that the entire system would become seriously polluted 

from Durocher Lake to Hudson Bay. 

 

This is what VanLuven says: 

 

It is quite conceivable that the entire system would become seriously polluted from Durocher Lake to 

Hudson Bay. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1309 

Seriously polluted! And the Churchill River system is the last major river system in settled North 

America that is not significantly polluted. 

 

The Government‟s consultant says that there is a risk of the entire system being seriously polluted. We 

ask in this debate, what are you going to do to guard against that risk? We ask: What proposals do you 

have to guard against this risk? And what are we told? We are told, “We don‟t know.” We are told, “We 

are working on it.” We are told, “Nothing is finalized.” And VanLuven says as clearly as words can say 

it — no system has been finalized. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Government opposite in effect says, “We don‟t have any final plans. We don‟t 

have any answers.” But the Member for Nutana South says, “Leave it to us. It is in good hands. Don‟t 

worry. Don‟t nitpick.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not good enough for this House and it is not good enough for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let‟s look a little further. The consultant says again and again that he doesn‟t have the facts. He says 

that more tests are needed. On page 15 he says: 

 

. . . that more study of the area in summer weather is required. 

 

On page 28 he says: 

 

. . . it will be necessary to operate a pilot plant under severe winter conditions. 

 

These tests have to be done. Summer tests have to be done. Winter tests have to be done before we shall 

even know what kind of a pollution system we should be building. 

 

As far as this House is concerned, we don‟t even know that these tests have started. So far as this House 

is concerned, we have not been told one word about these tests. And yet, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding 

the fact that their own consultant says that we need summer tests, we need winter tests, and 

notwithstanding the fact that these tests have not been completed and probably haven‟t even been 

started, the Premier is saying that construction starts in three months. 

 

These tests are needed even before the system can be designed. Tests not done. Winter tests not done. 

Summer tests not done and even before the pollution system can be designed the Premier says 

construction starts in three months. 

 

So much for their concern about water pollution. They are willing to risk serious pollution of the whole 

Churchill River system, in the words of their own consultant, rather than offend the Landegger interests, 

rather than demanding that a proven pollution control system be part of the design before it starts. And I 

charge you, I charge you with allowing this mill to start construction before a proven pollution system is 

even designed. But they say, “What of it, it‟s only the Churchill River system.” Only the basis of the 

way of life for 4,000 or 5,000 of our Saskatchewan citizens. What‟s that, when balancing it against 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1310 

the Landegger interests. Only the basis of the best tourist potential Saskatchewan has. What‟s that? 

What‟s that when balancing it against the Landegger interests? Mr. Speaker, I could not vote, and I 

would not vote, for a Bill to authorize agreements that do not spell out in the clearest possible way the 

manner in which our water is going to be protected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are demanding this protection of 

their heritage. The Government has no answers. The Government says construction will start before it 

has any answers, before the tests are even done to provide answers. This is not good enough. It‟s not 

good enough for the people of Saskatchewan and it shouldn‟t be good enough for this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — To illustrate the way in which we have been dealt with in this debate, we have had 

the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) tell us that they are going to require pollution control, that we 

shouldn‟t indulge in mass hysteria, that they are going to make provisions for $10 million for protection 

equipment. That‟s on one day. A couple of days later the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) says, “We expect 

Athabasca to put in the most modern anti-pollution devices available and my information is that they 

will cost in the neighborhood of $7 million.” The Provincial Treasurer says $10 million, the Premier 

says the next day $7 million. Could anything be clearer than that? They don‟t know what‟s going in 

there and they don‟t know whether our water will be protected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are indeed other difficulties with respect to this project. 

These agreements do not offer any protection for our forests. These contracts do not required the Pulp 

Mill Company to do any reforestation work. I invite anyone to find anywhere in those contracts any 

provisions whereby Athabasca shall plant a tree. As I read the contracts, and I may be wrong, the entire 

cost of reforestation is to be borne by the taxpayers, the entire cost. For this we are to get 20 cents a cord 

of what Athabasca are cutting. Now I think a very generous estimate of how many cords will be cut 

when this mill is going well is a million cords a year. Now that‟s $200,000 a year. I say that‟s generous 

and certainly on the basis of anything coming out of Prince Albert, it is far more than generous. 

 

I wonder if people know just how little this Government has got out of the Prince Albert Pulp Company 

Ltd. You know that in its first year of operation we got a total, and this includes dues and ground rentals 

and lease area payments and all the rest of it, both from the Pulp Company and Saskatchewan Forest 

Product‟s pulpwood subsidiary — how much do you think we got in this first year of 1967-68 — 

$42,000. Next year we were in trouble again — back to $105,000. These are the people who are telling 

us that Athabasca is going to yield $1 million in dues and fees. $1 million when the Prince Albert mill in 

its first 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1311 

three years hasn‟t yielded $300,000. And I can say that I haven‟t deduced from this the $800,000 in 

losses that Saskatchewan Pulp Wood Ltd. has suffered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Even though estimates up until the end of 1972 indicate annual payments of less than 

$300,000 a year. Oh, but they‟ve got all that fire fighting covered there. Nothing nasty like charging 

Parsons and Whittemore for its fires. If it‟s a little fire, yes. But if it‟s a big fire costing more than 

$15,000, the Government picks up the tab after that. I say that the $200,000 provided is far, far too little. 

That won‟t even buy the seedlings necessary to replant the area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Member opposite is wondering whether I am being a little expansive in my 

argument. If indeed it will buy the seedlings, it won‟t get a quarter of them into the ground. I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is far, far too little to pay the reforestation costs of a program involving a million cords 

over a widely dispersed area. If our forests are to receive even minimum protection it will take annual 

expenditures of $500,000 or $1 million protection and reforestation. Certainly regeneration is not in any 

sense guaranteed. Let‟s be absolutely clear. These people are talking about our 1,400 ton a day mill. I 

don‟t know when those trees got there but in January of 1966 the Premier told us that the Meadow Lake 

mill was ruled out. He said a survey of the Meadow Lake area had indicated there was not enough wood 

in the area adequately to support a mill. So I gather that since 1966 we‟ve grown enough to support the 

largest pulp mill in Canada. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, since that time of course we got all that land added in from the Federal 

Government. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The whole Cold Lake area was there in 1966 and it is there now. We had no right to 

cut it in 1966 and we don‟t have any right to cut it now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is true, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier may have been talking only about a softwood 

mill. It is true that maybe he did not at that time take into account the possibility of a hardwood mill. But 

at any rate I say to him that if there was not enough for a small softwood mill in 1966, that‟s for a 400 

ton mill, there is not now wood there for a 1,400 ton mill, half of which will be softwood. 

 

I want also to point out to Hon. Members that this wood has come there since 1966. It grew very rapidly, 

it may be that some Members opposite have been up there contributing their particular brand of 

fertilizer, I don‟t know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1312 

Mr. Blakeney: — But all I can say is that I have here the Parsons and Whittemore Feasibility Study for 

the Prince Albert mill and when this Feasibility Study was prepared, at that time it was indicated that the 

possible size of a pulp mill at Meadow Lake could not exceed 480 tons a day. I refer you to page 120 of 

the Parsons and Whittemore Feasibility Study. Now I am not surprised that they don‟t file the Feasibility 

Study for the Athabasca mill, if the Feasibility Study is going to say that there is only enough timber for 

a 480 ton mill on a sustained yield basis and they are putting in a 1,400 ton mill. It is hard to know what 

this next Feasibility Study might say. If I were they, I think I wouldn‟t table it either. Instead the 

Government has filed a document called their Fact Finding Report. I wonder whether people have 

looked at this Report. On the basis of this Report they say that there is enough timber for a 1,400 ton 

mill. And do you know what they class as pulpwood? Do you know what this Report classes as 

pulpwood? They class as pulpwood any tree, hardwood or softwood, of any species which, five feet off 

the ground, is four inches in diameter. Four inches in diameter; that‟s a ruddy toothpick! I should like to 

know of any mill in Canada which was ever based on pulpwood of a four inch size. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I want to tell you that in your own Forest Management License you define 

pulpwood as a very different thing. You don‟t say that in your Forest Management License that four 

inch breast-high wood is pulpwood. You say that it isn‟t pulpwood unless it is four inches in diameter at 

a 17-foot level and that‟s a very, very different tree. But in order to show that they‟ve got enough wood 

up there, they are measuring every twig and every toothpick in Northwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to Prince Albert, the Minister says he is experimenting with every method of 

reforestation. Well, what does this mean — experimenting with every method of reforestation? He talks 

as if this was the only pulp mill in the world. There is a pulp mill at Hinton in Alberta. There is a pulp 

mill at Pine Falls in Manitoba. Why can‟t he use their methods of reforestation? I‟ll tell you why he 

can‟t use their methods of reforestation, it is because he is not willing to accept the limitations with 

respect to wood harvesting that are imposed in Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, Manitoba and Alberta are not permitting clear-cutting over vast areas of square 

miles such as the mill at Prince Albert is and that is why he has a new and different problem. That‟s why 

he is experimenting. That‟s why three years after that mill is in operation he hasn‟t really started 

reforestation. He is trying to find out how he should do it. He hasn‟t even got at the job yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if clear-cutting is not permitted, it is perfectly clear in these documents that the Athabasca 

mill may be a highly marginal economic venture. And if it is permitted then reforestation costs are going 

to be high. They are going to be very, very much higher than $200,000 a year and it is going to involve a 

continued and perpetual subsidy by the people of Saskatchewan. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1313 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — These agreements commit every tree in northwest Saskatchewan, the exceptions are 

trifling. For fifty years we are committed. Fifty years, Mr. Speaker, is a long time. Who can tell what 

developments will happen up there in 50 years. If in 20 or 30 years we want to develop some tracts up 

there for tourist development we shall have to buy it back from Athabasca. If in 10 or 15 years there are 

a number of tourist developments up there, they have fire places and the Indians want to cut a little 

hardwood for sale, can it be done? It can‟t be done, it is prohibited by this agreement. Prohibited! Native 

people in the North are not permitted to cut a single stick of wood for sale in northwest Saskatchewan. 

These agreements sign away every stick of timber in northwest Saskatchewan. They provide no 

assurance that our forest will be renewed. They offer no protection to thousands of citizens who depend 

upon these timber resources. They offer no protection for our tourist potential. On these grounds alone, 

this Bill should be defeated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have reviewed the facts and on the facts these agreements fail to 

protect our forests; they fail to guard our heritage; they fail to guard against water pollution; and they 

add up to a gigantic financial give-away. They mean that the Government will provide by cash or 

guarantee all, or almost all, the money; take all, or almost all, the risk and get 30 per cent of the equity. 

They mean that Parsons and Whittemore will put up little or no money, will take little or no risk and get 

70 per cent of the equity. They mean that we, the people of Saskatchewan, will be bankrolling Parsons 

and Whittemore for a chance to make a great deal of money and if it doesn‟t pay off we pick up the tab 

and if it does pay off they pick up the plum. On this ground and on this ground alone, the Bill should be 

resoundingly defeated. I see the Premier is in his place and I say to him, if he wants to go to the people 

on this Bill, then let‟s go to the people on this Bill. Let‟s go to the people on this Bill! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If he wants to call an election, we shall welcome it, Mr. Speaker. But I say, if he 

does, he will be resoundingly defeated and I say that this Bill should be resoundingly defeated. It‟s a bad 

Bill for Saskatchewan. It won‟t be defeated in this House but it will be defeated by the electors of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Take it as read! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Wouldn‟t you like to take it as read, Mr. Romanow. 

Wouldn‟t you like those half-truths and innuendoes to go unanswered. Wouldn‟t you like that little 

academy award performance you put on for the gallery up there to go unanswered. Oh, you‟d love that, 

you and Mr. Blakeney. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1314 

You know, it was an interesting contest, Mr. Speaker. First of all we heard motor-mouth from Saskatoon 

get up and rave and rant and put on an academy performance trying to prove to his backbenchers that 

they made a mistake when they picked little Allan. Then Allan got up and practically repeated the 

performance word for word, only with greater histrionics, to prove that they didn‟t make a mistake. 

Well, I can tell them both, Mr. Speaker, just as soon as we go to an election, little Allan in turn with 

poor Woodrow will be the second victim to lose to Thatcher, two in a row. 

 

You know, Mr. Blakeney says the Prince Albert mill was a bitter experience. “A bitter experience,” 

those are his words. Well, it was a bitter experience, a bitter experience for the Socialist NDP, it‟s a 

monument to Liberal success and a monument to Socialist failure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am sorry to see the big former Department of Natural Resources Minister leaving 

because I have a few words for him. You know, Mr. Blakeney likes to talk about the turnkey contract, 

the “little sweetheart deal” he calls it. A deal that was made at arm‟s length. He knows what it means all 

right because he had been imported out from the Maritimes as one of their little backroom planners 

when they made a similar kind of deal with the steel mill. Just let me tell about it and we‟re not 

complaining. The steel mill was a good thing in spite of the NDP, in spite of the Socialists. Let‟s just 

talk about the kind of a deal that you put your money into when you Socialists were in power. It‟s a 

terrible thing when we do it but a great success when they did it. Now if you‟ll close your mouth and 

open your ears, you might learn something if it‟s not too late. 

 

Interprovincial Steel Corporation Limited was incorporated as a private Saskatchewan company 

December 24, 1957. By contract dated October 7, 1958 with Industrial Consultants Limited, J.W. Sharp 

and J.N. Turvey were the beneficial owners of all the issued shares of Industrial Consultants Limited. 

The Company agreed to a fee of two per cent of the total cost of constructing and equipping the plant for 

contract supervision and company management until the plant operated effectively. A fixed-price 

turnkey contract for construction of a 100,000 ton per annum plant at a price of $10,865,000 was entered 

into under date of October 14, 1958. In 1958 the corporation known as Industrial Consultants Limited 

acted as agent for the Company. Was that a sweetheart deal? Did Mr. Blakeney, who was then a civil 

servant, go up and down the country searching from one end of Canada to the other to see if he could 

find someone who would build this steel mill at a competitive price? No. It was a turnkey contract 

handed over to these people. What interest did the government have in it? You may say, “Well, why was 

the government interested?” The government was interested in this to a far greater extent than we are 

even suggesting we should be interest in the Athabasca pulp mill. 

 

Just let me give you the facts. Let‟s look at the proposed financing as provided for in an agreement dated 

March 17, 1959 between the Provincial Treasurer and the sponsors: total cost of mill and equipment, 

$12 million; provincial guarantee, $10 million — out of a total cost of $12 million, $10 million. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1315 

Then they purchased some shares on another little deal — $108,000 worth of shares purchased by the 

provincial government. In other words, using NDP arithmetic, the Province‟s exposure was $10,108,000 

on a $12 million project. Now did the sponsors assume a similar exposure? No, their exposure was 

limited to $78,000 equity and a $1.5 million in convertible sinking fund debentures. Now is that the end 

of it; was this the end of it; was that all? Oh, no, this was just the beginning. In April of 1960 the 

government provided a guarantee, another guarantee of up to $2 million for a line of credit for the 

company. Why? The Company couldn‟t get going; they had some trouble starting up; they had some 

problems getting to a profitable position. But the government guaranteed another deal, another guarantee 

of $2 million at the bank. That wasn‟t the end. In August, 1960 the government provided a further 

guarantee of $2.5 million. Again, in May, 1961 the government finance office guaranteed a further 

capital working loan. Now, was this a bad deal? No, it turned out to be a good deal. There are hundreds 

and hundreds working out in that mill. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Tell us who built . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The same people who owned the mill built the mill. They didn‟t put it out to contract. 

Sweetheart deal you call it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — You are running out of steam! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You know, the Hon. Member from The Battlefords . . . I heard the Hon. Member from 

The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) speak at the nomination for the former mayor of Regina. There were 80 

people to start with and five minutes after he started speaking only 35 were left. I don‟t know, maybe 

they don‟t listen to him over there. 

 

We don‟t say it was a bad deal. It provides jobs for hundreds and hundreds and secondary jobs for 

thousands of people in Saskatchewan. But it is an amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, what was a good deal for 

the Socialists, what was hailed as a triumph for the Socialists is now pointed to as a bad deal. A terrible 

risk when we introduce it to try to do what? To try and help the people of Northwestern Saskatchewan. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I am really pleased the NDP are not supporting this mill because they are 

showing their true colors all the way through this debate. When they were in government and since they 

have been in Opposition, they talk one way and they act another. They like to play at being bleeding 

hearts and shed crocodile tears about the plight of the unemployed, those out of work. But when we 

came in here we tried to bring a mine to the Wollaston Lake area to spend some money there, they 

oppose it. When we bring in a new pulp mill that really in fact will put to work directly 1,200 people 

during construction, another 900 or 1,000 people when the mill is in operation and generate another 

2,000, 3,000 or 4,000 jobs, most of which will be held by Indian and Metis people because they are the 

largest percentage of people who live in that area — what do they do? They oppose it. They like to talk 

about the Indian people. They are the friends of the Indian people. The Hon. Member for Shellbrook 

(Mr. Bowerman) 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1316 

left — he is coming back in now — the great friend of the Indian, the Hon. Member for Shellbrook. 

What did he do when he worked for the Department of Natural Resources? How did he show his 

friendship for the Indians? You know he had the nerve to talk about the Member for Athabasca (Mr. 

Guy) attending a meeting to try and talk to the Northern fishermen but when he was the head of the 

Fisheries Branch, or second in command of the Fisheries Branch, let me tell you what they used to do. 

They used to dress in civilian clothes and attend the meetings that were held by the Indian fishermen up 

North to vote on whether they would fish at this lake or they‟d fish at that lake and who they would sell 

their fish to. Instructions were sent out by that man or somebody close to him to say: “Don‟t wear your 

Department of Natural Resources uniforms because the natives up there would recognize you when you 

vote. It will upset them.” So they used to vote and control the native people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What did they do? Sure they did. They voted and forced the Indians to fish the lakes 

favored by the Department of Natural Resources. If they didn‟t fish in the designated lake, if they didn‟t 

sell their fish to the Co-op Fisheries or whoever the Department wanted them to, they hauled them to the 

courts and took their equipment away. He was involved in court cases brought up in this very House. He 

helped take the equipment away from many Indians, either he or the men working under him, took away 

the nets and the boats of many fishermen up in Northern Saskatchewan, most of them Indians. 

 

They like to talk about pollution. The Hon. Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) stands up 

in this House and talks about pollution. What about pollution in his own city? Has Mr. Romanow ever 

stood up in the city of Saskatoon and said, “Let‟s put a halt to the polluting of the Saskatchewan River 

by over 130,000 people dumping their raw sewage into the River,” where they have dumped their raw 

sewage into the River for 20 years, when the Socialists were the government . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . when your father, Mr. Brockelbank, sat in this House and did nothing about it, 

when the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) sat in this House as Treasurer and did 

absolutely nothing about it, and now they cry crocodile tears about pollution. 

 

Let‟s talk about this so-called sellout. They say we are selling out our resources, selling them out to, of 

all people, the Americans. Well, let‟s take a look at some of these deals the old CCF government made. I 

tell you when the NDP or the Socialists were in power, we all know they promised pulp mill after pulp 

mill before elections. They tried to peddle the resources of this province all over the continent to anyone 

who would buy them. They offered a deal to any promoter who would stop in Regina for 10 minutes and 

help them announce a pulp mill. I‟ve got a few of those deals here. 

 

Let‟s look at what they put out. In 1961 they put out a pamphlet called “Saskatchewan Pulp and Paper 

Potential” under the auspices of the Department of Industry. They‟ve got a little 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1317 

pulp mill floating about 1,000 feet in the air above the city of Prince Albert. They really never got it 

down out of the air. Well, let‟s look at this. Mr. Blakeney says ours is a bad deal. Considering the size of 

the guarantee the Province should obtain a larger percentage of the equity. When they put out this 

pamphlet in 1961 it was a brochure entitled, “Saskatchewan Pulp and Paper Potential.” It was put out by 

the Department of Industry. This brochure is based on a report, “Prospects for Pulp and Paper Mill 

Development in Canada,” by Sandwell and Company then referred to as the “Stanford Report” 

developed at the Stanford Research Institute in mellow California. Here are some of the comments from 

this brochure: 

 

Saskatchewan pulp and paper potential is ripe for development. 

 

It states that: 

 

The Saskatchewan Government would offer substantial financial assistance in the form of loans or 

guarantees. 

 

It says on the second last page: 

 

A guarantee might support up to 60 per cent of the company‟s financial proposals. 

 

Nowhere does it say anything about equity, what the government would want in return. They were 

prepared to support up to 60 per cent of the company‟s financial proposal. No mention was made of the 

government receiving any equity or share of the ownership in spite of the fact that the NDP agreed or 

were prepared to guarantee 60 per cent of any financial proposals. Now in addition, the government is 

prepared to provide more help than the 60 per cent. In the next line it says: 

 

We will also give you wholehearted co-operation from other government agencies and Crown 

corporations. 

 

And on the next page — and I would point this out to Mr. Blakeney, who just before he left the House 

bitterly attacked the fact that this pulp mill will pay a three per cent commission on the sale of pulp. 

Well, in 1961, according to the same brochure, the economic summary of gross earnings estimates and 

included a sales commission of three per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, if a three per cent sales commission 

was acceptable in 1961, why is it so terrible now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In 1961, Roy, your boys offered three per cent in perpetuity. It was fine in 1961, why is 

it so terrible in 1971? 

 

Let‟s take a look at what they said about pollution. Mr. Blakeney and Mr. Romanow expressed concern 

for our Northern environment; the effects of a pulp mill on our lakes or rivers. Well, what does this 

brochure say about pollution control? Just one sentence: 

 

A good water supply and effluent disposal are provided by the North Saskatchewan River which flows 

through the city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1318 

Mr. Steuart: — Then there is the same Sandwell Report — it is a little more specific. On page 29 it 

suggests the following: 

 

Water for a pulp and paper mill may be obtained from the North Saskatchewan River which will dilute 

the mill effluent sufficiently so as to require the installation of only nominal effluent treatment 

equipment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Further to that the report stated: 

 

. . . that there were no communities for some distance down the stream that would be affected by the 

mill effluent. 

 

No mention of primary disposal treatment, no mention of secondary treatment. Compare the facts, Mr. 

Speaker, compare the facts as laid out before the Opposition in this deal we are proposing with the 

Athabasca Forest Industries Ltd. and that is, we shall spend in fact up to $10 million or more if it is 

necessary to protect the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with Mr. Kramer, the former Minister of Natural Resources. It will take a 

little while because he rose in his place in this House and made an incredible statement the other night 

talking about this pulp mill, in talking about our fire fighting and he said, “Why does the Government 

waste money fighting fires in the far North? It is a terrible waste of money.” “In fact,” he said, “what are 

they fighting those fires for? All there is up there to burn is a little tundra.” Well, I don‟t know how far 

he has been up North or just where he has been in Northern Saskatchewan. There is a little tundra in 

Northern Saskatchewan, it is over in the northeastern part, a little tip in the corner of Saskatchewan. 

What is in the rest of the province that this former Minister of Natural Resources would turn over and let 

burn, let it go? Where do you draw the line? Where do you draw the line — 57th parallel? Would you let 

Ile-a-la-Crosse go? Would you let LaLoche go? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — No! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, you are the one who made the statement. You are the one who said, “Let it burn. 

It is a waste of money to fight fire in the North.” 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the Wafflers in this province and we know they are what they 

stand for. At least they are honest. But now we‟ve got a new bunch. They are Blakeney‟s Wigglers. You 

know the trouble with those people across the way, they haven‟t got the guts to be Socialists and they 

haven‟t got the brains to be Capitalists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let‟s look at their claim and let‟s look at their records. I‟ve got a contract here that was 

signed. It was signed by a Mr. K. Malcolm of Toronto. It is an agreement for 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1319 

a pulp mill signed and dated March 24, 1959. Let‟s look at the safeguards. Let‟s look at the deal. Who 

was it signed by? Well, it was signed by Alex Kuziak and he is gone but not forgotten, just as most of 

you will be after the next election. What was the stumpage rate charged by these Socialist protectors of 

the forests? Well, the first six years was one-third of the basic stumpage rate. For jackpine the basic 

stumpage rate was $1.10. So what were they going to give the pulp away to these people from Toronto 

for? 37 cents a cord. What are we going to get for it? $1.00 a cord. And the next six years, 74 cents a 

cord. What are we going to get for it? $1.00 a cord. What about provisions for water pollution? Well it 

says: 

 

The licensee shall comply with all relevant provisions of the Pollution Streams Act. 

 

And the Pollution Streams Act under the NDP was the most anaemic piece of legislation ever forced on 

to the public and they tried to pass it off as anti-pollution control. It meant in effect that they would have 

to do absolutely nothing. What about fire protection? 5 cents a cord? No. 3 cents an acre is all they get. 

What about reforestation? Not a nickel. Not one cent is mentioned in this contract signed by Mr. Kuziak 

about reforestation. 

 

Another thing. They talk about the streams and the rivers. There isn‟t a mention in this contract for a 

reservation of cutting the timber within 300 feet of the banks of lakes, rivers or streams. No reservation 

in this contract for cutting timber within 600 feet of the centre line of a bridge or highway as we have in 

these contracts and as we have with the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is not one word mentioned in these NDP contracts about employing one single native 

or Metis person. 

 

Now we come to 1963. You see they didn‟t get that pulp mill they promised in 1960. As a matter of fact 

it was just before the 1956 election that they promised one. Then just before the 1964 election they tried 

again. They thought, “We should try again.” They could smell defeat coming, they knew their days were 

numbered. In fact, they were so hopeless they appointed a man called Mr. Kramer as the Minister of the 

Department of Natural Resources. Well, that‟s the man who signed this particular deal. Mr. Kramer! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I don‟t know whether he can write or not but his name is signed to this. I tell you I 

don‟t know whether he can write or not but he sure couldn‟t read because he didn‟t read this contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Whom did this defender of the great resources of Saskatchewan sign the contract with? 

Did he sign it with a Saskatchewan firm? Did he make it with a Saskatchewan Crown corporation? 

Would it be government-owned? Oh, no. He signed it with the Green Bay Packaging Company of 

Wisconsin, an American firm. It is what he calls today a great sellout! 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1320 

Mr. Michayluk: — . . . destroyed in 1964! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — This was in 1963, Dick, that was just before . . . No, I guess we didn‟t defeat you. We 

shall this time, though. 

 

All right, what about this contract? Did the great Mr. Kramer, the defender of the North, mention the 

man who is going to look after pollution, who is going to look after reforestation? Not one mention of 

timber reservations again within any 300 feet of any lake, river or highway. Did the Minister obtain 

additional stumpage dues from this American company? Well, let‟s look at the stumpage dues. 37 cents 

for the first five years, 74 cents and then $1.10 for eternity. Some deal, some big deal you made, or tried 

to make! 

 

What about reforestation? Now a word in here about reforestation. What about pollution control? Well, I 

can‟t find any. Not a word. Nothing! What about helping the native people he now bleeds so pathetically 

for and cries crocodile tears about? Not one solitary mention of providing employment for any of our 

native people from this American company. You know, Mr. Speaker, the irony of this is that they didn‟t 

even get a pulp mill. They ran all over this country, up and down the United States, entertained any 

promoter that would come and after they tried to give it away and made idiots of themselves, they 

couldn‟t even give our resources away, never mind selling them. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Come on, Jack, you can take it. You are a bigger man than that! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I don‟t blame Jack for leaving. He is the only Capitalist Socialist I know on that side of 

the House. I think to be fair to him, he married into the Party and he may see the light of day one of 

these days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they tried to peddle the resources of the province at cut-rate prices from one end of this 

country to the other and they failed. Why are they doing this? Why are they so full of bitterness and so 

full of hate? Why are they so negative? Why are they crying sour grapes? We were surprised, frankly, 

when they opposed this. I don‟t think, to tell you the truth, that they give a tinker‟s damn about the 

pollution. I don‟t think they give a tinker‟s damn about the Indians and the natives. I think our friend, 

who just came in who quoted the Manitoba situation and said, “Look what those free enterprisers did in 

Manitoba.” This is the Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). “What a terrible deal.” But 

what he forgot to tell the people was that when his hero, Mr. Schreyer and the NDP took over, they 

could have stopped that Manitoba pulp mill deal in its tracks. They could have passed an Act in the 

Legislature to outlaw the whole transaction and stopped it. But did Mr. Schreyer stop it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No. He paid out over $40 million, not in contingency guarantees but in cold hard cash 

and the mill isn‟t going. It sits there, a 450 ton mill, a failure before it ever got off the ground and the 

NDP in Manitoba should hang their head 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1321 

because they didn‟t have the guts to stop it. Do you know what Schreyer said when asked why he didn‟t 

stop it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Equity! They haven‟t got a 5-cent piece of equity in it. And do you know what Mr. 

Schreyer said when they asked him why he didn‟t stop it? Well, he said, “You know we‟re a Socialist 

government and a lot of people think that we‟re against private enterprise and we just got going and we 

were down in New York trying to get some money and we went down to Bay Street trying to get some 

money and if we‟d have closed this thing up immediately, people would have said, „you‟re anti-private 

enterprise,‟ and it would have hurt our future.” So he let it go and the price of his gutlessness was 

another $40 million cost to the taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) says, “Look at it. That‟s the 

deal made by the Conservatives and they‟re private enterprisers and you Liberals are private enterprisers 

so you are all in the same pot.” I wonder if he follows that through with that famous quote that the 

Minister of Highways, Mr. Borowski or whatever they call him, from the Government of Manitoba. I 

wonder if you New Democrats feel the same way about the native people that he feels. He said, “We 

don‟t want any drunken Indians working around here.” I wonder if you feel the same way about veterans 

as he does. He wanted a veteran fired out of the Legislative building. He said that the man was too 

crippled to do the job, he didn‟t want him around the buildings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What was the attitude of the NDP about Indians? What was their answer? I‟ll tell you 

what their answer was. They didn‟t have five per cent Indian and Metis people like we have working in 

the Government. They didn‟t have four per cent or three per cent. They didn‟t have one per cent. They 

never had one clause in any contract that they signed, any contract, a road contract or any other kind, 

demanding or even asking them, never mind forcing them, to give our Indian and Metis people a chance. 

What did they do for the Indian and Metis people? They turned them over to the direction, guidance and 

dictatorship of some fellow called Woollam whom we fired about two months after we came to office. 

What‟s their answer to those people up in Northwestern Saskatchewan? I‟ll tell you their answer. It‟s 

“let them rot on welfare,” that‟s their answer. 

 

What about our resources? What‟s their answer? They said, “Oh, we would take that money and we‟d 

develop great tourist facilities.” Well, Mr. Speaker, what tourist facilities did they develop in Northern 

Saskatchewan when they were the government? Let them stand up here and name any tourist facilities 

they developed in that part of Northern Saskatchewan. Not a five-cent piece did they spend on tourist 

facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1322 

Mr. Steuart: — Now when they are in Opposition they say, “Oh, we‟d take that money and we‟d create 

all kinds of employment.” Well, I‟ve pointed out to the House that there are 60 part-time jobs in the 

tourist industry in the Meadow Lake area. What about our resources? What was their answer when you, 

Mr. Kramer, were the Minister in the Department of Natural Resources? Your answer to our Northern 

resources, if you couldn‟t handle it under the Timber Board — and they had an iron grip on the Northern 

timber resources — you let them burn and you let them rot. What was your answer to pollution? What 

was your answer in the city of Saskatoon? What was your answer, Mr. Blakeney, when you sat over 

here? You had none! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Dump it in the river! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The river of the North Saskatchewan was dirty and it was polluted for all the 20 years 

that you were in office and you never lifted a finger. You never lifted a finger and in fact when the city 

of Prince Albert asked you for help, you sneered at us and wouldn‟t even go to Edmonton to talk to the 

Government of Alberta to see if they would do something. 

 

What about your record with the Interprovincial Co-op plant that started in Saskatoon under your 

government and you like to wave it in our face now? Push them a little deeper into the trouble they are 

in. When that plant started, did the former CCF government, the Socialist government, go to them and 

say put this pollution control in or that pollution control? They did not. They had nothing on the books. 

They had no laws at all. They had absolutely no policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker. We‟re moving into Committee on this Bill now. 

Every day that they block this Bill will be just one more day that there are no employment opportunities 

for the people in Northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now let me just tell you about that. Mr. Blakeney said, and Mr. Romanow says that the 

Government has no deal. He says they come in the House and say we‟re holding it up. Well, I explained 

to them the sequence of events. I think what they need to do is hire a good lawyer, they‟re having a little 

conflab, a little tete-a-tete there, boys, what you really need to do — Tweedledee and Tweedledum-dum 

— is to go out and hire a couple of good lawyers to straighten you out on this whole deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We need to get this Act through this House. At the same time we‟re working with the 

Federal Government, and of course they haven‟t put their okay on it. And they won‟t put their okay on it 

until they‟re satisfied, just as we must be satisfied, with things like reforestation and pollution control. 

Once they put their okay on it and we get their $12 million, we shall go to the markets and we‟ll raise 

the money. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1323 

Let me tell this House and the people of Saskatchewan — and I make this commitment on behalf of the 

Government — Mr. Blakeney said you‟re too far gone, it‟s too far down the road . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Don‟t believe it! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You wouldn‟t believe the Lord‟s Prayer if you knew how to read it. Let me tell you 

this. I make this commitment on behalf of the Government that if we‟re not satisfied with the pollution 

control, if we‟re not satisfied with reforestation, if we‟re not satisfied that this mill will be viable — just 

as the Prince Albert mill was viable — a sound economic complex — we‟ll stop it and we‟ll stop it in its 

tracks, and so will the people we‟re dealing with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And why will we do this? Because we have some common business sense on this side 

of the House, something that‟s absolutely foreign and missing on that side of the House. 

 

You know, Mr. Blakeney stood up in this House when he first talked on this Bill and he said, “I haven‟t 

been able to study all the documents. They are voluminous and they are intricate and they‟re complex,” 

and that‟s true. And so he said, “Before we‟d make a judgment, I have to study them.” But just before he 

adjourned the debate, he made the most unbelievable statement of all for a lawyer. He said, “Before I 

even look into it, I‟m not going to vote for it.” But it‟s a good thing that they never made NDP Members 

judges and probably never will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Because that would be a great attitude on the Bench. Bring in the accused, first we‟re 

going to hang him, then we‟ll listen to the evidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we had to listen when this debate first started to the former 

Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Lloyd, and he came in here and gave us his usual philosophical speech 

and then he picked up this report and he gave the most dishonest performance I‟ve ever seen in this 

House. And I mean that. He picked up this Associated Consultants Incorporated Report, tried to pretend 

that it was the report on pollution, which it wasn‟t, and said, “Let me read from it.” And he read very 

careful excerpts. The Hon. Member from Saskatoon followed his example. He though he‟d get in on the 

act a little bit too. He said, I‟m quoting Mr. Lloyd now: 

 

It is unfortunate that information on the waterflow quality in the beaver River is so sketchy. 

 

Then he said the Government doesn‟t even know what they‟re doing. He forgot to read the next line 

which is as follows: 

 

The estimate in quantity of effluent below Dorintosh where some measurements have been taken are 

sufficient. 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1324 

In all probability the flow in the Beaver, except at extremely low levels, will be adequate for the mill‟s 

requirement. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, why didn‟t he read that? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now then, he got down to the best one. He said, “Let me read you something . . .” 

 

Single readings for iron of 6.76 and for manganese of 1.00, both of these are so far from the average 

that they are questionable. In fact it is not unreasonable that they are typographical errors. 

 

And then he made a great fuss. He said, “Isn‟t this terrible? They admit it could be a typographical error 

and this is the kind of information they will use to build this mill on.” What he forgot to tell the House is 

that the report stated these readings were omitted. The report measured color, turbidity, iron manganese, 

total hardness — every measurement of pollution that they could take in that river. They‟ve got it all 

listed in the report. Down below with an asterisk they said this reading was omitted. One single reading 

was omitted because it was obviously an error. He tried to pretend to this House that he didn‟t know any 

better and that it was in there as part of the report. It was a dishonest statement just as his entire so-called 

philosophical approach about the protection of our environment was dishonest. You‟re all dishonest on 

this and you haven‟t go the guts to admit it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you have to say to yourself, why are they doing this? Why are they doing this? Well, let 

me tell you this: they are doing it for politics. They say they‟ll fight an election on it and I‟m glad that 

they will. I‟m glad they will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, and young Mr. Lawyer who hopes some day to be a corporation lawyer, and if 

you don‟t learn more about reading a balance sheet, you never, never will be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let me tell you something. Well, I think Wilf Gardiner knows about as much about a 

balance sheet as you. You‟d make a good pair, I think. 

 

Let me tell you something. I‟ll tell you why you‟re opposing this mill. Because you‟re bitter. The minute 

that anyone raises the question that this company might make a profit, you all rise up and every one of 

you pound the table and you get hysterical. You can‟t stand the idea. You can‟t stand the idea that 

private development has brought this nation and this province to the second highest standard of living in 

the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You can‟t stand the idea that private initiative and 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1325 

private enterprise in the Prince Albert pulp mill is the greatest success story in the industrial 

development of this province. It succeeded while you people with your box factory and your woolen 

mill, you failed and you failed miserably. And I‟m going to tell you something . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . in the last election you were aptly named “the wrecking crew” because you are 

negative, you are bitter and you had nothing new to offer. And when those Wafflers stand up and say 

they don‟t want any part of you, I don‟t blame them — for a different reason. They say you haven‟t got 

anything new. As I said before you haven‟t got the guts to be Socialists and you haven‟t got the brains to 

be private enterprisers. 

 

I‟m glad and I‟m happy that you‟re opposing this because there never was a single issue which showed 

the philosophical difference between our Party and your Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Nothing! Nothing, and I‟ll tell you why, why there will never be an NDP government 

in this country. We believe in the people, we believe in our resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And we know, we know that you have to develop those resources to help the people. 

We don‟t pay lip service to the Indian people or the disadvantaged or the jobless. We get out and we do 

something practical to help them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And you, you with your bitterness, your hatred, your sour grapes will be turned down 

by the people just as you were turned down in 1964, just as you were turned down in 1967 and you‟ll be 

turned down to an even greater extent in 1971. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS 
 

Messieurs 
Thatcher Howes Cameron 

Steuart Heald Guy 

Barrie Loken MacDougall 

Grant Coderre Larochelle 

Estey MacLennan Gallagher 

Hooker Breker Leith 

Radloff Weatherald Mitchell 

Gardner Coupland McPherson 

Forsyth McIvor Schmeiser 

 

-27 



March 25, 1971 

 

 
1326 

NAYS 
 

Messieurs 
 

Blakeney Bowerman Kramer 

Messer Wood Romanow 

Davies Dewhurst Meakes 

Berezowsky Smishek Thibault 

Whelan Snyder Michayluk 

Brockelbank Baker Pepper 

Matsalla Wooff Kwasnica 

Kowalchuk Byers  

 

- 23 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 


