



















































Hansard: February 17, 1971


9 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

 

2nd Day 

 

Wednesday, February 17, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to welcome the following groups of 

students: from the constituency of Regina North East, represented by Mr. Smishek, 100 students from the 

Imperial School under the direction of their school teacher, Mr. Dumansky; from Regina South East 

constituency, represented by Mr. Baker, 42 students from the Wetmore School under the direction of their 

school teacher, Mr. Gendur. 

 

I am sure that all Hon. Members will wish to join with me in extending an extremely warm welcome to these 

children and to express the very sincere wish that their stay here may be educational and help them to take 

their proper places and play their parts proudly and well in the life of a free, self-governing nation. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

PRINCE ALBERT PULP MILL DOCUMENTS 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like 

to lay on the table a number of documents in respect to the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited and I 

should like to ask for leave to make a short statement in regard to these documents. 

 

Since February 16th, 1966 the Government has provided all pertinent documentation relating to the 

establishment of the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. In addition the Government has responded to all questions and 

Orders for Returns from Members of the Opposition with the following exceptions: 

 

On March 18th, 1969 the Hon. Mr. Blakeney asked for a copy of the union agreement between the 

Saskatchewan Pulp Wood Limited and its employees. The Government took the position, and I stand by this 

today, that the union agreement is a private contract between union and management and would be a breach 

of confidence to have the document made public. The Government would not require any union contract to 

be made public. 

 

On April 1st, 1969 the Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved for copies  

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

10 

 

of agreements between PAPCO and Parsons and Whittemore between February 29th, 1968 and March 15th, 

1969. In addition he requested agreements between PAPCO or Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated and 

Saskatchewan Pulp Wood Limited or Woodlands Enterprises Limited between February 23rd, 1966 and 

March 15th, 1969. At the time these questions were asked I was out of the province. The documents I now 

refer to are amendments to the original pulp wood agreements and are basically of a housekeeping and 

operational nature. Much of this information was provided during Crown Corporations Committee, however, 

since they were never formally tabled, I do so now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to lay on the table the following: (1) letter amendment dated June 8th, 1967 

between P.A. Pulp Company Limited and Saskatchewan Pulp Wood Limited confirming installation and 

financing of a slashing system; (2) amendments between Saskatchewan Forest Products, Saskatchewan Pulp 

Wood Limited, and P.A. Pulp Company Limited dated July 19th, 1968 confirming assignments of the 

logging agreement by Saskatchewan Forest Products to Saskatchewan Pulp Wood Company Limited and 

amendments to the logging agreement and the acquisition agreement; (3) amendments to the acquisition 

agreement dated July 19th, 1968; (4) amendments to the logging agreement dated July 19th, 1968; (5) 

amendments to the management license agreement dated July 19th, 1968; (6) amendments to the master 

agreement dated July 19th, 1968; and (7) letter amendments dated March 3rd, 1969 among Saskatchewan 

Pulp Wood Limited, Saskatchewan Forest Products, and Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited, providing for 

the determination of audited costs under Schedule "B" of the logging agreements. 

 

With the tabling of these documents, the Government has tabled all amendments to the pulp agreements 

which were originally tabled on March 28th, 1966. 

 

In 1969 a further agreement was concluded whereby SEDCO agreed to guarantee a line of credit and some 

inventory financing on behalf of the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited. Although this agreement is dated 

the 1st day of March, 1969, when agreement in principle was reached, the transaction was not completed 

until after the 1st day of April, 1969. Accordingly on this ground alone the agreement was not available 

when Mr. Blakeney's question was asked. Further, it has always been the practice that financing in which 

SEDCO participates does not become a matter of comment in the House and documents related thereto are 

not normally tabled. Under the present circumstances and because the Government has already indicated that 

SEDCO has given certain guarantees, I now wish to table the following: 

 

(1) agreement among Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited, SEDCO, Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated, 

and Parsons and Whittemore Industries Incorporated, and the Provincial Treasurer dated March 1, 1969; (2) 

Escrow agreements among Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated, the Chase Manhattan Bank, SEDCO, and 

Parsons and Whittemore Mill and Machinery Limited dated April 9th, 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

11 

 

1969; (2) letter agreement dated April 25, 1969 among SEDCO, the Provincial Treasurer, the Prince Albert 

Pulp Company Limited, Parsons and Whittemore Industries Limited Incorporated, and the Parsons and 

Whittemore Incorporated. 

 

I ought to stress that the SEDCO guarantee had nothing to do with the establishment of the mill but is for the 

purpose of providing an operating line of credit. 

 

On March 17th, 1970, Mr. Berezowsky asked for the net profits of the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited 

in 1969. At that time the Government did not have the audited financial statement but I wish now to table the 

audited balance sheet of the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited made up to the 31st day of December, 

1969. This statement was filed in the office of the Registrar of Companies on the 6th day of May, 1970 and 

has been public knowledge ever since. I would table these documents now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure we are very grateful to the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) for filing all of these documents. I think that the filings will come as some 

surprise to many people throughout the province who have for some months now been assured by the 

Provincial Treasurer that all of this material was on the record. I have in fact seen many press statements to 

that effect. It was of course not the case then. We are grateful to the Government for having changed its point 

of view on what the public is entitled to by way of information. However belatedly the change of heart many 

come on the part of the Government, we welcome it and we hope that it will set a pattern for future 

development so that we shall not have to pry out of an unwilling government, copies of agreements which in 

some cases were concluded one, two and three years ago. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I should like to just answer a statement made, and very briefly, I realize there was no 

statement made but I made a statement . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I made statements . . . you have always had those documents . . . establishment of the 

pulp mill . . . this has been operating . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! It is a pretty well established fact in this House that when a Minister 

makes a statement, a Member of the Opposition may reply but there being no motion 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

12 

 

before the House, no debate can ensue. Now we are having debate, it has ensued and it has been instigated 

by the Provincial Treasurer. The debate is wide open. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I just want the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, if I might just . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Let me draw the attention of all Hon. Members to what can happen if we have ragged 

debates in this House. If one Member can make a double comment then any other Member can. If two 

Members are going to comment, then three can and I suggest that we'd better stay with the rules that have 

served this House so well over a long period of years, that there should be one statement and one comment 

only . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — . . . and I hope that from here on in that is going to be it. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

INTEREST RATE ON REPORTED FEDERAL LOAN 

 

MR. W.R. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 

ask the Premier or the Provincial Treasurer what the rate of interest is on the $5 million which is reportedly 

being made available to the Province of Saskatchewan by the Government of Canada for provincial or 

municipal projects that would help create employment that would not otherwise be created. Reports say that 

these are favorable interest rates, what is the actual interest rates? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll answer the question. They never gave us the interest rate. They 

said favorable. Now interest rates are dropping, it probably would be a little above the Canada Pension rate 

which during this past year was a little over 8 per cent but I presume now would be down under 8 per cent. 

Our problem very frankly was we don't borrow money for public works and the conditions that the Federal 

Government put on this would make the borrowing of the money and the trying to use it scarcely worth the 

effort for the lousy $5 million. If they had offered us what they did to Quebec, maybe $50 million, it would 

have been worthwhile. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

13 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I gather that the Government has not taken up 

the offer and if that's the case can the Government get cheaper money than what is offered by the 

Government of Canada? 

 

MR. STEUART: — The answer is we have not taken up the money. We don't need cheaper money because 

we don't borrow money for public works. We have a pay-as-you-go policy which we intend to continue so 

we don't need the money. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AGREEMENT WITH PARSONS AND WHITTEMORE 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to the Government. Toward the 

end of the last session the Premier referred to an informal agreement between the Government and Parsons 

and Whittemore with respect to a second pulp mill. He referred to it, I think, as an understanding and 

indicated that formal documents would or might be signed in May of 1970. I wonder if the Premier could 

advise the House whether any formal documents have been signed between the Government and Parsons and 

Whittemore or any of its subsidiaries with respect to the so-called Meadow Lake or Athabasca Pulp Mill and 

if the answer is Yes, when we might expect to have them tabled? 

 

MR. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — No, Mr. Speaker, there have been no documents yet signed but I 

may tell the House that we are diligently working on the agreements. 

 

AGREEMENT WITH PARSONS AND WHITTEMORE TO SELL PULP MILL 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert-East Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the 

Day, I should like to ask the Premier a question. We all recall that before we left the last session the Premier 

had told us that there was an agreement under which the Province's share of the Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

would be sold to Parsons and Whittemore. I'd like to know if any negotiations have been carried on for the 

sale and what is the situation at this moment with reference to the sale of the said 30 per cent interest 

between the Province and the firm Parsons and Whittemore? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — There have been no changes made since the session ended. I'd still be very pleased to 

have the views of the Member for Prince Albert-East Cumberland as to what we should do. One time the one 

way, the next time there are other ways so . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

14 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

MR. A. MITCHELL (Bengough) moved, seconded by Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE STEPHEN WOROBETZ 

Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech 

which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening the present Session. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak in reply to the Speech from the Throne but before doing so I should 

first like to congratulate the Hon. Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) on his election to the 

leadership of Her Majesty's official Opposition in this House. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — I am sure it is an honor in his party but I certainly don't begrudge him his new 

position in view of the insurmountable problems he faces in respect to his party which appears to be split in 

all directions. I also want to congratulate the Member from Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) on being 

chosen Deputy Leader of the party opposite. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Well, probably the reason he's not . . . I was going to add that it is my understanding 

he was much relieved when the leadership convention finally decided against him as leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations are also in order on this side of the House to the Hon. Member for Last 

Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) on being appointed Minister of Labour. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — I am sure he will contribute much to the Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on moving the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne, I should like to express my 

sincere appreciation on behalf of the constituents of Assiniboia-Bengough for the 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

15 

 

honor that has been bestowed on me as their representative in this Assembly. I am proud to represent the 

constituency of Assiniboia-Bengough which is a typical rural area of this great province of ours. My 

constituency presents a great challenge to serve people of all walks of life, tradesmen, farmers, merchants, 

students, members of the professions and others. Out people are mainly dependent on the agriculture 

industry. But, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, regardless of the problems we experience from time to time in 

this vital industry, these people all work together to meet the challenges. 

 

Our people are hopeful that the recent upswing in the sale of wheat will continue and once again business for 

our implement dealers, our contractors, our retailers and all our endeavors will prosper. I can assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are concerned that possible demands by labor may be such as to cause slowdowns and 

strikes on our railroads and at our ports in Canada. These are vital to the movement of our products once a 

market has been obtained. It is to be hoped that some solution to the labor problems, other than strikes, will 

be forthcoming. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of our assembling in this House from time to time is to examine the affairs of 

state and make changes which we sincerely hope will benefit the people of all areas of our great province. 

From the pending legislation which has been outlined in the Speech from the Throne, I am satisfied that this 

Session before us will prove to be most useful and fruitful. I believe, Mr. Speaker, we should look beyond 

our borders at this time and compare our position in this Province with the position of other provinces. The 

economy in general across the nation has sagged in the past year and unemployment in general has increased. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have been able to hold the line on many of these problems . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — . . . and in many areas have moved ahead, whereas in other provinces they have had 

extreme difficulties and find themselves faced with deficit budgeting. Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan 

have been able to balance our budget . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — . . . And this has only been accomplished by sound financing and total efforts of a 

free enterprise and responsible government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, I propose to deal with specific items which I feel are of utmost interest 

not only to me and the 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

16 

 

constituency which I represent but to all people in our province. 

 

First, I should like to speak about the agricultural industry, particularly those areas of the industry which this 

Government can aid and improve, and has in fact done so. Mr. Speaker, I feel that because of the problems 

in respect to the sale and movement of grain, which is the responsibility of the Federal Government, of 

course, most of the attention by the media and some of the farm organizations, is focused on this facet of the 

industry and there is no publicity for the many provincial programs for agriculture which provide numerous 

opportunities for advancement of the industry. 

 

The emphasis that has been placed on diversification by the Government in the past six years is 

commendable. In one year from June, 1969, cattle numbers in this province increased by ten per cent. There 

are now approximately 350 feedlots located in our province, with facilities to accommodate anywhere from 

100 to 1,000 or more head of cattle at one time. Of course, there are those who say that this type of 

diversification will cause a glut of beef on the market. However, Mr. Speaker, I do not feel that this will 

happen for many years to come because one has only to look at the small percentage of beef Saskatchewan 

produces, in respect to the total beef production of the Canada-United States market. For instance, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan produces only 1.9 per cent of the beef in the total Canada-United States market 

annually, and only 1.3 per cent of the hogs of the total Canada-United States market yearly. Two counties in 

Ontario alone produce more hogs than the total of Saskatchewan annually, and in comparison the state of 

Iowa produces 2 and 1/2 times the hog production of all of Canada. Therefore, when our production is 

compared with the market of North America, you will find that we have many years of expansion ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no hesitation in recommending that farmers look seriously at the many programs of 

assistance being offered by our Government in the areas of diversification for the agriculture industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people may not know that as a result of the construction of irrigation works in the 

Outlook-Broderick areas of Saskatchewan, 42,000 acres can now be serviced. Most encouraging is the start 

in the potato growing industry with some 900 acres being sown to potatoes in the past season. This area of 

agricultural expansion is just in its infancy, and there is no doubt that in the near future, the irrigated acreage 

will be increased to grow other crops, and as a result will attract major food processing plants to further 

diversify our economy by way of the agriculture industry. 

 

It is most important, I feel, that the Saskatchewan agricultural economy does not return to being as 

dependent on the production of wheat regardless of the recent upswing in sales. It is anticipated that the long 

term outlook for increased sales in grains other than wheat is very favorable. This observation is supported 

by the fact that the demand and price for such crops 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

17 

 

as barley and rapeseed are moving up and will continue to do so in the foreseeable future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I should take this opportunity to point out developments under The Livestock Loans 

Guarantee Act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — This new program, as a result of this Act, has received extremely favorable 

acceptance. The purpose is to assist farmers in securing loans for financing the purchase of cattle and sheep 

breeding stock. During the first year of this program, over 6,000 loans were made and a total of $22.5 

million loaned. I suggest that any farmer who is interested in this program should contact the local 

agricultural representative in his area, or the Economics Branch of the Saskatchewan Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

Lately the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) has indicated that the program for our native people is 

not in line with what the Indian-Metis would like or want. Mr. Speaker, I should now like to point out what 

our Government is doing in the field of agriculture for our citizens of native origin. I am satisfied these 

measures meet with the approval of those who benefit. For instance there are seven training farms for people 

of Indian ancestry, and in 1970 these farms have undergone considerable expansion and will continue to be 

expanded. For example, 27 new, modern homes have been built on these farms which employ 80 persons 

full time and triple that number at peak work-load periods during the summer months. These farms have 

1,400 head of cattle, 600 head of these being purchased in 1970, and of this total at least 100 are breeding 

stock. 

 

The heavy construction programs of building houses, barns, and related buildings will continue in 1971, and 

as a matter of fact, is continuing now during the winter months. Our Government is to be commended on this 

program for our native people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I should deal specifically with some of the agriculture programs 

and what has been accomplished by these programs. 

 

SEDCO loans to major agriculture projects. There have been 125 loans of a major nature made to farmers to 

build feedlots, dairy barns, and hog enterprises for a total in excess of $6 million. SEDCO will loan up to 60 

per cent of the amount involved in the construction of these facilities. 

 

To encourage diversification, the Saskatchewan Government has expanded the community pasture program. 

At the present time 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

18 

 

there are 51 community pastures throughout the province for cattle, accommodating 68,000 head; six sheep 

pastures, providing pasture for over 11,000 head of sheep. These pastures comprising a total of 640,000 

acres provide service to 3,550 farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under this Government's policy of selling Crown leases to the farmer by 1970, 477,000 acres of 

grazing leases have been sold to over 2,000 farmers, and 541,000 acres of cultivated leases sold to 2,300 

farmers, as well as the sale of over 31,000 acres by tender to a further 129 farmers. A total, Mr. Speaker, of 

over 1 million acres, thus assuring the farmer of security of tenure on this land. 

 

A program was commenced to encourage farmers to seed marginal crop lands to perennial forage. Under this 

program the farmer is paid $2.50 per seeded acres. By the fall of 1970, over 6,500 grants had been made. 

 

In addition to the new veterinary college in Saskatoon, a $750,000 veterinary laboratory was built in Regina. 

These two facilities are very important to our expanding livestock industry. 

 

Time does not permit me, Mr. Speaker, to go into more detail in regard to the agriculture policies and 

programs which have been established over the past six years, but I should like to advise you that the 

following are some of the other programs which are available: Farm Labor Recruitment Service; Fodder 

Storage Program; Hay Shelter Program; The Cumberland House Farm Program; the Wild Rice Project (in 

the far North); Farm Water and Sewage; Livestock Housing and Mechanization Program; The Master Farm 

Family Awards; the Mexabition Program, to acquaint farmers with new developments in equipment related 

to agriculture; the rebate of E&H Tax on grain storage facilities, and many others. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, I have been able to inform and assure this Assembly and the public, that our 

Government does give A-1 priority to agriculture, and will continue to do so. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, much press publicity and attention has been focused on the Department 

of Education over the past year in reference to school board and teacher relations. I don't wish today to get 

involved in that aspect of education, but I should like to point out a few facts regarding school operating 

costs and grants in the past ten years. The total costs of school operating expenses in the province have gone 

up from $64.5 million in 1960 to $159 million in 1970. An increase of $94.5 million or, in other words, 142 

per cent. The Province of Saskatchewan grants for operating costs have gone up from $25 million in 1960 to 

$72.7 million in 1970, up, Mr. Speaker, 192 per cent. Our teaching staff has increased from 8,812 teachers in 

1960 to 11,321 in 1970, a 22 per cent increase. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

19 

 

Our teachers' salaries have increased from a total in 1960 of approximately $37 million to approximately $95 

million in 1970, an increase of 155 per cent. Our average teacher per annum earnings increased from 

approximately $4,400 in 1960 to approximately $7,800 in 1970. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not wish to comment at this time on whether or not these increased costs are justified but I 

felt this Assembly and the public should have this information in order to form an opinion about our cost of 

education. I might add that during this period of time to which I refer the cost of living rose approximately 

22 per cent, while university operating costs rose by 874 per cent, from $3.2 million in 1961 to $28 million 

in the 1970-71 fiscal year. In the same period of time, university capital construction costs rose 766 per cent, 

from $1.5 million to $11.5 million in the current year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot agree with those who make statements in this House and to the public, indicating that 

our Government is not giving education the assistance it needs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, before leaving the subject of education, I should like to express a 

personal observation or opinion which I think is possibly the feeling of many of our citizens. It is, that much 

publicity and emphasis is given to events and situations relative to our university campuses, but we hear too 

little about the other excellent facilities for education in our province. 

 

I have much or maybe more concern about the expansion of such facilities as the technical institute in Moose 

Jaw or the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences, located in Saskatoon. I strongly recommend 

that institutes of learning such as the two I have mentioned, be given as much or more priority by our 

Department of Education. Mr. Speaker, it is this type of institute that teaches our young people and older 

people practical trades which are useful, and which will continue to be required in this highly technical 

world. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't want to give anyone the impression that I don't believe in universities, but I do feel 

that there can be too much emphasis put on book learning and so-called "higher education", and not enough 

on practical knowledge. It is one thing to have a diploma to say you are qualified to do something, but it is 

equally important to put into practical operation that which the certificate or diploma indicates you are 

academically qualified to do. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — I know many people, particularly people from areas such as the constituency I 

represent, are attending technical 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

20 

 

training institutes, and, Mr. Speaker, I have yet to hear of any uprisings, demonstrations, or sit-ins at such 

institutes, because for the most part the people attending this type of school are anxious to learn and 

appreciate the opportunity afforded them to be there. 

 

There is one particular program under the Department of Education to which I should like to refer, and that 

is driver education. I feel that this is one of the factors why our accident rates are lower in comparison to 

other provinces. During the 1969-70 school year, another 10,500 students completed driver training, bring to 

29,081 the total number of high school students so trained, since our Government implemented the program 

in 1967. It is conservatively estimated that a further 13,000 students will complete training during the 1970-

71 school year. There now have been sufficient instructors courses conducted to create a pool of qualified 

personnel to meet the needs of the provincial program. 

 

I am very pleased to see that the Department of Education, in conjunction with the Indian and Metis 

Department, are conducting driver training courses for our native people, and that these courses are being 

held on the reserves or in an area easily accessible to those wishing instruction. This is just one more type of 

practical education which is most important and acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have faith in our youth and I am satisfied that those who seriously wish to obtain an 

education, academic or technical, will remain in the majority, and our halls of learning will continue to 

improve and exist for responsible people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, when researching material for this speech, I was very pleased with the 

facts which were revealed in regard to our highway programs. These facts indicate without any doubt that 

our Government has not followed the pattern of discrimination which would appear was followed by the 

previous administration. The following, Mr. Speaker, are a few comparisons which indicate our Government 

spends money on highway programs, not on the basis of politics, but on the basis of priority needs. I am sure 

the Members opposite will recognize which are Government and which are Opposition seats. The following 

are total capital expenditures from 1963 - 1970 by constituencies, and I have chosen at random 12 

constituencies here; Biggar over $5.5 million; Arm River less than $2.5 million; Cutknife over $7 million; 

Last Mountain $1.75 million; Canora over $4 million; Kerrobert-Kindersley $2.75 million; Swift Current 

$4.5 million; Rosthern, the seat that our Minister comes from, less than $3 million, $2,900,000 to be exact. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

21 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Weyburn over $4 million; Wilkie less than $1.5 million; Wadena $5.5 million; 

Souris-Estevan $2.25 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the foregoing are important statistics, but equally important are the comparisons of the same 

constituencies in reference to bridges constructed from 1963-1970. I have the figure here but I won't bother 

you with them. They are all available from this document from the Department of Highways and anyone can 

read it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, many times inside and outside this House I have heard the Hon. 

Members opposite criticize our highway budgets and suggest our Government should be spending less 

monies on our highway system and more in other departments. I can certainly understand now why a 

Member, such as the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd), who suggests cutting back on highways, undoubtedly 

feels he has all the highways and bridges he needs in his area. However, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that 

would be the feeling of all Members, particularly those on this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, we can be 

proud of our highways programs in the past six years . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — . . . and I am happy to see we can look forward again this year to further 

improvements. This type of expenditure saves lives, provides services, creates employment, does much to 

bolster our economy in all areas, and, of course, it must be pointed out that many of these roads are to 

resources. I am very happy to boast that 90 per cent of our Provincial highways are now dust free. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to say a few words about the public works program that has been 

announced by our Government just recently, which is directed at relieving unemployment and bolstering our 

economy in general. This crash program is for such purposes as colleges, nursing homes, hospitals, 

agriculture projects, campgrounds, parks, low rental housing, office buildings, and educational institutions, 

just to name a few. It is estimated that the foregoing programs will cost approximately $17 million. 

 

The Department of Natural Resources also has a works program. Areas where regional parks are located 

should be especially interested in the program of winter works this winter, a program which is set up on a 

basis of grants. These grants are such that the full cost of labor is granted on approved 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

22 

 

projects, and the materials used are on a cost sharing basis. I want to commend our Government on taking 

this action at a time of need to create employment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, I think I should deal with a project that is receiving much attention, and 

will continue to do so in the days ahead - Homecoming '71. 

 

Homecoming was born out of a desire of interested people in promoting our great province and, of course, 

bolstering that very important industry, tourism. The potential of tourism, if properly managed, could quite 

significantly improve the economics of our province. We, as Government, have recognized this potential and 

as a result have a Homecoming '71 celebration program well on its way. As many are aware, a mail out was 

carried on late in 1969. To date the reaction to this invitation to people to visit Saskatchewan has surpassed 

all expectations. At last count some 160,000 names had been received. The Department of Industry and 

Commerce, Tourism Branch, is responsible for the Homecoming '71 project, and it has and will continue to 

have an aggressive and extensive promotion program throughout the year. I strongly recommend to all 

citizens that they support the Homecoming '71 project in their community. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, early in October, 1970, our Premier announced a capital grants program 

to improve tourist and recreation facilities throughout our province. The grants, which are available on a 

matching basis by local residents, could quite feasibly produce a minimum of $3,200,000 in work programs. 

I suggest that all communities who have not already done so, contact the Department of Industry and 

Commerce (Tourism Branch) and enquire regarding these grants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend our Government on this type of promotion which not only tells the great story we 

have to sell about our outdoor recreation facilities, but at the same time assists in improving our standards of 

accommodation in local areas for tourists regardless of the size or geographical location. 

 

The Canada Winter Games, Mr. Speaker, you might say is the real big kickoff of Homecoming '71. The 

citizens of Saskatoon, in conjunction with governments, are to be congratulated first for obtaining these 

games, and secondly for the untiring effort that has been put into all the facilities and arrangements in order 

to make them a success. I know that the Members on this side of the House who represent Saskatoon, have 

been spending long hours of hard work to assure the games are a success. I am sure all of Canada will say to 

Saskatoon and Saskatchewan that it was a job well done. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

23 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should now like to spend a few minutes on the subjects of law, order and citizens' protection. 

Our Government has in the past five years placed on the Statute Books of the Province of Saskatchewan 

some of the best, if not the best, legislation in all of Canada at the provincial level, in respect to law, order 

and citizens' protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are most fortunate to have such a dedicated servant of the public in the person of our 

Attorney General and Provincial Secretary. He, along with the support of his colleagues, have shown the way 

in Canada, and in some instances the world, by introducing and passing legislation in this Assembly which 

has continuously improved the lot of every citizen in this province. Many of the statutes pertaining to public 

protection that were in existence in 1964, were out of date and had not been upgraded to meet the changing 

times. In addition to upgrading and amending the existing statutes, our Government has put on the Statute 

Books of this Province new progressive legislation such as: 1. Crimes of Violence Act; 2. Unconscionable 

Transactions Act; 3. Cost of Credit Disclosure Act; 4. New Securities Act (and I'm sure that one was long 

overdue; 5. Cemeteries Act; 6. Legal Aid Act; 7. Direct Sellers Act; 8. Motor Dealer Act; 9. Investment 

Contracts Act, just to name a few, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am quite aware, Mr. Speaker, there are arguments put forth that there are too many laws, that some 

question how far governments should go to protect people against themselves, etc. however, Mr. Speaker, I 

am not completely sold on this type of reasoning. I believe in free enterprise, which means as much freedom 

as is possible, but I also firmly believe that in order to maintain the system of free enterprise, we must make 

sure it is protected from those whose aim it is to destroy it from within and from without. That, Mr. Speaker, 

is why our Government is ever conscious of the need to have legislation which protects clean free enterprise 

business, and protects our citizens from the unscrupulous. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — I am sure that during the Session ahead, our Government will place before this 

House, further progressive legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now wish to make a few comments as to how I feel in respect to events which have taken 

place in Canada and elsewhere over the past few months. I think we, as citizens of this province and this 

great Dominion of Canada, should perhaps consider how important our rights and privileges are. Recent 

events might give one reason to consider whether we are smarter, or more civilized in this country, or 

perhaps we have just been more fortunate up until now. Mr. Speaker, I feel a time for decision has come. 

Each of us, as a citizen, must decide what type of social order we want to believe in. I think the choice is a 

simple one. We either choose the rule of law and order, 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

24 

 

and accept the personal responsibility involved, or we return, as a people, to the law of the jungle. In the 

absence of law and order, no one can feel safe or enjoy peace of mind. If we choose the rule of law and order 

as we know it, we must be prepared to take our stand openly, and to accept the responsibilities laid upon us. 

One of the primary responsibilities is to develop a respect for law and for those charged with enforcing it. 

Mr. Speaker, we as adults and parents, I suggest, should seriously consider how we act and what we say, 

when in certain circumstances we speak contemptuously of law enforcement in general, and some law 

officer in particular. 

 

In recent years, Mr. Speaker, we have read about and perhaps even witnessed, certain groups of people led 

by so-called social activists, demonstrate in a most violent fashion, for or against certain aspects of our 

society. On occasion demonstrations get out of hand and invite retaliation by law enforcement agencies. 

Then, we hear screams of police brutality and the resulting publicity of charges and counter charges to 

confuse the general public, that our entire system ends up in jeopardy. Perhaps there have been cases where 

law enforcement has been unnecessarily severe, but let us always remember there are three sides to a story, 

yours, mine and the facts. Let's be sure of the facts before we judge. For the most part, Mr. Speaker, our law 

enforcement officers are courageous and conscientious men, doing the most difficult job in society today. 

Their biggest reward should be the gratitude of the people for whom they are doing the job. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — The choice, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is at hand. It is up to us individually and 

collectively to make the right choice, so that centuries of human progress may not be lost. Let us preserve 

freedom of choice, but let everyone of us accept the responsibility which goes with such freedom and make 

certain that these freedoms are not denied others. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we are hearing a great deal about pollution and environmental control. I was surprised, 

Mr. Speaker, when I heard of the NDP Government of Manitoba suing one of our co-operative industries. I 

hope they realize that they were not only suing members of the co-operative movement in Saskatchewan, but 

also the members of the movement in their own province, as well as in others. It is my understanding that 

our Government is very aware of the problems of pollution. As a matter of fact, they had taken steps to 

resolve the problem of the co-op chemical plant sometime before the untimely action was taken by the 

Government of Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied that pollution problems in our province are well in 

hand and that further steps will be taken at this sitting of the Legislature to control certain aspects of 

pollution and litter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am of the opinion that we not only have 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

25 

 

pollution of our environment but pollution of the mind at times, and I now refer to the widespread use of 

illicit drugs, even in our elementary schools. I was very proud of our Government when the Hon. D.V. Heald 

presented our brief to the Le Dain Drug Commission. We must be firm in our stand on drugs. We must not 

decrease our surveillance or weaken our laws. I understand, Mr. Speaker, that one of our neighboring states 

of the union, namely North Dakota, is to have a Bill placed before their current session of the State 

Legislature which, if passed, will mean that a pusher of drugs on second offence could receive the death 

penalty. Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation may sound harsh, but to me, any person who pushes drugs to 

children and our young adults, should be dealt with very firmly by our courts. Let us not be swayed in our 

thinking by those who say soft drugs are not any more harmful than liquor or tobacco. This makes for 

idealistic speeches, but in fact, there is no substance to it. Let us press our Federal Government to be firmer 

with those who traffic in drugs coming from other countries regardless of whether or not it may cause 

international complications. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me say a few words about the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

I might say that it had not been my intention to mention our power and gas utility at this time. After all, Mr. 

Speaker, we have spent the past seven years trying to keep the Saskatchewan Power Corporation out of 

politics and politics out of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — However, recent speeches by the Hon. Members opposite, and I refer in particular to 

that given by the Member for Swift Current earlier this month, February 3 in fact, have so distorted the 

achievements of this Crown corporation that I feel the record needs to be made clear, once and for all. 

According to the Members on your left, Mr. Speaker, or should I say, the Members of the Left, the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation served the people of Saskatchewan so much better under the CCF. They 

are proud of the fact that they reduced the rates and brought the cost of electrical power down to an average 

of 2.5 cents a kilowatt hour for electrical power by 1963. They neglected, Mr. Speaker, though to point out 

that the average cost for kilowatt hours of electricity sold in Saskatchewan last year was only 1.6 cents, one-

third less than the figure of which they seem to be so proud. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — And, of course, Mr. Speaker, they shed pious tears of horror because this 

Government has — to use their own words — "Taken $20 million from the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

26 

 

thus forcing is to borrow for much needed expansion." They couldn't even get that figure right, even though 

it is in the record. The amount paid by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to its shareholders, the people 

of Saskatchewan, to the end of last year was $14.6 million. I realize that the Hon. Members of the left have a 

horror of that word "profit". Small wonder, for even the SPC of which they now seem so proud, barely made 

a profit in the years it was under their direct control. I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that a business must make 

a profit to remain healthy, whether it be a private business or a Crown corporation. This province needs more 

profitable businesses and corporations if we are to continue the strides we have made in the past seven years. 

To put the record straight, Mr. Speaker, what are the facts about the Saskatchewan Power Corporation? In 

order not to be accused of using information not available to the Members of the left, I shall refer only to the 

annual report tabled in the Legislature last year. 

 

Between the end of 1963 and the end of 1969, the number of customers increased by one-third. The sale of 

electricity increased by 150 per cent. The sales of gas increased by approximately 100 per cent. The number 

of gas towns increased from 155 to 292. And here is an important one, the number of Indian reservations 

served with electricity increased from 4 to 64. Electrical consumption by industry rose from less than 14 per 

cent to more than 41 per cent, while gas consumed by industry rose from only 10 billion cubic feet per year 

to more than 30 billion cubic feet per year. The remarkable thing about these facts, Mr. Speaker, is that all of 

these increases in sales and production were brought about with less staff in 1969 than in 1963. I leave you 

to draw your own conclusion, Mr. Speaker. In the Saskatchewan Power Corporation the return on investment 

in 1963 was only 1.4 per cent per annum. The equity we had in that business in 1963 was barely over seven 

per cent. By the end of 1969, in just six years, the return on investment had increased to over three per cent, 

more than doubled, and our equity had increased to 18 per cent. I believe it will be even better for the 1970 

year-end. 

 

These improvements in investments, Mr. Speaker, could not have been achieved without profits to re-invest 

in the business. And these profits could not have been obtained without a lot of hard work and increased 

efficiency by the Board of Directors, the management, and the staff of the corporation. They are proud of the 

fact that they had more than trebled the profit of the corporation in only six years. 

 

The Hon. Members of the left have made much of the fact that they decreased rates for their customers five 

times in 20 years of Government. With rates as high as 7.5 cents per kilowatt hour, and I quote the Hon. 

Member from Swift Current, I think it right that they did so. I might add that the Hon. Member was in error 

when he said that the corporation under this Government has not reduced rates. Three months after he left 

office there was a general decrease. I believe that this is 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

27 

 

the only utility in Canada not to have applied for, and received, an increase in rates during the past few years. 

 

There are few things that have remained constant in cost over the past number of years, but despite the 

annual increase in the cost of living and decrease in the true value of the dollar, our gas and electricity rates 

have remained constant. It is true that through greater efficiency, improved equipment and an expanding 

industrial market, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has made a reasonable profit during the past seven 

years. But I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that most of this profit has been re-invested in the business and 

this re-investment has saved the people of this province many millions of dollars in interest charges each 

year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Without those profits, and without those savings, the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation could never have maintained the steady rates they have, and I should like, Mr. Speaker, to have 

these facts acknowledged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of the problems we have experienced in the past year, I hope I have shown that we 

have accomplished many things under the leadership of our dynamic Premier, The Honourable Ross 

Thatcher. This Government, devoted to the principles of free enterprise, will continue to go forward and will 

continue to provide incentives to individuals to develop their talents and reach their goals, thus making this 

great province even greater. This Government and the majority of our citizens have too much ambition and 

pride to give way to Socialism and its shackles. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MITCHELL: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Member from Watrous (Mr. Schmeiser), that a 

Humble Address be presented to His Honour The Lieutenant-Governor. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. P. SCHMEISER (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, it is a great honor for me and for the Watrous 

constituency which I represent, to second the Address-in-Reply to The Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish at this time to express to the Hon. Mr. Lloyd, my appreciation for his constructive and 

untiring work for this Province during his years as Premier and later as Leader of the Opposition. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

28 

 

MR. SCHMEISER: — I should like to congratulate the new Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) and 

his deputy (Mr. Romanow). I know that these men will fulfil their role well and work in the best interest of 

this province, through their sincere co-operation with this Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the throne gives definite indication and proof that this Government is 

concerned and determined to assist every area of our province. 

 

The constituency of Watrous is made up of conscientious and hard working people who derive from a great 

diversity of ethnic and cultural backgrounds, and I am happy to say that like a miniature United Nations, 

these differences are not a source of division, but are used in harmony and co-operation as the people strive 

to pool their various strengths and abilities in a mighty thrust into the future, which we hope will bring them 

into greater prosperity and cultural development. 

 

The people in my constituency have benefited greatly by the industrial expansion of our province, especially 

by the development of the potash industry. We are proud to say that we have one of the largest potash mines 

in Saskatchewan and this has given a broader economic base to the members of the constituency and has 

been of tremendous value to our small communities. 

 

We are also fortunate in our constituency to have the personnel who man the radar site at Dana. These 

people come from all over Canada and they bring to our area the benefit of their broadening experience and 

also help to contribute to the economic stability of the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Watrous constituency has been steadily striving toward progress over the years and despite 

the many and varied problems which confront us as individuals and as a group, we are proud of the 

achievements that we have made. We look back on the past with pride and gratitude for our sturdy pioneers, 

and we look ahead to the future with eagerness because we see that our youth have inherited the 

determination and the vision of their forefathers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I proceed I should like to compliment the Hon. Member from Bengough (Mr. Mitchell) 

on his perceptive comments with regard to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SCHMEISER: — His understanding analysis of the problems facing our province and his grasp of the 

Government's role in accepting the challenge of the future, give evidence of his ability and shows that he is a 

real credit to this House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

29 

 

MR. SCHMEISER: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank the Premier and the Members 

of his Cabinet for their splendid leadership and efficient handling of Provincial affairs. 

 

The Speech from the Throne gives evidence of the integrity and hard work of this group of men, not just in 

the past year, but extending over the period since they first took office. Each one and all together they have 

been working steadily to make Saskatchewan a better place in which to live. They have brought to their 

position practicality and efficiency as well as an earnest desire to be fair and honest with each and every 

citizen of this province. 

 

The Speech from the Throne indicates, Mr. Speaker, the Government's deep concern for the progress of the 

province, not only in the economic area but even beyond that, in the non-physical, non-material aspects of 

life in this province. It has realistically outlined the program of work which the Government of 

Saskatchewan has undertaken for the betterment of our province, and this year of our joyous Homecoming 

'71 is an excellent time to re-evaluate our outlook on man and re-appreciate the dignity of man - past, present 

and future. 

 

The outstanding quality of our pioneer days is the generous co-operation which each and everyone exerted in 

a common effort and struggle for survival. Everyone was keenly aware of the gifts, talents and abilities of the 

other which they shared to build a community. A community then was built on inter-dependence of needs. 

Today with technology, mass communication and the strong competitive factors which have in many ways 

replaced co-operation to the impoverishment of personal values, we must look deeper than needs and 

abilities in order to realize the value of the individual in a community. We must see man as he is - the full 

human being whose dignity depends not so much upon what he can produce and what he possesses, but upon 

what he is in himself. Modern philosophy looks on man in his relationship to others. 

 

It is this phrase, relationship to others, which we as the leaders of our country must stress as we strive to 

guide our province into the future. The challenges and responsibilities of a full human life are visibly tied to 

our care for each other as individuals and the attitudes we have toward different sectors in our society, our 

concern for the needy and underprivileged - these are the measures by which our society can be evaluated. 

 

Homecoming '71 leads us naturally to a consideration of our senior citizens, those who have inaugurated the 

greatness of our province and have striven so industriously to give us what we have today. 

 

The growing number of senior citizens' homes is an indication not only of the increasing number of elderly 

people, but of the changing life-style of our families, and our concern to 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

30 

 

try to alleviate the problem. Though we must take these immediate measures, we must not be unmindful of 

the deeper implications of the problem. 

 

We must not consider our duty done when we have provided for the physical well-being of our senior 

citizens. We must consider the whole man, his social, affective, intellectual and religious dimensions. These 

people, through their work, have seen our province through the era of struggle for survival. Now as we enter 

the age where cultural advantages are being experienced, we must share these advances with them and help 

them find their fulfilment and enrichment by using their new-found leisure creatively. They, in turn, can 

provide the present generation with the fruits of their experience and wisdom and be an example to us of 

people who have found a serenity and meaning in life. 

 

Somehow, in our treatment and resolution of this problem, we must help one another to realize and 

experience the mutual benefits derived from communication between the old and young, a situation which 

was taken for granted in pioneer days because of the type of family life, but which tends to be lost in our new 

culture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our concern for our province we must also search for the new role of women in our society. 

For the greater part of the history of mankind, women have suffered forms of social and legal injustice and 

they often were and still are victims of a kind of interior colonialism. 

 

In this day when women are demanding their rights, we must do all within our power to remedy the situation 

and make them truly equal to men in the legal and economic aspects. At the same time we must guard 

against the fallacy of equating equality and sameness. Our appreciation of the specific role of women must 

help them to realize their dignity and the importance of their role in the progress of our province and country. 

 

A woman's strength lies in her intuitive grasp of her social environment. She has the special gift of making 

herself at home in the inner understanding world of others. These qualities make her presence so vital in this 

technological world which tends to be so impersonal and statistical. 

 

One writer says that the specific power of woman is two-fold and paradoxical - to make man descend to 

stupidity and folly, or to lift him to the height of excellence through love for her. 

 

If this is part of the role and dignity of woman, and I do believe it is, we must do all we can to maintain and 

spread her influence for the flourishing of culture, and the fostering of the humanity of man. For these same 

reasons we welcome women's participation and influence within our party and Legislature. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

31 

 

Mr. Speaker, another important segment of our people for which the Government of Saskatchewan must 

show concern, is for youth. 

 

Helder Camara, of Brazil, sets a challenge for all countries when he calls, "Let us open while there is still 

time a bold and unlimited dialogue with youth, in full confidence, for the young do not accept a half 

confidence." 

 

So often the mass media and the older generation in general, tend to look askance on what they term the 

problematic young people of today. But this must not be our approach. Let us recognize not only the 

problems which face youth, but also the vision which leads youth, and let us ourselves at times be ready and 

willing to accept and embrace a new and broader vision. 

 

We may recognize that among our youth there are exaggerations of illusory solutions to problems, but if we 

look deeper we shall also note the sincerity, the readiness to accept responsibility and the attempts to find 

new life modes in the context of 1971 society. 

 

If men do not understand the context in which they are living, they will not understand the meaning of life. 

Similarly, if we do not understand the context in which our youth live, we shall not be able to understand 

their search for meaning nor aid them in their search. Only if we are sensitive to youth culture will we be 

able to help our youth integrate their yesterdays into today and their todays into a meaningful tomorrow. 

 

The development of youthful energy and ego, difficult at any time, is complicated in our age by the 

complicated messages of mass media, and devastating effects of drugs, and often also, by the ambiguous 

philosophy of many adults, a philosophy which today's searching youth must evaluate with sincerity and 

which they must sift before they accept or reject as a whole or in part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province has reached a certain level of economic security and we are not as intimately 

bound up with the struggle for physical survival as pioneering Saskatchewan was. Once a people have their 

preoccupation with food, clothing and shelter satisfied, they enter upon a new era where they strive to 

develop their regional culture and seek to become more fully human. As this awareness grows in our youth it 

produces a change in their minds and they are no longer willing to be forced into actions by positive and 

negative sanctions. They want to develop their lives in terms of what is meaningful to them. In their search 

we must help youth by our leadership in showing them that a culture can be changed only in an evolutionary 

way. New cultural slants must be grafted onto the existing culture. 

 

If we wish to challenge the potentiality and enthusiasm of youth, we must master change, not drift along with 

it. And we must remember that a society capable of self-renewal must be 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

32 

 

marked by a great variety of opinions. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that just as our diversity in ethnic background has become an asset to our 

province through the co-operative blending of our various strengths, so too, our youth culture will strive to 

carry on this tradition and our province will grow through the new element our young are bringing to our 

culture. I believe that if the young people of Saskatchewan are given responsibilities and our generation 

shows a realistic trust and confidence in them, they will respond to the challenge of the future. This 

Government, we are proud to say, has seen this potential and has shown its confidence in our youth by 

lowering the legal age. 

 

Certainly we must commend our youth also for their positive thinking in such areas as for example, non-

violence. Our young people recognizing that their parents have long since given up war as a means of 

spreading religious ideas, have just as logically given up war as a means of spreading political and economic 

ideas. Should we not hope then that these young people will be heralds of a new era of peace for which we 

are all striving. 

 

I should like to challenge every Member of this Legislature to open a bold and unlimited dialogue with 

youth. Realistically we must recognize that a small minority of our young people are in serious trouble while 

trying to cope with their problems of immaturity and the added problems of drugs. But, let us be slow to 

condemn, and do all in our power to help these young people to find their true identity and become 

constructive citizens. 

 

If we look through the behaviour of youth and search into the meaning of their actions, we may find that the 

serious among them are asking the questions which too many adults pretend do not exist. 

 

We have every reason to be optimistic about our youth. If the day should come that our young people are 

moderate, prudent, and cautious, then our country will succumb to stagnation. The daring, energetic and 

budding potential we see in them gives us every reason to look towards them as the guides who will lead 

Saskatchewan into an even greater future. 

 

In our concern for the different segments of our society, Mr. Speaker, we must not forget the unborn, the 

most helpless and vulnerable of human beings. With what irrationality and irony does a nation become 

concerned or anxious over one person lost in a storm, or kidnapped, or unjustly sentenced to death, and at the 

same time condone mass destruction of many unborn children? Continuing public discussion about abortion 

is a major social fact of our times, therefore we must take a stand and face it as a legislative or public issue. 

 

In this country there are many people who take a stand against abortion and I wish to assure them of full 

support in their efforts to respect life and to preserve it. Under the 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

33 

 

present law, no individual is free to decide whether another innocent person should live or die. Opening the 

way to legal abortion would be an assault upon the life of an innocent human being; this is not essentially 

different from any other wilful destruction of an innocent human life. 

 

Circumstances sometimes explain why people resort to abortion, but they never eliminate the basic evil of it. 

Foremost among such circumstances are living conditions that are not conducive to a full human life. 

However, abortion cannot put an end to social distress. It simply adds to personal tragedy, as it proposes 

violence against human life as a solution to the problem of life. 

 

We, the leaders of Saskatchewan are dedicated to finding non-violent solutions to our problems, individual 

and social. All of us, as legislators, have grave responsibilities regarding the development and distribution of 

human talents and resources. We must make every attempt we can to serve life, to bring relief to human 

suffering, and to try to put an end to violence, including the violence of abortion. 

 

Society must make more sincere efforts to help the expectant mother protect herself against the emotional 

and financial fear which might cause her to favor death in preference to life. In this issue, the very principle 

of the dignity of human life is at stake. If our society really does not consider life as sacred, whose life is 

safe? Is anyone's? 

 

It is my hope that all mankind will re-assess and re-emphasize their concern for the rights of all human 

beings, and that the principle of reverence for human life, confirmed by logic and experience, will guide all 

of us when our country proposes changes in the abortion laws. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those who are concerned for the people of Saskatchewan must be concerned not only for their 

personal and social rights, but also for their environmental rights. If it moves, shoot it; if it doesn't, chop it 

down! To this early American attitude towards the environment could be added the more recent version: If it 

flows, pollute it; if it doesn't litter it! Neither of these attitudes can be permitted today. 

 

Until recently, the words ecology and pollution were words used only by the ecologists and conservationists, 

people easily dismissed by their critics as faddists and alarmists. It is time that we, the leaders of the 

province, and each member of the electorate, realize the real threat to human survival unless widespread 

attitudes are rapidly altered. 

But today, when so much is written and programmed about pollution, there is a danger that it becomes a 

mere fad to which many people pay lip service. Therefore it seems useful to examine the thinking that has 

allowed man to accept a conquest mentality in regard to the environment. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

34 

 

What exactly is the attitude behind man's rape of the earth? How has it been possible for him to engage in 

repeated activities that consistently resulted in destructive exploitation of his home planet? Rivers and 

steams have been turned into sewers and lakes into cesspools. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we all appreciate our 

beautiful Saskatchewan fishing grounds, our forests and our provincial parks. The attitude that most clearly 

emerges from a glance at Western history is that man thinks he can do anything he pleases with this earth. 

 

It is part of our Western tradition, as I have said earlier, to be aware of the dignity of man and his unique 

relationship to the rest of creation. Included in this vision there has always been the concept that man is to be 

responsible for the care and development of the earth, so that it remains a suitable habitat for himself and his 

brothers. This concept has been partly responsible for the great technological advances of our times. But 

modern critics are quick to point out the negative impact of these traditions. Has man's superior position 

removed him from the realm of nature? Has his domain over nature led to domination and to 

irresponsibility? Is the earth only a laboratory where man can experiment and exploit to his heart's content 

without limitation? 

 

Man cannot forget that he is not only on this earth; he is of the earth and for the earth. He is indeed lord of 

the earth, but to be lord means to foster and to encourage, not to plunder and to destroy. 

 

There is still time to change our attitudes and our ways; and the number of anti-pollution groups in this 

province which are taking the problem seriously is evidence that the people are ready to do so. What then 

must be done to participate wholeheartedly in the fight to save the environment? The basic problem is how 

to overcome the short-sightedness and popular misunderstandings that have been prevalent for too long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I suggest what is to be done on a practical level. First, we should avoid hysteria. Although 

pollution has become the current fad of the communication media, we must not permit this to sway genuine 

concern and sensible thinking. Even if the rash of words passes, we shall have to continue the search to find 

workable solutions. 

 

Secondly, we must learn and help the people to learn to assess the essential costs of pollution in terms of 

quality values. Until recently, man has not taken into account the side effects of material production on our 

environment and the quality of life. Because the costs were intangible and difficult to measure, we ignored 

them. 

 

We must realize, for example, that our over-departmentalized approach to selling both food and textile 

commodities is partly responsible for the gigantic waste-disposal problem. After a housewife unpacks her 

groceries, her supply of waste packaging 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

35 

 

is almost as great as the staples she purchased. The plastics that have become so common a component of 

our packaging are non-organic, and thus provide for an unnatural situation in the universe. Burning, burying, 

drowning these unnatural wastes only hides the problem, but it doesn't solve it. 

 

The car junk yards and the dump grounds of almost every community that are littered with non-disposable 

bottles and cans, are just two more festering sores of our affluent society. 

 

Each person who loves a pure safe environment will have to school himself to relate the total cost of the 

things he desires to the high cost of destroying his naturally healthy environment. Is the value of going faster 

and faster, with the resultant increase in air pollution, justified if the world thereby becomes more and more 

polluted? Are we going to allow manufacturers to convince us that style is more important than durability, 

even though the discarded articles pollute the environment? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to commend industry and the Government of Saskatchewan for what they have 

done in this matter, and I am convinced that we must continue to do all we can to make the people of 

Saskatchewan realistically aware of the problem and of the role we must play in the solution. All must be 

alerted to the fact that they are implicated in this vital issue, either as a part of the solution, or a part of the 

problem. 

 

In concluding these considerations, I should like to endorse the main steps as outlined by Pollution Probe: 

education about the problem; learning your local situation, and participation with other interested members 

and agencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our modern world is at once powerful and weak. Before it lies in the path to freedom or 

slavery, to progress or retreat, to brotherhood or to conflict. It is man's responsibility to guide the forces 

which he has unleashed, and use them for his progress. It is obvious to all of us that pollution ranks high in 

importance and warrants not only continued attention, but efforts by the governments of all levels, as well as 

of all voluntary groups and organizations, and the individual citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne indicates that the Government is truly concerned about the various 

problems or challenges our province is facing in the various areas which I have mentioned, and it is ready to 

struggle and to meet the challenges of its responsibility. It shows a real concern for all the people of our 

province, old and young, and I perceive in it a climate of understanding and courageous hope as it thrusts 

towards the future. 

 

I believe that the Government of Saskatchewan, under the leadership of Premier Ross Thatcher, is efficient 

and realistic about our problems and their solutions. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in 

seconding the Address-in-Reply to the 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

36 

 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I first want to congratulate the mover 

and the seconder of the traditional motion of an Humble Address-in-Reply. I appreciated the remarks of the 

Member for Watrous (Mr. Schmeiser) as I am sure other people in the House did. I believe he raised some 

serious problems which face us, not particularly here in Saskatchewan, but throughout North America and 

the world. He reminded us, and I think usefully, that these problems, although they are large are still our 

problems and we cannot slough off our responsibility simply because we are only a minor part in the total 

problem of pollution or youth or abortion or whatever it may be. 

 

Indeed any one person is only a minor part in solving a problem which involves a billion people. We as 

legislators have to take the responsibility which the Member for Watrous suggests. I agree with him in his 

basic comment with respect to pollution, that we are possessors of our environment not in fee simple, if I 

may use a lawyers' term, but rather in trust; that it doesn't belong to us to do as we will, but it belongs to the 

generations yet to come. Indeed if we don't agree with that, then any chatter about respecting the sanctity of 

life is just that, it is chatter, since the generations which come after us will not have an environment which 

will support them. 

 

Similarly with respect to his comments on youth he called for us to open a dialogue with young people. I 

happen to agree with his suggestions along this line. I think that when we agree with this, we have to 

remember that a dialogue involves not only talking, but listening. Some of us are very frequently unwilling 

to listen to what young people say, for example, on a subject which I am sure troubles us all, the subject of 

drugs. I sometimes think that we are unwilling to listen to what many young people say. They regard as 

cynical our tolerance of alcohol and our tolerance of tobacco, but our rejection of marijuana. 

 

I am attracted by the argument which says, the use of alcohol is a bad idea, but we have it with us and we 

cannot wave it out of existence — the use of tobacco is an unfortunate and deleterious habit, but here it is, 

we cannot wave it out of existence. But there is no need to add still a third such habit, the use of marijuana. 

That argument is attractive to me, but it is not attractive to the young people. If we are going to have a 

dialogue with them I think we are going to have to listen to their arguments and at least try to convince them 

of the merit of ours, rather than simply taking a firm stand saying this because we are in the seats of power, 

this shall be. I think this is not the essence of dialogue. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

37 

 

I want also to congratulate the Member for Bengough (Mr. Mitchell). He did a commendable, a creditable 

job of attempting to flesh out a very thin document which was the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I want too, to congratulate the Member for Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) on his appointment to the 

Cabinet. We are told that his appointment was to add strength to the Cabinet, and under the circumstances 

we certainly hope that he succeeds. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It couldn't help but succeed! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Reference was made to Homecoming '71 by the Member for Bengough and with 

respect to his reference I find myself in agreement that we should, in promoting Homecoming '71, keep in 

mind its basic idea of the promotion of tourism and not any subsidiary idea of the promotion of the Liberal 

party . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . and that we should also accept his proposition that tourism offers one of the 

greatest opportunities for the development of Saskatchewan of any possible activity that we can engage in, in 

the next years to come. He also referred to the Canada Winter Games, and I am sure I and Members on this 

side of the House will wish to congratulate the citizens of Saskatoon and all Members who have contributed 

to the very remarkable success of the games. We always knew that Saskatoon was a sports-minded city and 

they are certainly proving it this week. 

 

The Members for Bengough and Watrous talked about a good number of projects and I think the outstanding 

characteristic of the projects which they selected for comment was that they were not in the Speech from the 

Throne. They talked indeed about everything except what was in the Speech from the Throne. The Member 

from Bengough talked about the Veterinary College, about driver training and said it was established in 

1967. Of course I think it was transferred to the Department of Education in 1967, but I well remember 

having a good deal to do with that particular program in 1960 and '61 and '62. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I am sure that some Members may have wondered why the Member for Bengough 

and the Member for Watrous were selected to move and second the traditional motions. Well, I think we 

know why. It's because each of them is in deep trouble in his own constituency where young and attractive 

candidates of the New Democratic Party are being enthusiastically received by voters of all political 

persuasions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

38 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Certainly, they are obviously trying to salvage one of those seats, but they are going 

to fail not only in Bengough but also in Watrous. And having in mind the fact that the object of the endeavor 

was to see whether or not one of these gentlemen couldn't be back with us next year, if indeed the 

Government can mount its courage and call an election in the next twelve months — and I'm beginning to 

doubt that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — It's a little surprising that they didn't talk about the problems of Bengough or the 

problems of Watrous. There wasn't much about grain producers and what the Liberal party is going to do to 

solve their problems. There wasn't much about high mill rates and what the Liberal Government is going to 

do to solve those problems. There wasn't much about hog producers and what the Government is going to do 

to solve those problems. As a matter of fact, the Member for Bengough began talking about cattle and he 

pointed out that the cattle industry is pretty good. And he said, "It's going to continue! For many years this 

industry is going to have expansion and prosperity." And why? Because we have such a small part of the 

North American market. Yes, only 1.9 per cent. Then he went on to say, on his logic, "The hog industry 

should be even in better shape, because we have only 1.3 per cent of the hog industry." Well, we certainly 

hope he's right with respect to cattle, but his comparison with hogs is hardly encouraging. Because if the hog 

industry is enjoying years of expansion and prosperity, you'd think he'd look forward to more years of 

expansion and prosperity. There are a lot of hog producers in this province who would like to know when 

their prosperity is going to start. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's right. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — No, we're getting more hogs. We're getting more hogs than people. The number of 

hogs is going up, the number of people is going down. And the new Saskatchewan Liberals are for a new 

deal for hogs, but the New Democratic Party is going to offer a new deal for people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now let's look at a few of these problems that were ignored, ignored by the mover 

and seconder. Let me talk about one which I was frankly disappointed wasn't in the Speech from the Throne. 

And that's the matter of Federal-Provincial relations, the matter of our Constitution. Because this year we 

meet in Session at the close of yet another Federal-Provincial Conference and yet the Speech from the 

Throne was totally silent on this issue, although news reports are telling us that we as a legislature are going 

to be consulted before the next 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

39 

 

conference in June. 

 

These conferences so far as Saskatchewan is concerned have taken on the characteristic of a ritual. Before he 

goes down to Ottawa, the Premier issues some statements. He says he's going to take a firm stand against 

Quebec, and whatever Quebec gets Saskatchewan is going to get. And he's going to do something about 

freight rates. He's going to demand action on freight rates, and he's going to demand action to help our 

farmers. Those are his ritual press releases as he boards the plane for Ottawa. Then each time, when the 

conference is over, he goes through his further ritual press releases. Nothing is done about freight rates and 

he's angry; he's grumpy is what the Eastern press call it, grumpy Mr. Thatcher. Nothing will be done about 

farm problems, and he's grumpy again. And as for Quebec, well, he says, we're still working on it. Now 

translated that means Quebec is going to get something that Saskatchewan isn't. Now this is a pretty shallow 

comment on a subject as fundamental as our Constitution. At this recent conference, the Premier knew that 

there could be no agreement on a formula to amend the Canadian Constitution without an effective veto 

from Quebec and Ontario. And he knows too that Saskatchewan cannot have a similar veto unless every 

province in Canada has the veto. And he knows too that the veto-for-every-province idea has already been 

rejected. And yet he goes through this "damn the French," "damn Quebec," ritual, before every conference. 

 

I think it would be better if the Premier and his Ministers attempted to explain the issues in a straight 

forward manner. 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — I cannot permit the Hon. Leader of the Opposition to say that I 

damned the French, because I did nothing of the kind. All I indicated was that we want the same privileges 

as Quebec, no more, no less, now that's not damning the French. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that we will abide by the rules as you earlier suggested, and as 

the Premier well knows, that's not a point of personal privilege at all, it's a matter for debate, and he 

doubtless will respond tomorrow. 

 

But to come back to the point, whether or not he says he damns Quebec, whether or not he says he damns the 

French, there is not a time when leaves this province that he doesn't rattle his sword and say that he's going 

to demand for Saskatchewan what Quebec gets. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Why shouldn't we? 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

40 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, why shouldn't we? The answer, of course, is that while it perhaps is all right to 

demand it, it would be a lot more satisfactory if we got it once in a while. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — We'll drink to that. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier interjected, do we think we would do better. The 

answer is, on the record we did better . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . at every Federal-Provincial Conference, comparing what Saskatchewan got out 

of the Federal Government with Quebec, we did better prior to 1964 than the Government opposite did after 

1964. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — They used to say that it was because Saskatchewan was a 'have' province. Well 

whatever Saskatchewan is now, it is not a 'have' province. They came back empty handed in those days, they 

come back empty handed now. It's not because of the economic conditions of Saskatchewan, it's because of 

the political incompetence of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — But I want to come back, Mr. Speaker, to what I think the Premier and his Ministers 

should be doing with respect to explaining the issues to the people of Saskatchewan. I agree with the Premier 

that constitutional issues are not top priority in this province. With our farm economy in crisis, and with 

unemployment soaring, and with people leaving the province in thousands, we have much more pressing 

priorities. But if constitutional reform is going to be proceeded with because of its high priority in Quebec 

and Ottawa, then we should get into the act and see that Saskatchewan and the West are not hurt; we should 

see that our vital interests are not submerged — submerged in the pressing desire of others to find some new 

accommodation between Quebec and Ottawa and Ontario. For that's what's going on. Quebec wants a new 

constitution. The Federal Government is willing to bargain. The Government of Ontario is willing to 

bargain. The four Atlantic Provinces and the four Western Provinces are wary and watchful. In all these 

discussions and what comes out of them, I believe that the interests of Saskatchewan require that the Federal 

Government 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

41 

 

remain strong — strong so that it can be able to discharge its responsibilities. 

 

I believe that the interest of the people of Canada require that our constitution be flexible; flexible enough to 

allow us to meet new problems — new problems such as the problem of inter-provincial trade which is just 

emerging. We Canadians who live in Saskatchewan will be best served by a Canada with a strong central 

government and with a constitution that is flexible, able to adapt to a fast moving age. 

 

Now it may be — and I want to raise this point particularly with the Premier because of his earlier 

interjection — it may be that because of the unique position of Quebec as the heartland of the French culture 

in Canada, the Province of Quebec will need to have a different relationship with the Federal Government 

than have some of the other provinces. We would hope that that was not necessary. We would hope as the 

Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) puts it, that it would not be necessary for the Province of Quebec to have any 

particular status. But it may be necessary in order to meet the legitimate aspirations of the people of Quebec. 

And we in Saskatchewan should not use that as an excuse to demand similar powers for all provincial 

governments, based on some misconceived idea of equity. Because if we do, we will end up with a weak 

Federal Government, a balkanized Canada, and a Saskatchewan which is virtually open for plunder by the 

business interests of other regions, the machinery companies, and the railway companies, to name a couple. 

And this will happen unless our Federal Government is strong, and our Federal Government cannot be 

strong if our provincial governments, all of them, have a very large part of the legislative power in this 

country. 

 

I should have hoped that the Premier and his Ministers would have developed their views more fully for the 

public, so that we may all know what the issues are and what the Government's views on these issues are. 

And I'm not, Mr. Speaker, saying that these are easy problems. I am suggesting that they are problems of 

serious public interest which I should have liked the Government to develop. 

 

I hope too that during this Session we can have some serious discussion on this matter. We on this side of 

the House ask for such a discussion. And we say that if we have this discussion, we will present our ideas as 

I'm sure Members opposite will present their ideas, firstly as Canadians, secondly and far back, as citizens of 

Saskatchewan, and thirdly and way, way back, as either Liberals or New Democrats as the case may be. 

Because this is a matter of utmost importance, a matter that could in a profound way, shape the destiny of 

our children and our childrens' children during Canada's second century. 

Now let me turn, Mr. Speaker, to another problem referred to in the Speech from the Throne, identified in 

the Speech 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

42 

 

from the Throne but thereafter ignored — the problem of inflation. In the Speech, we're told inflation is still 

raging in many parts of Canada. We hardly need the Speech from the Throne to tell us that. The Speech from 

the Throne tells us that which is even more serious, is the fact the weapons used to combat inflation have 

caused other difficulties. We hardly need the Speech from the Throne to tell us that. Last years' speech listed 

the same problem. In fact, in last year's speech, inflation was set as the number one problem. Last year's 

speech said this, "The Government of Saskatchewan welcomes the announcement of the Prime Minister that 

every possible step will be taken in the near future to bring inflation under control." I want Members to recall 

that, "The Government of Saskatchewan welcomes the steps taken by the Government of Canada." When we 

talk about unemployment, when we talk about the Federal Government deliberately creating unemployment 

to control inflation, let's remember that the Government of Saskatchewan has welcomed that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Liberals welcome unemployment as a method of fighting inflation. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Great thesis! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Well this was said in the Speech from the Throne last February shortly after the 

Prime Minister had announced that it was his firm and deliberate policy to create unemployment to deal with 

inflation. We all recall his famous remark — it was December, 1969, I believe — about the fact that he had 

his nerve. There were people who said he'd lose his nerve just because unemployment got to six per cent, but 

those people would be wrong. And by golly they were, they were wrong — he didn't lose his nerve. The 

Prime Minister has nerves of steel when it comes to putting ordinary people out on the bread line. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The Prime Minister knows that these people shouldn't be spending their money on 

luxuries like food and clothing and driving prices up. I want to remind you again that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has recognized and welcomed this courageous policy, a war on the poor, on making working 

people in our society bear the brunt of the battle against inflation. Because, Mr. Speaker, creating 

unemployment does just that. When we have 700,000 people unemployed in Canada, there are no Prime 

Ministers among the 700,000 people, there are no Premiers among the 700,000 — some of them have 

changed their jobs recently, and some more will very shortly, but they're not unemployed. There are not 

many doctors among the 700,000, not many lawyers, not many company presidents. But there are tens of 

thousands 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

43 

 

of construction workers, tens of thousands of factory workers, tens of thousands of office workers. 

 

When we have seven per cent unemployment what does that mean? Does it mean that seven out of every 

hundred lawyers are out of work, and seven out of every hundred carpenters are out of work? It does not. 

The figure for professional people is not seven per cent, but two per cent. The number of unemployed among 

the skilled workers is not seven per cent, but over ten per cent. The number of unemployed among the 

unskilled workers is not seven per cent, it's over 20 per cent. Well over one in every five in unskilled 

workers without a job in Canada today. Oh, Mr. Speaker, that Trudeau Government has guts. It has the guts 

to come down hard on unskilled labor, to come down hard on the poorest in our society, but right there its 

courage stops. It won't control the prices charged by its rich friends, refuses to control interest rates charged 

by the mortgage companies or the banks. In fact, it took off the controls on interest charged by the banks. 

This Government won't even control rents or professional fees. And the Thatcher Government opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, is equally gutless in controlling prices charged by its big business friends, the implement 

companies, for instance. 

 

If indeed the Trudeau and Thatcher Governments were going to act to control inflation, rather than simply 

punish the poor, if they were going to show the guts they talk about, they would have controlled prices. And, 

Mr. Speaker, even yet, prices could and should be controlled. If Liberal Governments had the guts to control 

prices . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER (Premier): — Why doesn't Schreyer control prices too. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — If they had the guts to say to their big business friends that in the interest of the 

country as a whole, the prices of steel and nickel and of concrete, and of farm machinery and of cars, the 

basic elements in our economy, would be controlled, if, as I say, the Governments at Ottawa and Regina had 

together that courage, then we would get this country rolling again. I say to the Premier in respect to these 

interjections, if he will go with Mr. Schreyer down and talk to Mr. Trudeau, and ask for price controls I am 

sure Mr. Schreyer will accompany him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Schreyer is just looking for a lead from some other government in Canada. He is 

perfectly willing to control prices and if you answer I ask you to . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Let them do it! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I ask you to please go down 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

44 

 

with Mr. Schreyer to see Mr. Trudeau and . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — He hasn't done a thing about it in Manitoba! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . then we can have prosperity. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, if we had that sort of price control we could create all the jobs we 

needed without inflation., 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We could give our farmers a break. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Why doesn't Schreyer do it? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I . . . does the Premier have the floor? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, if we had price control in Canada and the Premier knows it is not easy 

to do it on a provincial level, much more could be done than he has done. If, and I was very careful to point 

out that the gutless ones included Mr. Trudeau and not only Mr. Thatcher, Mr. Speaker, if we had that sort of 

control we could create all the jobs we needed without having inflation. We could give our farmers a break, a 

break from this relentless cost-price squeeze they are in. A policy with guts. A policy to control prices and 

rents and interest and profits and professional fees and yes, wages, could have set Canada on the high road 

and still could. We could have jobs for virtually all our people. We could have had them and we still can. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . young people's problems. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We could have protected farmers against soaring interest rates and rising prices and 

we still could. We could have used our energies and our resources to build Canada and to feed a hungry 

world and we still could. Instead we have 700,000 people out of work at a cost of billions in lost production 

and untold cost in human suffering. We have farmers who are told "don't grow crops." We have farmers who 

are restricted in their production of eggs and poultry and dairy products. This, Mr. Speaker, is called — 

depending on where you are at — either the just society or the new Saskatchewan. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

45 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this society created by Liberal governments in the provinces and at Ottawa is not just and 

is not new. It is the same old free-enterprise philosophy "opportunity for the rich and poverty for the poor." 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — New Democrats believe that these policies of Liberal governments, federal and 

provincial, have failed. We believe that they are continuing to fail and they should be changed. We need a 

just society. Yes, we need a new Saskatchewan. Yes, but here in Saskatchewan seven years have shown that 

we'll never get either under Liberals. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Seven years have shown that Liberal times are hard times. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Seven years have shown that Liberals have no answers. And the Throne Speech only 

confirms it. Seven years have shown that we need some fresh ideas and a new approach. Seven years have 

shown that we need a new deal for people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to outline in a good deal more detail the things we do need, the 

things which should have been in the Speech from the Throne, and accordingly I ask leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Blakeney): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of seven 

former Members of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 

contributions each made to his community, his constituency, and to this Province: 

 

Ernest Walter Gerrand, Q.C., who died on October 10, 1970, was a Member of this 

Legislature for Melville from 1935 to 1938. He was born in Miniota, Manitoba in 1889. He 

received his education from the high schools in Brandon and Portage la Prairie and graduated 

with his Bachelor 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

46 

 

of Law from the University of Manitoba. He was admitted to the Bar of Saskatchewan in 

1912 and practised law in Melville from 1913 to 1941 and in Regina from 1945 to 1970. He 

was an inspector of income tax for southern Saskatchewan from 1942 to 1944 and was 

president of Crescent Finance from 1949 to 1964. He was a life member of the Law Society 

of Saskatchewan and a member of the Rotary Club. During his younger years he was an avid 

curler and hunter. 

 

James Chisholm King, who died on October 8, 1970, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Humboldt from 1935 to 1938. He was born in Winnipeg, Manitoba in 1886 and moved to 

Dauphin with his family in 1897. He received his high school education in Dauphin and 

graduated from the Royal College of Dental Surgeons at the University of Toronto in 1910 

with his Doctorate in Dental Surgery. In 1911 he moved to Humboldt to begin his practice. 

He was a councillor for Humboldt in 1916 and 1917 and was Mayor from 1920 to 1923 and 

again in 1931. He was the President of the Saskatchewan College of Dental Surgeons in 1935 

and 1936. In 1958 and 1969 he was honored for his long service in the dental profession. He 

was a life time member of the Humboldt Curling Club and the Prince Rupert Lodge of the 

Masonic Order of Saskatchewan. He was also a Royal Arch Mason and in 1962 received his 

50-year membership pin as a Shriner. He was an active sportsman in his youth. 

 

Donald MacDonald, who died on December 7, 1970, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Meadow Lake from 1934 to 1944. He was born near Listowel, Ontario in 1886 and received 

his education at R.R. No. 4, Public School, Grey Township, Huron, Ontario. He homesteaded 

in the Tugaske district in 1906 and enlisted in the Strathcona Horse Regiment in Winnipeg in 

1916. After serving in the First World War, he started ranching in the Spiritwood district in 

1921 and was a reeve of the Municipality of Spiritwood. He was a member of the Shrine 

Club and a life member of the Tugaske Lodge. 

 

Ross Arnold McCarthy, who died on August 7, 1970, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Cannington from 1949 to 1964. He was born in Hagersville, Ontario in 1891. He moved with 

his family to the Francis district in 1903 and to Goose Lake district in 1911. He received his 

education at Hagersville, Ontario and Francis, Saskatchewan. He later moved to the Corning 

district where he farmed. He was a reeve of the Golden West Municipality from 1929 to 

1949, was chairman of the local school board for 20 years and was a leader in boys' and girls' 

farm clubs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I may say that Mr. McCarthy was one Member whom I knew intimately in a personal way and I 

remember 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

47 

 

Mr. McCarthy being very popular on both sides of the House. He was a true gentleman. 

 

Charles McIntosh, who died on July 21, 1970, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Kinistino from 1925 to 1933. He was born near Edinburgh, Scotland in 1892. He came to 

Canada in 1904 and moved to Kinistino in 1919. He received his education at Portage la 

Prairie, Manitoba. He served overseas in the 43rd battalion, Canadian Expeditionary Force, 

and was awarded the Military Cross in 1918. He was a farmer, financial agent and also the 

assistant general manger of a training school during the Second World War. He was a 

member of the Masonic Lodge. 

 

Honourable William Melville Martin, Q.C., who died on June 22, 1970, was a Member of 

this Legislature for Regina City from 1916 to 1922. He was born in Norwich in the County of 

Oxford, Ontario in 1876. He received his education at Exeter Public School, Clinton 

Collegiate Institute, the University of Toronto and Osgoode Hall. He graduated from the 

University of Toronto with honours from the Department of Classics. He also attended the 

Ontario School of Pedagogy and taught Classics and History in the Harrison High School. He 

moved to Regina in 1903 where he commenced the practice of Law. In the general election 

of 1908 he was elected to the House of Commons and was re-elected in 1911. He resigned 

his seat in the House of Commons in 1916 to accept the Premiership of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. In 1916 he was elected to the Saskatchewan Legislature in a bye-election and 

was re-elected in the general elections of 1917 and 1921. During his 5 and 1/2 years as 

Premier he was also President of Council, Minister of Education, Attorney General, Minister 

of Railways and Minister of Telephones and Telegraphs. In 1922 he was appointed to the 

Bench of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and was Chief Justice of Saskatchewan from 

1941 to 1961. During the Second World War, he was appointed custodian of enemy alien 

property in Canada and in 1949 he was Chairman of the Commission assigned the task of 

revising the Canadian Criminal Code. He was Past Provincial President of the Canadian Red 

Cross Society; Past President of the King George V Jubilee Cancer Fund; Honorary 

Chairman of the Provincial Canadian National Institute for the Blind; Honorary Vice-

President of the National Council of the Canadian National Institute for the Blind; Past 

Grand Master of Saskatchewan of the Masonic Lodge; Past President of Ducks Unlimited 

and in his early years an active sportsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think Members on both sides of the House would agree that the Chief Justice was truly one of 

Saskatchewan's great citizens. 

 

Hubert Staines, who died on September 26, 1970, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Athabasca and the Minister 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

48 

 

of Education from 1941 to 1944. He was born in Essex, England in 1893. He came to Canada 

in 1913 and worked on farms in the Stoughton and Huntoon districts. He received his high 

school and university education from Brandon College receiving his Bachelor of Arts with a 

major in Economics from McMaster University. He attended normal school in Regina. He 

served in the First World War with the Eleventh Canadian Field Ambulance. He taught in the 

Moose Jaw College from 1924 to 1927; was principal of the Rosetown Public and High 

Schools for six years and was a history instructor in the Prince Albert Collegiate from 1933 

to 1941. He was the executive director of the Saskatchewan Centennial Corporation in 1964 

and a member of the Canadian Legion. 

 

And, again, Mr. Speaker, if I might make a personal comment, I worked with Mr. Staines for a number of 

years politically and I came to have a very high admiration for his abilities, his kindness and many other 

attributes. And I would also move: 

 

That this Assembly, have just become aware of the passing of a former Member of the 

Legislative Assembly on March 13, 1968, records with sorrow and regret the death of Joseph 

Victor Patterson, who sat in this Assembly for the Milestone Constituency from 1929 to 

1934. He was born in Paisley, Ontario in 1882 and received his education from the Paisley 

Public and High Schools. He homesteaded in the Hearne district where he farmed. He was a 

director of the Grain Growers Association, a lay minister for the United Church at Wilcox for 

eight years and he served with the Grace United Church in Moose Jaw from 1951 to 1963. 

He was a member of the Masonic Lodge. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most 

sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House wish to associate ourselves with the 

motion just moved by the Premier and with the sentiments expressed by him. Several of my colleagues, and I 

am sure several Members on both sides of the House, will be adding their own thoughts and observations. I 

did not have the opportunity to know a number of the Members referred to in the motion since their services 

in this House long preceded mine. I did, however, know two of the persons in a professional way —Chief 

Justice Martin and Mr. Ernie Gerrand — and of course I served in this House with Mr. Ross McCarthy. 

 

With respect to Chief Justice Martin, few people in the history of Saskatchewan could have had such a 

distinguished career in public life. As was mentioned by the Premier, he first actually entered public life in 

1908 when he was elected MP for the federal constituency of Regina, re-elected in 1911 and he became the 

second Premier of Saskatchewan. He was 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

49 

 

appointed to the Bench of the Court of Appeal in 1922 and in 1941 became Chief Justice of Saskatchewan 

until his retirement in 1961. And he served as Administrator of this Province on numerous occasions and in 

that capacity it was my honor to deal with him when he was acting on behalf of Lieutenant-Governor. 

 

A career of nearly 15 years in elected office and nearly 40 years on the Bench is surely a remarkable 

contribution to the history of this young province. I join with the Premier in paying tribute to the memory of 

this outstanding citizen of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

May I mention two other aspects of Judge Martin's service to our community. He left sons who have made 

and are making a distinguished contribution to the life of Saskatchewan and of Canada. And he was, to 

young lawyers in the 1950s and the 1960s, the grand old man of the Bar and Bench of Saskatchewan. He 

continued his interest in legal and judicial matters up until very close to the time of his death. He was 

invariably courteous and helpful to young men who were practising in Law and who were understandably 

awed by a man with such a glittering career. He soon put young people at their ease and he gave friendly 

counsel and advice. I know that he will be warmly remembered by the lawyers of Regina and Saskatchewan. 

 

It was my pleasure too to know Ernie Gerrand in the course of practising law in Regina. He was well like by 

his fellow lawyers, both young and old, and had the happy faculty of always appearing young in spirit. I 

remember the occasion when he was given an honorary membership in the Law Society of Saskatchewan by 

reason of his having practised law in Saskatchewan for more than 50 years. The general comment at the time 

was, "Well, Ernie Gerrand can't be that old." Because, as I say, his general demeanor and his general way of 

dealing was always that of a person who was forward looking and young in his outlook. He enjoyed practice 

and his day-to-day relationships both with his clients and his fellow lawyers until very shortly before his 

death. 

 

Many members of the House will have known Mr. Ross McCarthy who served as the Member for 

Cannington until 1964. He was regarded with warm affection by all Members on both sides of the House. He 

brought to his work in the House a never-failing supply of wit and humor and common sense, together with 

that particular personal charm which is often associated with people of Irish ancestry. He was an effective 

Member of the Opposition who served his constituents well. Prior to entering this House he had a 

distinguished record of service at the local level, having served as reeve of the Golden West Municipality for 

many, many years and similarly as chairman of the Corning School Board. 

 

I wish, therefore, to associate myself most sincerely with the resolution which is now before us and with the 

Premier's comments on the resolution. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

50 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to associate myself with the 

remarks which have been made by the Premier and by the Leader of the Opposition with respect to this fairly 

large number of former members of this Legislature who have passed from amongst us in the last 12 months. 

I think probably it is a commentary, perhaps a sad commentary on the fact that the province is maturing and 

growing older and accordingly each year with the passage of time we are losing more and more of our 

pioneers. Certainly since I have been in the Legislature, since 1965, this is the largest number of former 

members who have been included in this resolution of condolence. I think we owe a great deal, and all Hon. 

Members will agree with me that we owe a great deal to these pioneers of Saskatchewan. If we have a 

province of which we are all proud, and I know that is the case with all Hon. Members, we are indebted very 

much to each every one of the seven Members whose memory we honor today. I should like to pay particular 

reference to four of the gentlemen, because I knew each of them quite well. What I say with regard to the 

four of course applies to each and every one of the others, because as I say they were true pioneers who have 

made a very significant contribution to the life of this province. 

 

I would associate myself of course with the remarks of the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition with 

respect to the late Chief Justice William Melville Martin. I don't want to repeat what has been said. I 

remember Chief Justice Martin, I suppose, in three different capacities. First of all I remember him when I 

was a young lawyer in the city of Regina having returned from the war in 1945 and had the opportunity and 

privilege not long thereafter to appear before his court — it was known in those days as Chief Justice 

Martin's court. It was recognized as one of the really great and strong courts of appeal in Canada because of 

the towering influence of Chief Justice Martin. I remember him because in fear and trembling as a young 

lawyer with almost my first client going before his court I received the kind of courtesy and understanding 

that was so characteristic of this man and the other members of his court. I shall never forget him when I was 

a young, struggling, practising lawyer. 

 

Then I remember him before that when I was even younger and when I lived at a little place called Liberty in 

the constituency of Arm River, Chief Justice Martin was president of Ducks Unlimited and he was very, very 

active in some of the early conservation projects of Ducks Unlimited in that area west of Long Lake in the 

Big Arm area. I remember him as a hunter, as a conservationist. I had very fond memories of him in those 

days. Then as the Leader of the Opposition indicated I also remember him in his latter days as Administrator 

of Saskatchewan, substituting as he so ably did for the Lieutenant-Governor in affairs of State. Saskatchewan 

has truly lost one of its greatest citizens and I am sure we all join with members of the family in sharing their 

sense of loss. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

51 

 

Then, as also has been indicated by the Leader of the Opposition I too got to know Ernest W. (Ernie) 

Gerrand very well in the practice of law in Regina. I knew him as a Saturday morning curler along with 

myself in the Regina lawyers' league. I knew him as a practitioner in the same building, who shared a coffee 

counter once or twice a day. I knew him as a very fine gentleman and a very fine practitioner of the law. 

 

I also knew Mr. Staines very well and I associate myself with everything that has been said with regard to 

him and of course I also associate myself with everything that has been said concerning Ross McCarthy as 

one of the truly fine gentlemen of this Legislature and one of the fine pioneers of this province. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself with other 

speakers and to comment on two of the former MLAs, two of these people I knew very well. 

 

Ernest Gerrand gave me good advice many times. I knew him well over a period of 20 years as a competent 

and capable lawyer. When representing a client he was aggressive and accurate, effective and consistent. He 

never dealt with personalities, his representations were firm, with enthusiasm and documented. Young 

barristers I suggest might well study his law career. The Law Society of Saskatchewan can be very proud of 

his great dedication to the proper practice of law in this province. As a legislator, a civil servant and a lawyer 

we pay tribute to him. All Members join me, I am sure, in expressing to his family sincere sympathy. 

 

Each year on St. Patrick's Day when Ross McCarthy sat in this Legislature he eulogized with pride, humor 

and sincerity the Sons of Ireland. Those in the House at the time recall vividly how well he portrayed the 

best, not only of the Irish, but of all races. His family can be proud of him. Ross McCarthy was humble, 

approachable, friendly, patient and kind. Long years as reeve and school board chairman kept him close to 

his constituents. Representations in the House by him were in behalf of someone he had met, a person who 

called. He was here on their behalf and he never forgot it. All of us enjoyed meeting him, knowing him, 

talking to him. No one could have been more approachable. I wish to express to his family on behalf of all of 

us our sincere sympathy. 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate 

myself with other Members of this Assembly in paying tribute to former Members of this Legislature. I knew 

one former Member quite well, Charles McIntosh, who was a personal friend of mine. He did have farm land 

in the Meath Park district and on a number of occasions we had long talks and enjoyed the outdoors together. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

52 

 

I must say that Mr. McIntosh is highly regarded in the area around Prince Albert, and the reason I think was 

because he was deeply concerned with the welfare of the people of that area and of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, as the record of his life indicates. His passing is a loss to our province and to our country. He 

was one whom I think we could call a pioneer and a builder. I must offer my regrets and sympathy to his 

family for having lost a good parent and a relative. 

 

I associate myself as well with the Members of this House to pay tribute to other Members who sat and 

contributed in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. J. KOWALCHUK (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to join with the Premier and the 

Leader of the Opposition and the others in paying tribute to Mr. Ernest Walter Gerrand, Q.C., whom I did 

not know personally but who is remembered well in the Melville constituency. He was a Member of this 

Legislature for the Melville constituency from 1936 to 1938. I was informed of his by his son Gerry that it 

was 1936 not 1935 when he was first elected. A rarity in Saskatchewan politics, Mr. Speaker, he was the 

only Member who was elected from Melville constituency to the Legislature by acclamation. No other 

political party fielded a candidate against him. Mr. Gerrand died on October 10 of last year. As repeated 

before, Mr. Speaker, he was born in Miniota, Manitoba in 1889. He received his education from the high 

schools in Brandon and Portage la Prairie and graduated with a Bachelor of Law degree from the University 

of Manitoba. He was admitted to the Bar of Saskatchewan in 1912 and practised law in Melville from 1913 

to 1941 and in Regina from 1945 to 1970. He was an extremely capable lawyer and as mentioned by one of 

his associates, a quiet, but very keen fighter. A very good man to work with, and a fair man to fight against, I 

am told. Mr. Gerrand is survived by his wife Lillian, three sons, one of whom is Gerry, who followed his 

father's foot steps and is today an able lawyer in this city. Also surviving Mr. Gerrand are four daughters 

living in all parts of Canada. 

 

I should like on behalf of the constituency of Melville to pay tribute to him and express sympathy to his 

family. We owe a great deal to people such as he who have done service to the public. 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I should also like to associate myself with the 

words that have been expressed today, particularly in regard to one Member, Mr. Ross McCarthy, who 

represented Cannington in 1949-1964. I knew Mr. McCarthy exceptionally well, Mr. Speaker. I knew him 

when he was our Member for a considerable number of years, and I later knew him after he retired. His 

cottage at the lake was just across the alley from ours and frequently we had most interesting conversations 

during the summer. I know that I appreciated these as he used to appreciate the visits. If Mr. McCarthy was 

to be remembered for any particular reason, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be his 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

53 

 

honesty and his integrity with which he represented Cannington. 

 

The only thing that ever troubled him in politics was whenever anyone questioned his honesty. He was 

undoubtedly a very great friend of mine and I wish to express the feelings of sympathy today on behalf of all 

the people of Cannington. 

 

MR. M. BREKER (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a few remarks regarding the late Dr. 

King. As the Premier stated he was an active sportsman in his youth. Even a few days before his death it was 

a common sight to see his bulky figure on the golf course, morning after morning. To my knowledge, Dr. 

King never did own a car. It was his choice to walk, to enjoy the elements of rain or shine. Walking daily 

was part of Dr. King's life's ritual, which probably contributed to his physical and mental powers at a ripe old 

age of 84. In spite of years he was very alert, extremely active physically and he continued to involved 

himself in community affairs. Dr. King was very strong in his convictions on all matters. He did not hesitate 

to defend them. Dr. King's death was a personal loss for me, because he was a close friend whose advice and 

support could be readily obtained. The feeling I have for him was shared by many and this is testimony of his 

esteem in the Humboldt area. In my opinion this House can be proud to call a man of Dr. King's calibre a 

former Member. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this motion, I should like to join 

with the mover and seconder in paying tribute to Mr. Charles McIntosh who was MLA for the Kinistino 

constituency from 1925 to 1933. I remember Mr. McIntosh visiting our home when I was quite young. Mr. 

McIntosh was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, 78 years ago and passed away on Tuesday, July 21, 1970. He 

came to Canada in 1904 and in 1919 came to Kinistino where he managed the Bank of Montreal until 1924. 

He later operated a general insurance business in Kinistino from 1933 to 1943. In 1948 he opened the 

Charles McIntosh general agency in Prince Albert which he operated until his death. He was a farmer even 

though he did many other types of work. He was an active Member of the Wesley United Church and Prince 

Albert Lodge No. 69, A.F. and A.M. He was a Past Master of the local Masonic Lodge. During the second 

World War, Mr. McIntosh was the Assistant General Manager of a training school. He had a fine voice and 

loved to sing and was always willing to help out in this capacity at the various functions during his years in 

Kinistino. An Army Veteran of World War I he was awarded the Military Cross and had attained the rank of 

Captain on his retirement from the armed forces. 

 

Mr. McIntosh is survived by his wife Genevieve; one daughter, Mrs. Joan Smith of Dallas, Texas; one son 

Ian of Prince Albert; six grandchildren and three sisters. 

 

I should like on behalf of the constituents of Kinistino to pay tribute to him and to express sympathy to his 

family. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

54 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with other 

Members of the Assembly in associating myself with the resolution moved by the Premier and seconded by 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I particularly would like to add a comment about the Member for Milestone, Joseph Victor Patterson, who 

died in 1968 and whose death did not come to the knowledge of the House until today. I did not have the 

opportunity of knowing Mr. Patterson even though he was a lay minister in the United Church at Wilcox, my 

home community. I did contact several of the old timers in the district and the area concerning Mr. Patterson. 

They all indicated to me that he was a very fine gentleman, a real old pioneer of the Milestone constituency, 

a man who was a very active community worker, enjoyed his friends, enjoyed his church work, most of 

which he did on a voluntary basis. 

 

I also should like to associate myself with the comments concerning Ross McCarthy and Hubert Staines. 

These were two war horses of public life in Saskatchewan. They won the respect and admiration of citizens 

from one end of the province to the other. 

 

I should like to add one comment in relation to Judge Martin. In the absence of the Lieutenant-Governor, it 

was Judge Martin who swore me into the Cabinet of Saskatchewan. In the many years that I spent at Notre 

Dame college, on several occasions each year we enjoyed the company of Judge Martin as a friend of the 

College. I enjoyed his company, I enjoyed his wisdom and counsel, and his love of Saskatchewan and his 

love of Canada. 

 

I do want to associate myself with this resolution. 

 

HON. A.R. GUY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the others 

here today in paying tribute to all the gentlemen whom we have mentioned. 

 

I should like particularly to join with those who have paid tribute to Mr. Hubert Staines. As you know he 

represented the seat of Athabasca when he was Minister of Education. I think perhaps that Mr. Staines will 

be remembered most by the people he represented, as being the first Minister of Education who took a real 

interest in the development of schools in Northern Saskatchewan. As Minister he proceeded to improve the 

program or adopt a program that would provide facilities in areas which had for many years, in fact, had 

never had school facilities. Another outstanding quality that I think most of us envied about Mr. Staines was 

his tremendous memory which I am sure served him excellently both as a history teacher and as a politician. 

I would join with all Members in expressing my condolences to his family. 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

55 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to join the others in 

paying a tribute to these former Members who have passed on. I want to make special mention of three of 

them. First, Hubert Staines. Of course all of us on this side of the House or most of us knew Hubert Staines 

very intimately and worked with him. Hubert taught members of my family when he taught in Prince Albert. 

Besides being remembered for many other things such as his work as Minister of Education, his work with 

our political party, his work with the Centennial Commission, he will be remembered by hundreds of people 

throughout this country as a very warm, friendly, and great teacher. 

 

Ross McCarthy; of course many things have been said about Ross McCarthy. We all loved him and we were 

all saddened at his passing. 

 

I should like to join with the other Members who said a word about Charles McIntosh. The first political 

campaign I was ever involved in was on behalf of Charles McIntosh. I may say that later on he and I worked 

more successfully together on civic ventures. Again he was an outstanding citizen of this province and of the 

city of Prince Albert. He will be remembered for both his political work, his community work and for his 

work as a businessman. I would join with the others in paying a tribute to him and pass my condolences on 

to his family. 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I am also very pleased to echo and support 

these sentiments expressed on behalf of the former Chief Justice, the Hon. Mr. Martin. He was a man who 

served this city, this province and this country as a great Canadian. His work with the organization in making 

conditions better for the sightless people, really showed him up to be a real humanitarian and one who 

thought of the needs of others. For 14 or 15 years from 1908 to 1922 he had a very successful political 

career. For the past few years I have had the privilege of becoming a very good friend of his. In many of our 

personal discussions he revealed many of his experiences in the legal field, as well as in the teaching 

profession. As a Judge his opinions and decisions were given in the main with a keen sense of justice. His 

career and contributions could be the envy of many, but could also be a measuring stick for others to 

achieve. Our city, province and country is a better place because of a man like Mr. Martin. I extend my 

sympathies to members of his family. 

 

I should also like to associate myself with the remarks made with regard to Mr. Gerrand and Mr. Staines 

whom I knew quite well for a good number of years. 

 

MR. W.A. FORSYTH (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself with 

the remarks of the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and the Leader of the 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

56 

 

Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) and to pay particular tribute to Mr. Donald MacDonald. It was not my privilege 

to know Mr. MacDonald during the years that he served as a Member of the Legislature but following his 

retirement from his agricultural vocation in 1956 he and his devoted wife, Laura, took up residence in our 

neighborhood in Saskatoon and I came to know him and to respect him very highly. The highest tribute that 

can be paid to any man is that he accepts fully his responsibility to his family and to his community. Donald 

MacDonald did this in a most exemplary fashion. He was a devoted father, a productive farmer and rancher 

and, as has been noted, he served in this Legislature for a period of almost ten years. Up until the time of his 

disablement by the illness which ultimately led to his death, he took a keen interest in his church as well as 

in local and provincial affairs. I should like to add my personal expression of sympathy to Mrs. MacDonald, 

to his sons, Neil and Donald, as this Assembly records the loss of a faithful servant of Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of knowing the late 

Honourable William Martin very intimately for quite a number of years. He arrived in Regina the same 

month as my Father and Mother did in 1903, consequently the two families were quite close over those 

intervening years. I remember meeting him when I was a teenager and no one wouldn't be impressed by his 

dignity and carriage; but what impressed me even more was the fact that he never, over the years failed to 

recognize me even as a young lad and as he used to walk down Hamilton Street from the Court House he 

always seemed to have time for the boys who were playing around the corners. His qualities and his 

contributions to this province are second to none and his wide interest in the various groups that he was 

associated with demonstrates his sincere interest in our province. I know he was one of the first citizens of 

this country to have close negotiations with the Indians in the Pasqua reserve in connection with his interest 

in Ducks Unlimited and also occasional hunting. 

 

Mr. Gerrand was well known to me but in addition to the qualifications that he has been remembered for 

here today I think there is another one worthy of mention and that is that he has left a son, Gerry, who is 

making a good contribution in this community not only in connection with school board work but also as a 

very valuable member on our South Saskatchewan Hospital Board, and we owe a debt of gratitude to Mr. 

Gerrand for bringing sons of that type into the world. 

 

MR. R.H. WOOFF (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I should like very much to associate myself with the 

expressions of tribute to the passing of these public servants, friends and neighbors. Donald MacDonald, as 

has already been noted represented the constituency of Meadow Lake but because of the change in 

constituency boundaries 

 



 

February 17, 1971 

 

57 

 

Donald MacDonald became a resident of Turtleford constituency. I came to know him as a successful 

rancher in the Bapaume area just west of Spiritwood. I can't say that I knew him intimately but we did have 

chats and conversations and I should like to express my sympathy to the family and Mrs. MacDonald. 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Blakeney): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:17 o’clock p.m. 

 


