



















































Hansard: February 26, 1971


410 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

5th Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

9th Day 

Friday, February 26, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I wish to introduce to all Hon. Members the following school groups in the galleries: 

from the constituency of Bengough represented by Mr. Mitchell, 51 students from the Ogema High School, 

under the direction of their teachers Mrs. Gurskey and Mr. Folkerts; from the constituency of Touchwood 

represented by Mr. Meakes, 25 students from the Cupar School under the direction of their teacher Mr. 

Brotzel; from the constituency of Saskatoon City Park-University represented by their Member Mr. 

Charlebois, 74 students from the Sutherland School under the direction of their teachers Mrs. Scisson, Mrs. 

Towen, Mr. Husulak and Mr. Davis; from the constituency of Milestone represented by the Minister of 

Welfare (Mr. MacDonald), 39 students from the Pangman High School under the direction of their teacher, 

Mr. Squires; and also 50 students from the University of Saskatchewan under the direction of Professor D. 

Thomas. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members would wish me to extend to each and every one of these visitors in the galleries 

an extremely warm welcome and express the hope that they will find their stay here interesting and enjoyable 

and educational. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

SECURITIES ADMINISTRATORS CONFERENCE 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wish to make a 

short statement with respect to the Securities Administrators' Conference which was held in Vancouver this 

week. 

 

A number of major breakthroughs in the field of securities administration were achieved when the Provincial 

Securities administrators of all provinces, except Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, met this week in 

Vancouver. One of the most significant developments was the adoption of a procedure which will expedite 

the clearance of national issues, permitting the deficiencies to be settled primarily with one administrator. 

The agreements reached, involve no surrender of either jurisdiction or discretion by any of the provinces. 

 

The administrators also completed their review of the Canadian Report on Mutual Funds and Investment 

Contracts and the Gillies Report commissioned by Ontario on the same subject. The administrators have 

agreed upon a proposed scheme of legislation to implement the Mutual Fund Report and will be submitting 

their recommended legislation to their respective governments. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

411 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Lieutenant-Governor transmits Estimates of Certain Sums required for the service 

of the Province of Saskatchewan for the 12 months ending March 31, 1972, and Supplementary Estimates of 

certain sums required for the service of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1971, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

Thatcher: 

 

That His Honour’s message, the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates be referred to the Committee 

of Finance. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I should first like to welcome a group 

from the very important city of Prince Albert to the Chambers today. I would ask all the members that came 

down in the contingent to stand: Mr. Orville Erickson. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I just want you to know that that very colorful garb that he has on isn't what is normally 

worn in the city of Prince Albert, but is normally worn in Festival Week, and that is what is happening in 

Prince Albert. There are just two days to go and so I invite everybody here and everybody in Saskatchewan 

to go up to the number one and the original Winter Festival that takes place in Prince Albert, the number one 

festival in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, it has been traditional for Treasurers to wear a certain type of tie when he 

presents the budget and I have on a tie that Ian MacDougall presented to me just before I presented the 1968 

Budget. I notice that the Budgets are getting larger and so are the ties. As you will recall, there was the odd 

little tax increase in the 1968 Budget. When I finished delivering it and he came back to see me, I thought he 

was trying to grab the tie back, but I found out afterwards that he was trying to strangle me. I am sure that his 

reaction will be much more favorable when I present this Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure and a deep sense of pride that I present to the Legislature the seventh Budget 

of our Administration and my fourth as Provincial Treasurer. 

 

This Budget is not just a series of charts or columns of 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

412 

figures; it is a record of past achievements and a blueprint of future actions. It is a portrayal in financial 

terms of the growth and development of Saskatchewan. It is an expression or our confidence in the future of 

this great Province. 

 

I am proud of the record of the Saskatchewan Liberal Administration of Ross Thatcher, and, Mr. Speaker, I 

should like for a moment to look at that record. 

 

We were first elected in in 1964 and this Province immediately began to move ahead. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Our first and greatest achievement was ridding Saskatchewan of an NDP Socialist 

Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This ended 20 years of regimentation and stagnation. We restored the confidence of the 

investors in the economic and financial stability of Saskatchewan and we triggered the greatest industrial and 

business boom ever witnessed in this province. 

 

The potash mines rolled in with a total investment of close to $1 billion. They provided thousands of high 

paying jobs for Saskatchewan people. Secondary industry and business followed. The oil and mining 

industry, sparked by incentives provided by our Government, spent record amounts in Saskatchewan and 

poured millions of dollars into the pockets of our people and the Provincial Treasury. We brought into 

production Saskatchewan's first pulp mill at Prince Albert. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This mill pumps $25 million into our economy annually and has brought unbelievable 

improvement to the living standards of thousands of people in Northern Saskatchewan. It stands as a 

monument to Liberal industrial success and NDP industrial failure. 

 

We promised a common sense business-like approach to government and we delivered. We trimmed 

unnecessary government spending by millions of dollars. We cleaned up the financial mess left by the 

Socialists both in the Government and the Crown corporations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We were then able to balance the budget and have continued to do so for every one of 

our seven years in office. We launched a great new highway construction program that moved Saskatchewan 

out of the horse and buggy era into the 20th Century. We helped build new hospital, school and university 

facilities by doubling and tripling the amount spent by the Socialists for these essential services. We proved 

our real concern for people by setting up the first Provincial Indian and Metis Department in Canada and the 

first Youth Agency in Saskatchewan. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

413 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, recognizing that agriculture is still the backbone of our economy, we 

gave the farmers real help after 20 years of NDP lip-service. 

 

In 1965, it was our Government that made it possible for farmers to use tax-free purple gas in farm trucks to 

travel anywhere in the province. Our Socialist friends refused the farmers this assistance for 20 years and 

many of them even voted against the Bill. The same year we abolished the mineral tax on farm lands. We 

greatly expanded community pasture facilities in every part of Saskatchewan and we made crop insurance 

available to thousands of farmers. 

 

Concerned with the plight of local governments and their taxpayers, we began programs of practical help to 

shift the tax burden from the property tax to the general revenues of the Province. We also provided more 

money for local school boards — every year since coming to office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We increased in a major way our equalization grants to municipalities. We brought in 

new grants for snow clearing and increased other grants for such things as gravelling, paving and library 

service. 

 

For the home owner we began the $50 Homeowner Grant, again over the opposition of many NDP 

Members. 

 

In 1967, Premier Thatcher called an election; the people looked at our record, like what they saw, and 

returned us with an increased majority. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The general prosperity and growth continued into 1968, but toward the end of that year 

a situation new to Saskatchewan was developing. We were facing mounting surpluses in four of the 

commodities upon which we depend most for our economic well-being. We had too much uranium, oil, 

potash and most serious of all far too much wheat. This serious problem had been brought about partially 

because of a world-wide slowdown in demand and partially because of world-wide over-production. 

Farm cash income took a drastic drop, oil and uranium production slowed down with a corresponding 

slowdown in employment and royalties. The potash industry faced disaster; with low production coupled 

with falling prices, some mines were actually considering total shutdowns. A threat by the United States 

Government to place embargoes against Saskatchewan potash for alleged dumping at cut-rate prices made 

the situation even more serious. This decline in our basic economy, coupled with tight money and high 

interest rates, brought on a virtual collapse in the construction industry, throwing thousands of men and 

women out of work. A prolonged strike by the plumbers and electricians further aggravated the problem. 

 

As if this were not enough, we in Saskatchewan were, 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

414 

along with other Canadians, the victims of almost run-away inflation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, almost any government can look good when things are moving ahead, when the economy 

is on the upswing, but the true test comes when the economy is in trouble, when outside forces bring on a 

recession. And, Mr. Romanow, I said almost any government, because the NDP Socialists managed to look 

bad in good times and poor times alike. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — You Socialist could and often did turn a recession into a depression, good times into a 

recession. Mr. Speaker, the years from 1964 to 1968 were the best years our Province ever experienced and 

the actions of this Administration played a large role in creating that prosperity, and I am proud of that 

record. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But the real test came during the . . . I'll deal with you later, Mr. Smishek. 

 

The real test came during the years 1969 and 1970, both rough years, in which our Government faced not 

only a recession caused by growing surpluses and falling markets but also the crisis of inflation. These were 

the years when Ross Thatcher proved his mettle as a leader and his Government showed it had the courage to 

take the necessary action to solve the problems facing Saskatchewan. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, we tackled the wheat surplus problem. We raised Cain with the Federal Government and 

the Wheat Board, demanding that they show more initiative and energy in their efforts to sell wheat. Our 

Government launched a program to barter wheat and we made good deals. Our critics and "yappers" on the 

other side of the House claimed that we never produced any added sales and that we might even have 

threatened the world wheat prices. I say, nonsense! We did create extra sales but even more important, we 

shook up the Federal Government and the Wheat Board and they got off their seats and started an aggressive 

sales policy for our wheat. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — What are the results? The result has been a sharp upswing in grain sales and a vastly 

improved picture for our agricultural industry. At the same time we provided a rebate of the sales tax on 

grain storage facilities to ease the grain storage and cash problem facing many of our farmers. To help the 

farmers to diversify, the Government introduced The Livestock Loan Guarantee Act which permits farmers 

to borrow funds at reduced interest rates to purchase breeding stock. 

 

Then the Premier took on the potash problem. The experts said it couldn't be done but he and Alex Cameron 

put in prorationing and made a sensible floor price stick. The Premier went to Washington and succeeded in 

stopping the move to block 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

415 

Saskatchewan potash from the United States market. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — He also convinced potash producers in New Mexico to cut back on their production so 

that we would continue to hold our share of the American and world markets. The potash industry is not 

operating at full production yet but it is out of danger and making excellent progress. This industry is 

responsible for thousands of jobs for Saskatchewan people and it pours substantial money into our treasury. 

It was sick and is now on the mend and one man, Ross Thatcher, with the help of Alex Cameron, deserves 

most of the credit for getting the potash industry back on its feet. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, to combat the unemployment caused by the slowdown in the construction 

trade, we embarked on a series of stepped-up public works programs. We also made it possible for the 

Crown corporations and the University to speed up their capital projects. Our foresight in pushing ahead with 

these projects has helped keep our unemployment level among the lowest in all of Canada. However, Mr. 

Speaker, it was in the fight against inflation that the Saskatchewan Liberal Government really proved its 

courage and its responsibility. We began by running the Government in a responsible and businesslike 

manner. We did not add to the inflationary pressures, but we suffered equally with those who did. We 

instituted guidelines for wage settlements even before they were asked for by the Federal Government. We 

used our legislative power to settle strikes when we considered the demands of some unions too high; we 

also intervened on behalf of working people when the wages offered by management were too low. 

 

We have been accused of an anti-labor bias but this is not true, make no mistake. Run-away inflation and 

price increases not only hurt pensioners, people on fixed incomes, but working people as well. Mr. Speaker, 

had other governments taken the same action as we did to hold down excessive wage and price increases, 

inflation would have been stopped long ago. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It is interesting to note that throughout these two difficult years, the financial position 

of the Saskatchewan Government has remained sound and our credit rating is one of the highest in Canada. 

 

The policies of our Government have helped move the Province's economy out of the doldrums and we can 

now look ahead with renewed confidence to more prosperous times. 

 

The prospect for our farmers is much better than a year ago, the potash industry is moving ahead, the 

Meadow Lake pulp mill will bring new life to that area, the development of the uranium mine at Wollaston 

Lake promises an upswing in the mining sector and the construction industry will show sharp improvement 

in 1971 over the last two years. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

416 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget I am about to present is also planned to bring practical help to solve social problems 

that still exist and must be of concern to all of us. 

 

I refer to such things as unemployment, the pollution of our environment, and the tax burden on farms and 

homes. For example, you will be asked to vote money to mount a massive public works program to combat 

general unemployment, as well as a special program to help students find summer work. 

 

The new anti-pollution program to be considered by this House must also be provided with funds. 

 

Once again the Legislature through this Budget will be given the opportunity to take another major step to 

shift the tax burden from the local ratepayer onto the larger Provincial tax base. I should again remind you 

that it was the present Liberal Government that began this shift with the Homeowner Grant, and a variety of 

other new grants to cities, towns and rural municipalities. I will tell you now that the present Budget contains 

substantial increases in all these grants and will be another important move in easing the tax load on farmers, 

home owners and small businessmen. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I also inform the House that because of our prudent management of the Government's 

finances, we are able to present you today with a Budget that calls for gross spending of over half a billion 

dollars without the necessity of borrowing one five-cent piece. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before laying out this forward-looking Budget, for the Members I would ask leave to first 

review for a few minutes, the highlights of our economy during the past year. 

 

The Saskatchewan economy passed through a second difficult year in 1970. We in Saskatchewan are still 

dependent upon the growth and expansion of our primary industry, agriculture, for our economic well-being. 

The farmer experienced an extremely tough year as grain sales remained at low levels until the latter part of 

1970. Farm cash receipts will reach about the same level as the 1969 receipts. The value of grain sales 

increased in 1970 by over 20 per cent. The benefit to the individual farmer was lessened however by his need 

to repay outstanding cash advances from the Canadian Wheat Board. In 1970, Saskatchewan farmers paid 

back $55 million more than they had borrowed. 

 

With the prospects for grain sales in 1971 much improved and with the reduction in outstanding advances, 

the farm economy will show substantial improvement in this year 1971. My optimism is bolstered by the 

degree to which the Saskatchewan farmer has taken advantage of our programs for diversification. This year 

$25 million will be borrowed under our Livestock Loan Guarantee Program. The latest livestock survey 

shows that the cattle population has increased by 150,000 in the past year. During 1970, the number of hogs 

increased by over 50 per cent. These changes, along with the movement into grains other than wheat, will 

tend to stabilize the farm sector and improve the outlook for the future. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

417 

Mineral production in Saskatchewan in 1970 is estimated at $396.8 million, an increase of 15 per cent over 

1969. Much of the increase in value is attributable to the success of the Potash Conservation Board in 

increasing the world price of potash. 

 

Manufacturing will be up by almost 10 per cent. This increase is associated with the increased production in 

the wood, paper, food and beverage industries. 

 

Retail sales dipped slightly below the level of 1969 with sales of new motor vehicles showing the greatest 

decline. Public and private investment in Saskatchewan was the softest spot in the non-agricultural sector of 

our economy. While public investment showed a significant increase, investment in the private sector slowed 

markedly. 

 

The Provincial Government's accelerated public works program resulted in a 14 per cent increase in this 

portion of public investment, however, the increase was not great enough to offset the decline in private 

investment. 

 

Once again this year we propose to cushion the impact by accelerating our Public Works programs and we 

look forward to a major improvement by the two large projects now being planned for Northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I turn now to the current year's fiscal position. 

 

Last year at this time, I introduced a budget calling for a level of expenditure at about $405 million with a 

budgetary deficit of some $10.4 million. Since that time a number of changes have occurred and we now 

anticipate that our expenditures will be significantly above that estimate. However, the increase in our 

revenues will more than offset this growth as well as the planned deficit, thus resulting in our seventh 

consecutive balanced Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — As far as capital financing in 1970-71 is concerned, the trend of rising interest rates 

was finally broken in the fall of 1970 to produce a strength never before encountered in the Canadian 

long-term debt market. This reflects the marked swing toward monetary expansion and the fact that 

inflationary fears have subsided considerably. Formerly the fear of inflation had been restricting the flow of 

money into the bond market and institutions were building up large cash reserves. It appears that these 

reserves are now being committed in large part to the debt market. 

During the calendar year 1970, the Province borrowed $58.13 million. Funds were obtained from the 

following markets: $15 million from the Canadian Bond market at a rate of 8 3/4 per cent; $43.3 from the 

Canada Pension Plan. The $15 million Canadian debentures issue was extremely well received and sold 

quickly. This was the first issue of Saskatchewan debentures put on the Canadian market since 1968. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, we took full advantage of all the funds made available by the Canada Pension Plan 

at substantial savings and this money was earmarked of course to 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

418 

Saskatchewan Power and to Saskatchewan Telecommunications. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to an outline in more detail, the positive program which is 

contemplated by this year's Budget. The major aims of this record pay-as-you-go budget will be to: 1. Find 

jobs for the unemployed and create summer work for students. 2. Speed up the development of our great 

natural resources and job-producing industries. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — 3. Take another major step to shift the municipal tax load off farmers, home owners 

and small businesses. 4. Give to the fight for clean environment the same high priority we are giving to 

education and health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to find jobs. Because of our concern for the unemployed, we have planned a large and 

comprehensive program to produce jobs and to produce them immediately. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

announce the largest public works program in the history of Saskatchewan. In 1971-72 we shall spend 

directly on public works, $15.8 million, an increase of $7.4 million over this year's total. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I shall deal with the record of the NDP when it was in office — bad record. 

 

These projects will be scattered throughout the province and provide hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan 

people. Through grants to the University, schools, hospitals and nursing homes we shall make possible the 

spending of an additional $45 million on job-producing projects. For example, we are providing $525,000 in 

construction grants and $60,000 in maintenance grants for special-care homes. These grants represent the 

province's 20 per cent share of the total and as a result they will generate a total of $2.9 million in 

construction. We are continuing our program of upgrading Saskatchewan hospitals. To facilitate this 

program, we have included $8.2 million in the Estimates for 1971-72. 

 

Discussions are progressing with respect to the Government's offer to authorize a $12 million construction 

program for the Regina General and the Regina Grey Nuns' hospitals. We are prepared to approve 

construction grants totalling $8 million, with $500,000 being provided in this Budget. Construction of the 

South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre at Regina is proceeding on schedule. It is expected that this 300-bed 

hospital will be completed in the latter part of 1972. This year as in the past six years, we are setting aside 

funds to aid us in the financing of this $16 million project. This Budget provides an additional $2 million 

bringing the amount set aside to $12.8 million, with construction in the 1971-72 year estimated at $7 million. 

 

Plans are also proceeding to convert a portion of the Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn into a 360-bed 

extended care hospital for chronically ill patients. Approximately $1 million has been allocated for 

renovations to this facility which will be known as the Souris Valley Extended Care Hospital. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

419 

Planning for a major extension to the University Hospital at Saskatoon has progressed to the working 

drawing stage. Construction is expected to begin in early 1972 and will be completed late in 1974. The 

extension will provide facilities that are integral to the development and expansion of the Medical School 

facilities, and will ensure that the University Hospital continues to meet the standards required of a teaching 

hospital. The extension will also include a betatron unit for the treatment of cancer patients as well as 

clinical facilities for the College of Dentistry. This coming year we shall provide an additional $2 million, 

bring the total set aside for this project to some $7 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to stimulate house construction we shall continue our $500 grant to individuals for home 

building and have provided $500,000 for this purpose. Saskatchewan Crown corporations have been asked to 

play their part in fighting unemployment and have responded with a capital spending program of over $57 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recognizing the plight of many of our students who want to continue their education but face 

the prospect of no work this summer, our Government is launching a program that will provide at least 2,000 

student jobs during the next six months. We shall make 1,000 jobs available in the Government and Crown 

corporations. We will also stimulate the hiring of at least another 1,000 students by paying up to half their 

wages to farmers and businesses providing summer employment for these students. We have earmarked an 

extra $1.5 million in the Budget for these added student jobs. The Hon. D.G. MacLennan, Minister of 

Labour, is in charge of the program and will lay the details before the House in this debate. We shall also 

carry on with Teenpower and do everything possible to persuade the private sector of the economy to join us 

in this crash program to help our students finance their education. Student representatives from the schools 

of technology and the University will be members of a committee to advise on jobs and selection of students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while looking after the interests of the general public and students needing employment, we 

have not forgotten our native people. People of Indian ancestry make up over seven per cent of our 

population but they do not have anywhere near seven per cent of the jobs in this province. In 1969 we 

established the Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Department to help our native people take their proper place 

in the mainstream of the Province's development. More than 1,500 native people benefited this year from a 

variety of programs, including the Government hiring program, on-the-job training and post-secondary 

training. It is estimated that this number will increase to 1,850 in 1971-72, an increase of 20 per cent. The 

Cutbank Work Training Project, which was established during the current year at a cost of $83,000 provides 

short-term programs to train native people for permanent employment in agriculture and resource-based 

industries will be continued. In fact in 1971-72, we shall be providing $146,000 for this purpose. An amount 

of $20,350 will be made available to finance and administer the Indian and Metis Driver Training Program. 

Training on-the-job contracts with industry and homemaking courses for Indian and Metis people will cost 

us another $33,000. The Government has set an example in contributing to the on-the-job training and 

placement programs for people of Indian ancestry. The 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

420 

Government's Supernumerary Training Program which costs over $1.3 million in the current year will be 

increased in 1971-72. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, no one should underestimate the contribution which our highway construction program 

makes in providing employment for the people of Saskatchewan. In the 1967 election campaign, we 

promised to spend $250 million on provincial highways and another $50 million on municipal and urban 

roads as well. I am happy to inform this Legislature that highway expenditures under this Budget will 

amount in the coming year to the record sum of $65.3 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This means that we shall surpass our target of $250 million by $3.5 million and the $50 

million goal by $2.2 million. These highway projects will provide 320,000 man days of employment plus a 

great deal of additional work in related industries. Our Government has been determined to build a highway 

system in Saskatchewan that would be safe, modern and that would provide a stimulus for industrial and 

resource development. Mr. Speaker, we have accomplished that goal. Our highway safety record is the best 

in the nation. We now have over 8,000 miles of modern, hard-surfaced highways. By the end of this year, we 

shall have more than 200 miles of four-lane divided highways compared to 40 miles when we took over in 

1964. Since 1964, construction on eight major bridges has been undertaken. We have also answered the 

highway needs of the potash mines, and the pulp mill and other major industries. 

 

During the past months the NDP Opposition has attempted to ridicule and downgrade our sincere efforts to 

create employment. Let's look at the facts: in the first place, the percentage of unemployed people in 

Saskatchewan is the lowest in Canada. It is lower than Quebec, it is lower than Ontario, Alberta or British 

Columbia and even lower than that working man's paradise, NDP Manitoba. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Nevertheless, we still think it is too high and that's why we have taken the massive 

action I have just outlined. We read and we hear of all the great things the NDP Socialists would do now that 

they are out of government. How did they act when they had the power? Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan should be told the truth. The truth is that the Liberals act and the Socialists talk. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I just want to call to the attention of Saskatchewan people that the NDP went hysterical 

when I said they'd tell the truth, they haven't heard it for so long. Let us look at the track record . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Let's look at the track record of the NDP. In the fall of 1960 when their 1961-62 budget 

was in its preparation 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

421 

stages, unemployment in Saskatchewan had reached its highest level since the Great Depression. Did the 

Socialist speed up their public works program in the fall of 1960? Did they bring forward a massive program 

of capital works, the 1961-62 program. The answer is No. Capital expenditures on public works in 1960-61 

fiscal year were reduced from the previous year and did not even reach the estimated level. But, Mr. Speaker, 

did they finally realize the urgency of the situation in their 1961-62 works program? Once again the answer 

is a definite No. As a matter of fact the NDP, the great friends of the workers, actually cut public works 

capital expenditures in half, from a sad $4.3 million to an incredible $2.3 million, and get this, they only 

spent $1.2 million of that. Compare this to the proposed budget of $15.8 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, highway construction was also cut by $2 million in 1961-62. The NDP 

did not discriminate when it came to putting people out of work. They had no plan for the student, in fact 

they only discovered the student since we put them in Opposition. They offered the Indian and Metis people 

the same double talk the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) is now engaged in, no jobs, no upgrading, 

no real help, just empty promises. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Nonsense. 

 

MR. STEUART: — He offered them nonsense, the Leader of the Opposition says, and I agree with him. 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think the Socialists are fooling anybody, I don't even think they are fooling themselves. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to review the efforts which this Government has made to stimulate 

and develop the economy of the province. 

 

First, we are deeply aware of the importance of the agricultural sector of our economy. Agriculture has been, 

and continues to be, the most important single factor in the economic well-being of Saskatchewan. 

 

Over the past seven years, we have taken decisive action to strengthen the agricultural industry through the 

introduction of new programs to enable farmers to diversify their operations and thus attain a greater 

measure of security. At the same time, we have encouraged and promoted the development of our resources 

— our potash, our forest products and our oil and gas. To achieve this development we have welcomed 

investment from other parts of Canada, from the United States and from Europe. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The Leader of the Opposition and his Socialist supporters have travelled the length and 

breadth of this province in a futile effort to shake the faith of the people of Saskatchewan in the future of 

their province. I should remind the Members of this House that 25,000 to 35,000 persons in our province 

depend for their jobs on outside investment in three primary 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

422 

fields — potash, forest products, oil and gas. And these people will not be misled by the NDP whose only 

alternative is obviously widespread unemployment. Nor will they be impressed by the arguments of people 

like independently wealthy Walter Gordon and some of our university people like Professor Watkins who 

proclaim from the comfort of their secure positions on the public payroll, "Let's keep out foreign capital, 

tighten our belts and be real Canadians." 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you always notice that it's someone else's belt that must be tightened; these super patriots on 

the other side and across this country will fight to the last working man to build a fence around this nation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Now who are these economic nationalists who cry about selling out Canada and 

demand that all outside capital be kept out or even kicked out? They're a strange combination. I said they 

were a strange combination. NDP Socialists, Communist professors, and a few Canadian businessmen from 

Eastern Canada. They've all got one thing in common, they have all got one thing in common. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What's that? 

 

MR. STEUART: — They are frightened by outside competition, they are living off the backs of the 

Canadian people and they are afraid of losing their cosy set-up. The nonsense that is being spread by these 

people that we can discourage outside investment, limit economic growth, still produce new jobs and 

increase welfare is a dangerous hoax. I can assure this Legislature that as long as we are in the Government, 

we will continue to encourage Canadian investment first, but when it is not available, we will get outside 

capital to help us create new jobs and new prosperity. But, Mr. Speaker, we will also demand that foreign 

investors in Saskatchewan obey our laws, follow our rules, provide work for our people and if they don't they 

won't be in this province very long. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, last year in my budget address, I spent some time outlining the difficult 

situation facing our agricultural industry. This year we see some encouragement, some measure of optimism 

in the current and forecast situation. Grain marketing has improved. Exports of all grains this year will 

exceed 700 million bushels with increases in wheat, oats, barley and rapeseed. This compares to 483 million 

bushels in 1969-70. In spite of the marked improvement in grain marketing, the Government continues to 

emphasize need for diversification in the agricultural industry. 

 

The Guaranteed Livestock Program has been widely recognized as an imaginative and effective program. 

During the first year it was in effect 6,000 farmers borrowed $25 million to purchase breeding stock. In 

addition, the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation approved loans of $655,000 to farmers to 

encourage diversification, and they made available $3.5 million to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to assist 

members in financing 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

423 

livestock programs. Negotiations are proceeding with the Federal Government for the establishment of a 

crop development centre at the University of Saskatchewan and we're budgeting $210,000 for this purpose. 

 

In 1967 we introduced a program of grants for the building of modern hog barns. At the end of the current 

fiscal year, we will have made more than 700 grants totalling $1.5 million. This program has been 

instrumental in achieving a major modernization in our swine industry in a little over three years. As a 

further measure of support to the industry, this year we will pay producers a premium of $2 per hog 

marketed that reaches a Federal index grade of 103 or better, at an estimated cost of $500,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Since our Government took office we have devoted major attention and resources to 

the improvement of veterinary services in the province. Completion of the Western College of Veterinary 

Medicine and the modern diagnostic laboratory were major milestones in this program. Last year, we 

provided for a large increase in the grants available to the Veterinary Service Districts. This year, we shall 

offer to the Veterinary Service Districts an additional grant of up to $3,000 each to be used in the 

construction of veterinary clinics. As a further measure of assistance to the livestock industry we shall offer 

to auction markets, veterinary inspection of livestock going through their sales rings. We will carry on 

development of new community pastures, adding over $160,000 to our budget for this purpose. And a further 

$2 million will be spent in the South Saskatchewan irrigation area on the west side of the river as that great 

agricultural project continues to grow in importance. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, we propose to spend a record total of $16.2 million on agriculture in 1971-72, an 

increase of 60 per cent over the 1964-65 budget we had inherited from the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn now to one of the great success stories for the past 20 

years, the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I realize my friends on the other side of the House prefer not to hear about it. If I were 

in their shoes, I shouldn't want to hear about it either. Mr. Speaker, for 20 years the Socialists tried their 

hardest to get someone to build a pulp mill in our northland. They didn't care where the money came from, 

whether it was from the United States, from Japan or from Europe. But their efforts were to no avail. Now in 

typical Socialist dog-in-the-manger style, they are doing everything they can to harass the pulp mill and its 

operations. The time has come, Mr. Speaker, for the Leader of the Opposition to clarify for the people of 

Saskatchewan just what are his motives in these attacks on this valuable industry. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

424 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Is he so blinded by jealousy that he is willing to destroy an industry that provides 

employment for over 900 people and that spends $25 million in our province every year? Or is the Waffle 

group really dictating the policies of the Saskatchewan NDP? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — A few short years ago when we had an NDP Government, the city of Prince Albert was 

classified as a depressed area. Today, Prince Albert has the highest average per capita income in 

Saskatchewan and the third highest on the Prairies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The Prince Albert mill is a success and its very existence is a constant reminder to the 

NDP of their abject failure to industrialize this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We in the Liberal Party believe that there is a great future in our northland. It is one of 

the last frontiers to be explored and developed. We intend to see that it is explored and developed, that the 

resources of this province will be used for the benefit of all the people of Saskatchewan, and make no 

mistake, we will protect the environment and we will renew the resources. This is why we are planning 

another forest complex in the northwest part of the province. Last year, we negotiated with the Federal 

Government to have the Meadow Lake area designated as a "special area." We entered into an agreement 

with the Federal Government to undertake a number of special projects, designed to give Northwest 

Saskatchewan an economic boost. The agreement has a threefold objective: First, to establish a major 

industry in the Meadow Lake region. Second, to establish Meadow Lake as a transitional centre where the 

native people of the North may be brought for training before seeking employment in other parts of the 

province. Third, to upgrade the level of government services to the people of that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have that major industry. Work has already commenced on a new sawmill to be located just 

a few miles from Meadow Lake. This sawmill will provide employment for approximately 80 people in the 

mill and 100 in the woodlands operations. Most of the people will be drawn from the area itself. Plans are 

underway for a comprehensive training program which will enable residents of the area to qualify for jobs in 

the mill operation. Many others will find employment during the construction phases. We have also 

negotiated for an even larger development in the area. The new pulp mill will bring to the people of 

Northwestern Saskatchewan the same degree of economic benefit which the residents of Prince Albert 

currently enjoy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This new pulp mill will call 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

425 

for an investment of around $177 million and there is no question that there is an element of risk. We have 

kept this risk to a minimum by having every phase of the project checked and double checked. But it will 

create over a thousand new jobs directly and another two or three thousand jobs indirectly in an area where 

the major source of income has been social aid for far too long. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, to keep this investment in its proper context I should point out that the 

Provincial and Federal Governments in the four years between now and the end of the first year of operation 

of that mill, will have paid out over $140 million in social aid in this province and have absolutely nothing to 

show for the money. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — If we deny this mill we are, in fact, telling hundreds and hundreds of people in the 

North to rot on social aid because we haven't got the guts to risk backing this pulp mill. The only kind of 

enterprise that can make it in that area. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But this is not an isolated example of the progress which is being made in the 

development of our resources. In the northeastern part of the province, the Simpson Timber Company 

sawmill has undergone major expansion. This expansion will increase employment in the mill from 125 to 

165 people and increase the annual payroll to over $1 million. This mill also provides employment for 300 

woodcutters and in peak periods upwards of 500 people are employed in their bush operations. At Big River 

the Saskatchewan Timber Board is building a new sawmill to replace the one that was burned down in 1969. 

The mill, estimated cost of which is $400,000 will have a capacity of about 12 million board feet per year 

compared to the old mill's capacity of 7.5 million board feet. 

 

Mineral Resources — one of the most buoyant sectors of the provincial economy is in the mineral resource 

industry. The over-supply problem which faced the potash industry is being solved. The industry can now 

look forward to a period when market demand will begin to overtake production capacity. During 1971, 

potash sales are expected to reach $140 million compared to $74 million in 1969 and $110 million in 1970. 

Increased activity in mineral exploration could bring expenditures to $15 million in Saskatchewan's 

northland. The most significant mining find in the province for a number of years was made in 1970 with 

Gulf Minerals announcing its intention to proceed with the development of a uranium mine at Rabbit Lake. 

This development will involve a capital expenditure in the order of $50 million and will employ 550 people 

in construction and 400 when the mine goes on-stream. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The residential needs of this development will 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

426 

require a new townsite with a population of approximately 4,000 people. Access to the townsite will be 

provided by the construction of a permanent all-weather road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increased demand for natural gas has resulted in an intensive exploration program in the Milk 

River formation underlying the Great Sandhills area in the southwestern part of Saskatchewan. Petroleum 

production in the province continued at the highest level that markets and transportation facilities would 

permit. Saskatchewan's coal resources are beginning to attract the attention of industrial users as the demand 

for energy in Canada increases. In 1970, lignite production reached an all-time high of 3.5 million tons and 

sales are active due to large orders from Ontario, the United States and the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — During the past year the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation approved 

loans of $16.8 million bringing the eight-year lending total to $57 million. These loans were designed mainly 

to assist in industrial development but they were also used for the expansion and construction of highly 

specialized agricultural operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a further stimulus to the economy, the Government has declared 1971 as Saskatchewan 

Homecoming Year. The influx of tourists to the province will provide a much needed shot-in-the-arm for our 

tourist industry and related service industries. In addition, we have introduced a grant program to encourage 

municipalities to carry out local projects of a lasting nature that will add to the facilities available for tourism 

and recreation in Saskatchewan. The Government will contribute the lesser of $2 per capita or 50 per cent of 

the total cost of an approved project to a maximum of $125,000. Government grants under this program 

could reach $1.6 million and generate an added $6 million in local spending. 

 

These then are some of the highlights of our continued drive to develop our resources and our industries for 

the benefit of the people of this province and the results show why we face the future with great confidence. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, let me turn now to an area of major concern to this Government, the 

plight of the local taxpayer. We all know, every year, more and more demands for services are being made 

upon all levels of government. The problem is particularly acute for local governments who have little 

alternative but to increase property taxes. Our Government has taken positive action to take the local tax load 

off property and place it on the broader provincial tax base. This Budget will take another large step in this 

program. 

 

In 1966, our Government first introduced Homeowner Grants as a direct method of reducing the property tax 

burden for thousands of our citizens. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

427 

MR. STEUART: — In 1970 we increased the maximum grant from $50 to $60. During the five years since 

the inception of this program, a total of $45 million has been distributed to urban and rural home owners. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform the Members of this House that in 1971 we will increase this grant an 

additional $10 making the maximum grant $70. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — As a result, the total annual grant will rise to $12.8 million, an increase of $1.9 million 

over 1970. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the greatest single contributing factor in the overall municipal tax 

problem is, without a doubt, the rapid escalation of costs in the field of education. Because of our concern 

over rising costs, we took positive steps to control the situation. We asked school boards to exercise restraint 

in developing their expenditure plans; we asked the Department of Education to undertake a comprehensive 

review of local school budgets; we asked for an increase in pupil-teacher ratio; and we introduced the 

Foundation Grant program to provide a more equitable distribution of the costs of educating our young 

people. The results of this program are concrete evidence of our determination to assist the municipal 

taxpayer. When we formed the Government in 1964, 43 per cent of school operating costs were covered by 

grants from the Province. In 1971-72, Provincial grants will actually cover 50 per cent of operating costs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And they promised 100. 

 

MR. STEUART: — In the 1970-71 budget, we made provision for an increase of $11.2 million in 

Provincial operating grants, the largest increase ever given. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Our objective at that time was simple — to bring some measure of relief to tax-weary 

property owners. With this added injection in Provincial grants, school mill rates were generally held with no 

increase and indeed in several districts the mill rates were actually lowered. Our objective in this Budget is 

the same. The school boards have shown excellent co-operation in bringing in their budgets with only 

modest increases in expenditures. As a result, we shall again increase school operating grants sufficiently to 

hold the line in all districts and actually reduce the mill rate in most areas. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This Budget contains an increase of $8.3 million for school operating grants bringing 

our total increase for the last two years to almost $20 million, the largest increase 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

428 

ever given to education in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the Socialists talk big about education but let's look at their record. In 

their best year they provided the magnificent sum of $37 million in operating grants. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Oh, shame, shame! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This year we propose to spend $81.8 million for the same purpose, an increase of 121 

per cent over the Socialists' best year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Again I repeat, the operating grants provided in this Budget will more than offset the 

cost increases anticipated by school authorities. This means that local taxpayers can confidently expect their 

property tax for school purposes to remain constant and in many cases it should decrease by one or two 

mills. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I should now like to examine some of the features in our continuing 

program to help local governments. We realize the very serious problems which confront our city and town 

councils in their efforts to stretch the tax dollar to meet the demands for services which are made by their 

citizens. Last year we instituted three new grant programs to provide additional assistance to urban centres. 

We provided a grant to assist in the cost of snow removal. We provided a grant to help these centres to meet 

the cost of police protection. We provided a grant to the four largest cities to aid them in meeting the cost of 

reassessment. These grants, which were introduced by a Liberal government, have materially assisted our 

urban governments and have relieved the tax burden on the individual local taxpayers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, we intend not only to continue these programs but also to increase the 

level of assistance. This year the grant to the 11 cities to assist with snow removal costs will be doubled from 

50 cents per capita to $1 per capita at a total cost of $410,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Similarly, the grant to urban municipalities for police protection will also be doubled 

. . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . from 50 cents per capita to $1 per capita. This 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

429 

program will now cost the Government $560,000. Grants to the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and 

Prince Albert to assist in the cost of reassessment will be continued for another year with $75,000 being 

allocated for this purpose. Our efforts to assist local governments are not confined to urban centres. Through 

the Municipal Road Assistance Authority we have provided financial aid to municipalities for the 

improvement of their road and street systems. Since 1966 we have increased the equalization grant to rural 

municipalities from $600,000 to $2.5 million to help them meet their share of the costs of constructing roads. 

This year we shall add another $250,000 bringing the total to $2.75 million for rural equalization. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, by the end of 1970 we had assisted in the construction of 19,000 miles of 

all-weather roads, including grid roads, main farm access roads, oilfield roads and resort access roads. We 

also initiated a program of assisting municipalities in snow removal on school bus roads by paying 50 per 

cent of the cost. We shall now increase our share to 60 per cent of the cost for snow removal for a new total 

of $360,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — In the field of health services. An important element in the finances of local 

governments is the cost of regional health services. Traditionally these costs have been shared by the 

Provincial Government and local governments. The local governments are assessed a fixed percentage of the 

total cost of providing the service within the health region of which they are a part to a maximum of 50 cents 

per capita. Therefore, as costs go up, the Province assumes a larger share of the cost while, the 

municipalities' contribution remains constant. In 1964-65, municipal governments paid $332,530 or 18 per 

cent of the cost of regional health services. In the 1971-72 fiscal year, municipalities will be asked to pay 

only 11 per cent of the cost of these services. During the same period the Federal share has decreased from 

nine per cent to six per cent and so this year we shall assume 83 per cent of these important costs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — When the Liberal Government came into power in 1964 the Province was providing a 

grant of 75 cents per capita to the City Health Departments in Regina and Saskatoon. Under our 

administration this grant has increased to $1.10 per capita. We are pleased to announce that once again we 

shall increase the grant to the Health Departments this time to $1.25 per capita — an increase of 66.6 per 

cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The grant to regional libraries will be increased to $1.20 per capita while municipal 

grants will be increased to 40 cents per capita. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in summary, we shall assist local governments and thus relieve the tax burden on home owners, 

farms and small businesses by increasing the following grants: homeowner 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

430 

education, police protection, urban snow removal, rural snow removal, municipal equalization, health, 

library — rural and urban. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, thus far I have spoken of the measures which our Government has taken 

and will take to provide jobs, economic stability and financial independence for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Important as these factors are they are not the whole of life. We believe that the people of this province are 

as concerned with the quality of life as they are with an abundance of material goods. We are proud of the 

health programs which have been pioneered and developed in Saskatchewan and which have provided an 

inspiration and an example to the rest of this nation. 

 

We take pride in the educational opportunities which are available to our young people, far out of proportion 

to our population when compared to the more densely populated eastern provinces. We take pleasure and 

pride in the beauty of our forests, our lakes and our rivers and in the purity of our clean fresh air. Our 

leadership in the field of health programs and our achievements in the field of education are not accidents. 

They happened because we wanted them to happen and because we were prepared to make them happen. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the preservation of our environment will not be accomplished by leaving it to chance but 

rather through the conscious and deliberate efforts of the Government and the people working together to 

safeguard our heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in today's parlance pollution is a four-letter word but it is not something that's new. Pollution in 

one form or another has been with us for many years but we have become more conscious of its dangers 

because of what has happened in the United States and in Eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Opposition Members claim that there has been an increase in industrial pollution since this 

Government came into power. Perhaps they are right. The simple reason is that when the Socialists were in 

power in Saskatchewan, they had no industries to pollute. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We do not intend to see the same thing happen in Saskatchewan that happened in 

Ontario. 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — Stop polluting! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I'm glad you finally woke up, Fred, after four years. It must be an election year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The priority which this Government has given to the preservation and the development 

of the quality of our environment is another example of our responsibility and foresight. Let's look at the 

record. In 1965 we passed the 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

431 

Air Pollution Control Act and have since instituted certain air pollution control functions in the Department 

of Health. 

 

In 1968 we established the Water Pollution Control Branch in the Saskatchewan Water Resources 

Commission. Each year we have increased the level of resources allocated to pollution research and control. 

Last year we established the Interdepartmental Committee on Environmental Pollution to co-ordinate all 

Provincial agencies having responsibility for protection of our environment. In addition to identifying 

deficiencies in existing programs, this Committee has the power to deal with and recommend appropriate 

action on any pollution matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not content to stop there. This year we will introduce legislation to establish a 

Saskatchewan Clean Environment Authority to replace the Interdepartmental Committee on Environmental 

Pollution. This Authority will include not only government agencies but also representation from the public 

at large. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — There goes another plank, Roy! 

 

MR. STEUART: — In addition to co-ordinating all pollution control programs and advising the 

Government on the adequacy of existing programs, it will be responsible for approving every licence and 

every permit issued for the discharge of waste into the environment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This Authority with the power of the Legislature behind it will put real teeth into our 

pollution control program, another example of dynamic, decisive Liberal action. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — In this Budget we have provided $100,000 for the Saskatchewan Clean Environment 

Authority to be allocated to the various areas of environmental control. This does not mean, however, that 

our present environmental control programs will be abandoned. On the contrary, these programs will be 

continued and greatly expanded. For example in 1970-71 we provided $73,000 in grants to the cities under 

the Water Pollution Control Assistance Act. This year we are budgeting 10 times that amount — $745,000 in 

grants toward the capital cost of pollution control for cities to the extent of 10 per cent of the capital cost or 

$500,000 whichever is lesser. 

 

It is anticipated that payments will be made as follows: the city of Saskatoon $500,000; the city of Prince 

Albert $175,000; Weyburn, Swift Current, Melville and Estevan will each receive $15,000; Moose Jaw will 

received $10,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through these actions . . . 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon-Riversdale): — Keep going. What about the 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

432 

other nine cities? 

 

MR. STEUART: — The other nine cities. I have listed out here 10 cities that you never even dreamt of 

when you were in the government. You didn't know they existed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — And as soon as the other nine cities, or 19 towns and villages are ready, we'll assist 

them too. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I . . . we get there. 

 

MR. STEUART: — And we'll be here after the next election. 

 

Through these actions and others that will be laid before this Session of the Legislature . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Roy, you'll be wiped out after the next election. 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . our Government serves notice that we will not tolerate the pollution and destruction 

of our environment by anyone for any purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall now review some of the accomplishments of our Government in the fields of health, 

education and welfare. We do not take second place to any party or any government in our concern for the 

physical and social well-being of the people of the province. We believe that the citizens of Saskatchewan 

should have adequate safeguards against economic hardships which are not of their own making. We are 

firmly convinced that these should be workable programs which can be afforded, not programs leading to 

mass welfare which will bankrupt the Province. No government in the history of this province has given 

higher priority to health and education than has the present Administration. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Nevertheless we believe that we have a responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to 

manage the affairs of the Province in a business-like manner matching the demands for Government services 

against the ability of the taxpayer to support the cost of such services. Despite our efforts to slow down 

rising medical and hospital costs our two major health plans will still cost close to $127 million in 1971-72. 

The gross budget for the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission in 1971-72 will be $36.3 

million, an increase of 6.8 per cent. At the same time the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan will spend 

$90.6 million, up almost 9 per cent over last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government is also concerned about these rising costs and recently established 

guidelines for each province in relation to shareable costs. We have every expectation that we shall be able 

to meet the guidelines which have been established for Saskatchewan but we must all 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

433 

realize that the Federal Government will not continue for much longer to give the provinces a blank cheque 

for health or education costs increases. 

 

While much of the increase in health costs is due to increased operating costs, provision has been made in 

this year's Budget for a number of new hospital programs. For example, an intensive care unit has been 

approved for the Yorkton hospital at an annual cost of $48,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Last year we gave grants in the amount of $60,000 to health agencies which provide 

residential care for children with severe emotional problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am happy to announce that this year we are providing double that amount or $120,000 for the 

same purpose. 

 

We are continuing our program of expanded dental health services for children in our Northern communities 

and this year the program will be extended to Uranium City, Molanosa and Beauval. 

 

In the 1969 Budget speech I announced that the out-of-Canada in-patient hospital rate would be increased to 

$30 per day for adults and $7.50 per day for newborn infants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this increase has eased the burden somewhat on our citizens who have to obtain hospital 

care while travelling outside Canada, we are still concerned about the financial effect on these people. I am 

therefore pleased to announce that the out-of-Canada in-patient hospital rates will be increased to $50 a day 

up to a maximum of $2,000 for any one case. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — As part of our program to expand our out-patient diagnostic and treatment services to 

children who are experiencing emotional problems and behavior disturbances, we have increased the 

professional staff complement of the Munroe Wing in Regina by one additional psychologist and one social 

worker. In addition it is our intention to move the Youth Service Unit to new quarters which will provide 

them with much needed additional space. 

 

Other improvements in our over-all health services will be outlined by the Minister of Public Health (Mr. 

Grant) when he reports for his Department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, economic problems, even of a temporary nature, have a direct influence on the costs of welfare. 

Problems affecting the entire country as well as those created by a lack of grain sales, contributed to a 

situation in Saskatchewan, which called for an expenditure under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan last year 

of almost $35 million. While the future looks promising we plan to budget a similar amount for the 1971-72 

year to meet existing needs and to continue programs designed to assist our less fortunate citizens to reach a 

position of self support. And we are all pleased that the Hon. Mr. MacDonald, Minister of Welfare, 

announced the increases to those 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

434 

in need in this House yesterday. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The record of the Liberal Government in encouraging and assisting in financing the 

establishment of special-care homes for the aged and infirm is an enviable one. From 2,583 beds in 

special-care homes in 1964, the number has more than doubled to a total of 5,787 beds now in operation as 

well as 737 under construction. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Accommodation in self-contained housing units in 1964 was 2,084; today it is 2,991. 

Yet in a few areas of our province beds for specific levels of care are still needed. To encourage the 

establishment of facilities that will increase the number of beds for the levels of care needed in these areas, 

construction grants will be provided in the amount of $525,000. 

 

In addition, we shall begin making funds available on a cost-shared basis to communities to provide a variety 

of services such as activity centres and shut-in services for the aged. All these services are designed to make 

life more meaningful for elderly people in their own communities. A program initiated during the current 

year to encourage development of day-care centres in urban areas will be continued and expanded, with 

$65,000 budgeted to provide for starter grants, development and operating grants and financial assistance, 

where necessary, for those using the services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the welfare of all citizens is a prime consideration of any government. In every society there 

will always be some individuals who require an extra measure of assistance in achieving their potential. In 

1971-72 we shall be providing an additional $92,000 for a variety of new and expanded rehabilitation 

programs. Included in these is a Work Release Residence at the Provincial Correctional Centre in Prince 

Albert as well as a capital grant to the Haven of Hope Residential Farm near Kinistino to provide 50 per cent 

of the costs of their renovations. 

 

We have not forgotten our young people in the development of this Budget for besides our program to create 

summer work for students we shall also increase youth and recreation grants to $336,400 to encourage local 

recreation programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget also provides for $32 million to the University in operating grants and $11.5 

million in construction grants. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Although this represents an increase over the amount provided in the current year, the 

percentage increase is somewhat less than the percentage increase of the current year over 1969-70. Most of 

this is due to the new way we shall handle scholarships and bursaries. Construction grants will remain the 

same as in 1970-71 for the University. This is entirely logical since enrolments are levelling off and so 

should 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

435 

construction on the campuses. 

 

We have also asked the University to take steps to eliminate duplication of courses between the University of 

Saskatchewan and the universities in Alberta and Manitoba. We have asked them to increase their 

student-teacher ratio. We hope to have their co-operation and thus provide top quality university education at 

less cost to the people of this province. This will in turn leave more money for other priorities in the field of 

education. Mr. Speaker, ever since we came to office we have given education our highest priority. Because 

of the fantastic increase in costs, it is becoming evident that priorities within the education field must also be 

established. I have mentioned a levelling off of enrolment at the universities. 

 

However, there is another field — education in the technologies, the trades and the whole area of educational 

upgrading that has and must, continue to receive increased attention from the Government because after all, 

the vast majority of our students will look to this kind of education before they seek work. It is thus our 

intention to devote an even higher priority to this field in the coming year. So in 1971-72, we shall provide 

$9.9 million for training in the technologies, trades and upgrading courses, an increase of over $1 million 

over the Budget of 1970-71 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This will provide for enrolments of approximately 9,000 students in technical 

institutions in addition to those who receive training at centres spread throughout the province. 

 

In addition, a new facility will be constructed in Regina at an initial cost of over $2 million, providing 

training for students in the area of the Health Sciences. Mr. Speaker, this Administration enacted legislation 

making it mandatory for all school boards to provide educational services for handicapped children after 

September, 1971. The Budget includes support for these services whether provided directly by a school 

board or indirectly by purchase of services from another board or agency. We know that the people of 

Saskatchewan will support this progressive decision because they are aware of the great need in this field. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Renovations and improvements to the School for the Deaf will continue in 1971-72 

with expenditures expected to be about $776,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — During 1971-72, the Chinook Regional Library will be established to serve residents of 

the Swift Current area. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART — This is the fifth regional library to be established in the province. Initially 45,000 

persons will be served by 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

436 

the Chinook Regional Library and this will eventually increase to 70,000. The establishment of this regional 

library means that over 325,000 people in this province will have direct access to a regional library. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that although they had the legislation on the books, our Socialist friends 

were able to establish only one regional library during their 20 years in office . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . while the Chinook Library will be our fourth in only seven years. This is one more 

example of NDP talk and Liberal action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall now deal with the revenue aspects of our budgetary proposals. Mr. Speaker, the 

prospects of increased sales of grain along with an improvement in the non-agricultural sector of our 

economy lead us to anticipate a growth in Government revenues in the neighborhood of nine per cent. Given 

our current tax rates and some significant adjustments in payments from Ottawa, we expect revenues in 

1971-72 to yield over $451 million. This revenue will come from the following sources in general. 

 

For the coming year, we anticipate that our Education & Health Tax will yield $68.8 million. This level 

assumes a modest growth in retail trade as well as the movement from the current quarterly basis of payment 

to monthly remittances by vendors. Gasoline taxes will yield $51.4 million; liquor profits will increase to 

$26.6 million; tobacco taxes are expected to bring in over $6 million. Total consumption taxes are expected 

to yield $152.8 million as compared to the $145 million estimated for the current year. 

 

In 1971-72, we estimate that personal and corporate income taxes will yield $84.6 million. Of this amount, 

individuals will pay $69.3 million with corporations paying the remainder. This year we expect to receive 

$70.6 million in equalization payments from the Federal Government. This amount includes the equalization 

payments on account of 1971-72 as well as upward adjustments for underpayments in previous years. The 

upward adjustment is offset to some extent by downward adjustments of personal and corporate income 

taxes as a result of overpayments in previous years under the Tax Collection Agreement. The 

Post-Secondary Education Program equalization or adjustment payment will amount to $16.4 million. This 

coming year, the Province will receive $7.5 million as the final payment in the phase out of the capital 

program under the Adult Occupational Training Act. This brings us to our full entitlement under this 

Agreement. 

 

This year we expect to receive $36 million in mineral resource revenues. The only significant decrease we 

expect is our receipts from the sale of petroleum and natural gas Crown leases. 

 

When we took office in 1964, our Government promised to put the Crown corporations on a business-like 

and profitable basis. And we have done that. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

437 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — This coming year, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation will pay the Government of 

Saskatchewan a dividend of over $10.2 million, again without increasing the rates to our people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The dividend from the Sask Tel will be $5.9 million and $1 million from the 

Government Finance Office group of corporations. These payments were made possible by effective 

management and the growth of industry in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The receipts from all other sources are expected to amount of $66 million. Thus, we 

expect total budgetary revenues of a little over $451 million in 1971-72. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I present the motion that will begin the Budgetary Debate, I should remind the 

Legislature that this Budget will definitely accomplish its major aims of creating jobs, easing local taxes, 

putting new muscle into our pollution control and speeding up industrial development. It will be interesting 

to hear the reaction of the NDP Socialists as they oppose these progressive programs. And I have no doubt 

they will oppose and criticize everything we bring forward because they are becoming more negative every 

day. 

 

Let me give you just one example of what I mean by the negative, destructive attitude of the NDP Socialists. 

First they cry abut unemployment. They weep crocodile tears over the plight of the jobless. And when we 

announce a new pulp mill and new uranium mines to employ three or four thousand people or more directly 

and indirectly, how do they react? Are the NDPs happy about all these new jobs and high wages? Do they 

welcome the new revenue to pay for schools and hospitals? They do not. They whine about outside capital; 

they wring their hands over the use of our resources; the NDP fill the air with cries of anguish about keeping 

the trees for generations yet unborn, like they tried to do. Only the trees didn't co-operate. They rotted and 

burned down while they waited for the Socialists' Utopia. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I decided to see how the NDP would develop our resources if they 

ever came to power so I looked up the new platform they just published. Under Resource and Economic 

Development the NDP promised, if elected, to give first priority to public ownership, and second to 

co-operative development. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — "Hear, hear," he says, "There, there," he'll say in a minute. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

438 

We know their failure with Government ownership, the box factory and the woolen mill, the shoe factory — 

they are monuments to the lack of NDP business ability. This is typical of the Socialists because most of 

them couldn't succeed in anything else. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, how would they treat the co-operatives who dare to venture into the 

industrial field? Mr. Speaker, there is a co-operative in the chemical business in Saskatoon, the 

Interprovincial Co-op and they have had a few problems lately. Did the great co-operators in the NDP rush to 

the rescue? Did they defend the Co-op in its hour of need? The NDP here in Saskatchewan and in Manitoba 

not only failed to help or defend the Interprovincial Co-op when it was down and nearly out, they did their 

best to put them out of business . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The Interprovincial Co-op found itself in financial difficulties because of a sharp 

decrease in sales. This decline in sales was caused by a number of reasons, not the least of which was the 

shutdown of a firm in the United States with which IPCO had a large contract for agricultural chemicals. 

They had also made a bad deal with the pulp mill for industrial chemicals. They had, as well, been accused 

of polluting the Saskatchewan River by the NDP Government in Manitoba. Accused, Mr. Speaker, I said 

accused, not admitted, not proven. But who jumped in and joined the NDP from Manitoba accusing IPCO of 

polluting? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — None other than Mr. Smishek, none other than Mr. Romanow, Members from Regina 

and Saskatoon. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Has IPCO been tried in the courts, has IPCO been found guilty of pollution? The 

answer is, No, absolutely, No. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But here is a press clipping. What does Smishek say? 
 

He finds the Interprovincial Co-op guilty of polluting the Saskatchewan River. 
 
He didn't wait for a court hearing or a judgment, he was so eager to smear the Government that he walked all 

over the co-op movement just to get at us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Here is another report. It says: 

 

Romanow calls for takeover of chemical plant by Government. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

439 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Young fearless Roy. He didn't wait five minutes to give the Co-op a chance to recover. 

He demanded that they be socialized immediately. He also played judge, but it may be his only chance. He 

played judge and declared the Co-ops guilty of pollution on the unproven evidence of his NDP friends in 

Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, if this is the way they treat their friends, God help their enemies. By their actions the 

NDP in Manitoba and in Saskatchewan put into jeopardy the jobs of dozens and dozens of workers in 

Saskatoon, in Winnipeg and in Toronto, who also work for the Interprovincial Co-op. 

 

I see his leader is writing out some statements for him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — They also threaten . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I hope they are better than the ones he used to make when he was the critic. 

 

They also threatened the investment in this firm of almost the entire co-op movement across Canada, 

including Federated Co-ops of Saskatchewan, United Co-ops of Ontario, the Wheat Pools and the Credit 

Unions. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Liberals have to protect them! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But you know fortunately we didn't listen to these hysterical outbursts. What did we 

do? Why we simply helped the Interprovincial Co-op get a better deal from the pulp mill. We helped them 

with a refinancing plan and as a result they are still in business and they are still providing jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — You know, Mr. Speaker, these actions prove more conclusively than any words, that 

the NDP have become a negative force, bankrupt of any new ideas or positive suggestions to really help our 

people find jobs or prosperity. We will give you one last chance, fellows, one last chance — for most of you 

it will be your last chance — to prove that you can really think positive. I invite you to support this great 

Budget and thus show the people that you haven't become totally blinded . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I ask you, how can the Members opposite vote against this Budget? How 

could Mr. Romanow, the defender of youth, the youth in shining armour, vote against the student job 

program? How could my friend, Bill Berezowsky, vote against a greater pollution control program? I think 

I'll get his vote, I think we'll get Bill's vote. How can Walter and Bill Davies 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

440 

say "No" to our massive public works program to create employment without revealing their anti-labor bias? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Will the Hon. Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) vote against added police 

protection? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — How about it Eiling? How about it? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Will Henry vote against the added hundreds of thousands in extra grants for Regina 

now that he is an ordinary citizen like the rest of us? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Will Art Thibault show his courage and vote against the Homeowner Grant? Or does 

he want another term as an MLA? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I'm sorry Arthur. Arthur didn't show his courage the last time he voted for it. 

 

All these questions and more will be answered when this Debate ends and I predict the NDP will fail the acid 

test of true statesmanship . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . and will vote against this great Budget, putting politics ahead of people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have outlined just some of the highlights of our 1971-72 Budget. This is a Budget designed to 

provide our people with jobs, economic well-being; reasonable taxes and higher quality of life. It will be a 

record budget, calling for a net spending of $450.7 million, an increase of $45.7 million over the current year 

and a new high for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all this will be done, as I said at the beginning, but absolutely no borrowing. I am doubly 

pleased to announce that it will also be all done with absolutely no increase in taxes or charges. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — That our Government can produce its seventh consecutive balanced budget calling for 

a net expenditure of $450 million and total gross spending of over $600 million with no tax increases bears 

testimony to the sound way that we have conducted the Government's business. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

441 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It is also proof positive of the soundness of our economy. It is the basic reason we have 

every right to be optimistic about the great future of this province. 

 

I believe that all, but the most hardened and pessimistic Socialist will rejoice with us over the story this 

Budget unfolds and will give us their unqualified support. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon-Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, my first words are words of 

congratulations to the Hon. The Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) on the delivery of the Budget Address, 1971, if not 

the content of the Budget. Certainly the Treasurer knows how to deliver speeches in a very colorful and 

flamboyant manner, if I may describe it that way, if nothing else. Too bad we are going to miss him next year 

after the election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I see again that the Hon. Treasurer has his Scottish tie lent to him by the Hon. 

Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall). At least we on this side of the House know the Hon. Member 

from Souris-Estevan actually does make a contribution to the proceedings of this House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And I can say to you, the Hon. Member from Souris, that that is more than the Hon. 

Member from Nipawin (Mr. Radloff) or the Hon. Member back there sitting from Humboldt (Mr. Breker) 

makes. 

 

It is the same old speech that we've heard, same old tired line from the Treasurer and the Liberal 

Government, same old Liberal Party speech that I heard first back in 1959, given then by the then Leader of 

the Opposition, the now Premier, speaking to the University. 1959, the same old speech. We heard it in 

1964. We heard it in 1967. I know this is the first time you heard it, Member from City Park-University (Mr. 

Charlebois) because you, too, like the rest of us were asleep during that same old tired speech — the same 

old speech . . . 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I thought you finished making your Canada Winter Games speech a couple of weeks 

ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same old speech that we heard in 1967 . . . 

 

MR. CHARLEBOIS: — . . . knuckle head . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, we hear again the comments from the junior Member from Saskatoon City 

Park-University, making his only one 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

442 

speech during this entire Session. Thank you very much, Mr. Member. 

 

Well, the Treasurer made some reference about Members falling asleep. I don't blame the Members for 

falling asleep, because of this tired old speech. Apart from the Treasurer's feeble jokes that liven things up 

from time to time, this Budget Speech was an absolutely weak speech. Same old speech, same old campaign. 

I bet, Mr. Speaker, when the next election is called, sooner or later and I hope sooner, we'll even hear the 

same old slogan of "Welcome to the new Saskatchewan." The new Saskatchewan for which we are still 

waiting. We will remember that 1967 slogan of, "Welcome to the new Saskatchewan." Well I had occasion 

to do some research on your past Budget Speeches, because this is my first opportunity to be budget critic for 

my party. I had occasion to read some of the comments . . .Yes, it will be my last speech as budget critic 

because I'll be sitting over where the Treasurer is! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — You won't even be in this House, Member for Athabasca! 

 

I had occasion to look at some of the flamboyant terms, and some of the flamboyant promises that the 

Premier who was then the Treasurer made back in 1967. He said in 1967, just like the present Treasurer is 

saying in 1971, "We are going to have increases in school grants. We are going to ease the burden of the 

local property taxes." That is what he said in 1967. You know what happened in 1968? You know what 

happened in 1969? Today Saskatchewan has the highest rate of local property taxation in the history of the 

provinces, thanks to a Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — It wasn't enough for the Premier and his pre-election Budget Speech, and I underline 

the word "speech" in 1967. "Why," he said, "you know not only that but we're going to reduce taxation." He 

said, "you know since we have taken over government in 1964, we reduced taxes from five to four per cent 

for sales tax. We reduced the income surcharge six to five per cent." Just like the Treasurer today. "We even 

gave the farmers the privilege of using tax free gasoline in farm trucks." That was in 1967 before the 

election. We all know what happened after the election in 1968. I am going to remind the Treasurer and this 

House what happened, the last time the people in Saskatchewan bought a phony budget, a budget that is as 

phony as this one is. In 1968, the sales tax went up 25 per cent. The sales tax was expanded to cover 

everything. Mr. Speaker, absolutely everything came within the clutches of that very eager Treasurer over 

there. Meals, hotels, motels, telecommunications. All the businessmen know that the sales tax applies now 

absolutely everywhere, even to meals 14 cents and over. How about in 1968? There was a tax on deterrent 

fees. That was a brand new tax. The people of Saskatchewan, when they are taking into account this Budget 

of 1971, will also take into account the deterrent fee which was a tax on the sick. They put a tax on the sick 

and a tax on the poor. Then this so-called "farmers' party," this "farmers' party" that is populated by the 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

443 

corporation lawyer over there from Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Estey), the corporation big business lawyer, the 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald), the corporation big business lawyer over there from Hanley (Mr. Heggie). 

This fine “farmers’ party.” Oh, no, you listen, Mr. Treasurer, this “farmers’ party” of corporate lawyers. You 

know what they did for the hard-pressed farmer in 1968? You know what they did? They put on the two cent 

tax on purple gasoline! That's what the Treasurer did. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — That wasn’t good enough for the Treasurer. He then put on another two cent tax on 

gasoline, up 13 per cent. Cigarette, tobacco tax, and cigars, up 60 per cent; operator license taxes, up 100 per 

cent; taxes on pari-mutuels, up 100 per cent. You could make a speech alone on the taxation by the Liberal 

Government. Taxation which has placed Saskatchewan at the highest level of taxation in our entire history. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well in 1967, just like in 1971, just like in this Budget we heard just now from the 

Treasurer, it has a happy way of inflating, of boosting its revenues and expenditures to make it look all very 

good when it went to the people. It estimated big returns from consumption taxes, just like he has done again 

today. It estimated big expenditures for people programs, just like it did today. Then came 1969, and the 

Treasurer slashed back and cut back on almost every conceivable Government program going. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Then in 1970, last year, finally the economic depression was getting to the 

Government. We had been telling this Treasurer, who delivered this Budget Speech today, all along that 

there was a depression around the corner, thanks to the Liberal policies in Ottawa and Regina. But, he 

wouldn't listen. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Treasurer had the answer. He got up and said: “You 

know, we’re going to have a crash public works program,” he said last year. “We’re going to have a crash 

$20 million public works program to help stimulate the economy,” he says. “To make work. $20 million!” 

You know what we did. We went through the Estimates just as we’re going through the Estimates on this 

Budget. Was there $20 million budgeted for capital expenditures? Was there $10 million budgeted for 

expenditures? No! Was there $5 million budgeted for capital expenditures? No! You know what this 

Treasurer did to make work last year, work that would have kept part of the 30,000 people from leaving 

Saskatchewan, that would have kept them here, you know what he budgeted? A decrease of $3 million in 

capital construction. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, in 1970, those things 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

444 

were all very good. He said, “We are going to have this crash public works program, because you know 

why.” I remember the Treasurer as he was delivering his approach last Budget. He said, “We are going to 

prime the pump.” In 1970 he said, “Saskatchewan’s economy needs some priming at the pump.” We could 

see the Treasurer waving his arms, in a flamboyant style, just as if he was priming the pump. He said — 

these are his exact words — “It will bring help, help to every part of Saskatchewan. This Budget will spark 

— note the word “spark” — our economy to provide employment and opportunity for contractors and 

supplies.” Some spark, Mr. Treasurer, 1970. Some spark. 

 

Then we hear about the Budget of 1971. I get a kick out of the colorful, but inaccurate language the 

Treasurer uses in his Budget address. He talks about those dark days. Here is how he worded it. “Our first 

and greatest achievement was ridding Saskatchewan of an NDP Socialist Government.” He said, “this ended 

20 years of regimentation and stagnation.” That's what the Treasurer told the people today. Regimentation 

and stagnation. Oh, the people of Saskatchewan, if only they could have back again those days of stagnation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I want to tell you how prosperous things are. How well did the Treasurer do with his 

priming of the pump? How well did the Treasurer do in sparking the economy to get it going? Well, we 

haven’t had a chance to do a thorough review of the Estimates that he tabled just a few minutes before the 

Address. But I have an interesting little figure here, with respect to revenues from the Estimates for 1970-71. 

I want the Members of this House to keep these figures in mind. This is from the Estimates tabled today by 

the Treasurer. Petroleum and natural gas, what does he estimate? A big booming increase that he talked 

about. Is it going to happen? No! The decrease is $1.6 million in petroleum and natural gas for the coming 

year, by this Government’s own Estimates. What about metals? Surely, we are going to have a big boost in 

this new Saskatchewan of metal production. Is there an increase there? No spark and no priming of the 

pump. Down $200,000. What about the other minerals? Down $1,000. What about forests and game and the 

revenues there, the thing that the Treasurer is particularly proud about — what revenues are going to the 

Province of Saskatchewan 1971-72 by his own Estimates? Not one cent, we are going to be down $1 million 

compared to the Estimates last year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — It’s not all that bad! Things are looking up in the new Saskatchewan. We do have 

one increase by their own Estimates, I found. It was in potash we found it. Estimated revenue increase 

$37,000. The total of all estimated increases and all the deficits. You know what this new, free enterprising, 

big dealing, big business, big wheeling boys over there are going to do? Get us in the hole. A total of $1.3 

million less, than last year in the Estimates. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — $1.3 million less! Welcome to the new Saskatchewan. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

445 

The story goes on. You know, in the area of oil production since 1964, under the Liberals, oil production has 

been at a steady decline. In 1964, the number of barrels produced was up 14.2 per cent over the year before. 

Under the Liberals, under this Treasurer, it has gone down steadily since 1967. That was, as you will recall, 

the last pre-election Budget Speech. Down .7 per cent, 1968; .7 per cent in 1969, down to a point where it 

has reached a 5 per cent decrease. Down, down, down, is the story of oil production. I should say one thing. 

In 1970 it only slightly decreased, temporarily arrested, but still below the five-year production. Oh, if we 

could turn back to those dark days of stagnation under the CCF. I want to tell you how stagnant the economy 

was in respect to oil, Mr. Treasurer. In 1944, the CCF took over, after the Liberals last had their hands on the 

public funds and the management of this economy. They ran it right down to the economic mess we are in, 

similarly, now. By the time we left, one quarter of all the oil produced in Canada was produced right here in 

Saskatchewan under the CCF. One quarter! That's what we left behind. What has the Treasurer given us. 

Nothing but decrease in oil production! Decrease after decrease, after decrease after decrease! That's the 

Treasurer's contribution. Oh, those dark days of stagnation. 

 

Now, the unemployment matter. The Treasurer talks so grandiosely about unemployment. He says, “We are 

doing so much about unemployment.” 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Yeah, they are! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — So much, that's right. I think he even talked during the course of his Address about a 

wall being built, about Melville Watkins, and who's that Liberal friend he mentioned in addition, Bill? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Walter Gordon! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Oh, that's right he was part of that odd-ball group of kooks in the Liberal Party 

whom the Treasurer talked about. Fuddle duddlers, yes, that's right. All is just fuddle duddle, Mr. Treasurer. 

Yes, I might add to that, the name of Herb Grey who is also a Liberal Minister. He doesn't want foreign 

investment to have runaway in Canada. Add to that the name of Joe Green. These are all your Liberal 

counterparts. You are inaccurate in the information as well there. Mind you, I sometimes think in judging the 

performances of Mr. Grey and Mr. Green, that they belong to an odd-ball collection that is the exclusive 

domain of the Liberal Party. You know, what the Treasurer has said about the big job that he was doing for 

unemployment, has to be put into proper prospective. With respect to the population loss, he can make all 

the political speeches one wants, but under this Liberal Government, from 1964 to 1971 we have never ever, 

in the history of Saskatchewan, experienced as massive a population exodus. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — These are figures from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. DBS figures. Young 

people, trained and skilled people, farmers being driven off their farms. Workers. Everybody is leaving the 

Province of Saskatchewan. There is no other 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

446 

province in Canada that has as bad a record with respect to population loss than the Treasurer and the 

Premier opposite. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The Treasurer keeps on telling us about that famous old acid test. The acid test. He 

coined that phrase from the Premier. By the way, the Premier used the phrase initially . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — He doesn't use it anymore! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, the Premier doesn't but now he has his aide-de-camp. The Treasurer is using 

the acid test. I shouldn't be a bit surprised, if in fact not only the Treasurer borrowed the phrase, acid test, but 

he borrowed his entire speech from the Premier, that old speech from 1959. 

 

The total loss, natural increase and people who have left the Province of Saskatchewan in the Liberal years 

from 1964 to 1971, is over 103,000 people, Mr. Speaker, under a Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — But in the salad days, but in the salad days, the Treasurer and the Premier were still 

making their good old political speeches which I see they have revived again today. The Treasurer said on 

April 1, 1964, at some political rally, or other, where there was a reporter who happened to be around, 

“Thousands of jobs will be provided by the Liberal Government to stop the exodus of trained youth to other 

provinces.” Thousands of jobs in 1964, the Treasurer said. Well the only consolation I can say for that 

speech, is that it was made on April 1, 1964 — April Fools’ Day. The Treasurer talked about people being 

fools and foolish, and I can say that there is no better expert than the Treasurer himself on that particular 

subject. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The only problem is that sometimes the people of Saskatchewan are the victims. 

How about this new Saskatchewan with respect to farm income. I ask any Member in this House to try to tell 

me when they get up in the Budget Debate, without referring to their notes, what the Minister said about 

agriculture. He talked for an hour and three quarters, rambled on, talking that same old Liberal speech, the 

same old Liberal speeches from 1959, 1964 and 1967. I ask anyone here to tell me what he said about 

agriculture. That's the most important industry according to this "farmers' party." He glided over agriculture. 

Where is the Minister of Agriculture? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Gone to Alberta! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Gone to Alberta, so is everybody else. You're right! Maybe things will be a little 

more prosperous there. 

 

You didn't want to talk about farming, Mr. Treasurer. I 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

447 

don't blame you. You talked about the stagnation of the CCF days. Farm incomes are absolutely disastrous 

under the Liberal Party rule in Saskatchewan and in Canada. I want to tell the Members of this House the net 

farm cash receipts this year have never been as low in the entire period that is recorded in the Government's 

own White Paper from 1963 to 1970, has never been as low. The net farm cash receipts for the Province of 

Saskatchewan in 1970 is about $190 million, using the Government's own figures. You know what they were 

in those old dark days of stagnation, $450 million under the CCF . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — $450 million when we had a Government that was concerned about farmers. Our 

Government wasn’t putting a 2-cent tax on purple gas. $190 million under this very successful big business, 

wheeling-dealing Liberal Government. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — 20-cent hogs! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — 20-cent hogs, as well, at this particular time. 

 

The Treasurer said, very grandiosely, "Well, things on investment are not very good." That's a mild 

understatement, Mr. Treasurer, that investment isn't all that good. Investment in Saskatchewan has been 

roughly increasing about 10 per cent since 1944. For example, in 1963 in those old days of stagnation under 

the CCF, investment in Canada was second highest in Saskatchewan next to Alberta under the CCF. Today 

under your party, Mr. Treasurer, Saskatchewan investment has been steadily declining, to a point where it is 

down now nearly 10 per cent. Down 10 per cent while Canada is up and in that new Socialist Province of 

Manitoba it is up nearly four per cent and Alberta is up 11 per cent. Some priming of the pump by the 

Minister opposite. Some sparklighting by the Minister opposite. 

 

What about retail trade? I say, Mr. Speaker, that nowhere has Saskatchewan's difficult situation, caused by 

the Liberals, been more painfully reflected than in retail trade. By every yardstick, Saskatchewan is in a 

wholesale depression. In 1967, that was the date of the last great pre-election Budget Speech, by the Premier 

then, things were not looking so badly. Then right after the new Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) took over the job 

from the Premier, and under the new management, retail trade dropped to 1.5 per cent increase from the year 

before. While it was only his first year as Treasurer, we all decided to give him another chance, and certainly 

the Premier decided to give him another chance. How did he fare in 1969? Retail trade went down not 1.5 

per cent, not 5 per cent but over 8 per cent under the new Treasurer. And then in 1970, while we all thought 

of the "New Saskatchewan" that things would get going again, retail trade fell off 11 per cent. And in the 

months of January and February of 1971 it is at 11 per cent or more. Shame! These are the actions of the 

Treasurer and the Premier opposite with respect to this New Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to tell the "farmers' party" over there, the corporation big business lawyers that dominate and control 

that party, I want to tell them that if you get out and start travelling in the country you would know that the 

retail trade figures are not 11 per cent, more like 40 to 50 per cent down. 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

448 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Farm implement sales are down $75 million. Never in the history of the White Paper 

Reports of the years 1963 to 1970 has it been down as much as it is down in 1970 under the Liberals. And in 

Saskatoon, my own city, retail trade last year dropped off 10 per cent according to the Retail Merchant's 

Association and it is still going down. 

 

What did my colleagues from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth), Nutana Centre (Mr. Estey), Saskatoon City 

Park-University (Mr. Charlebois), have to say about the Treasurer's priming of the pump to keep Saskatoon 

going and healthy. We'll be waiting for the speech from those Members. Some priming of the pump, by the 

Treasurer! 

 

I don't think that he knows which end of the pump to hold, after all he is not a farm boy. So he doesn't know 

how to get the economy rolling again. 

 

I had to laugh at the figure on housing construction and what this great new Budget held for it. You know the 

Treasurer said, "We are going to continue this great program with the $500 grants for housing construction. 

We are going to keep up our rapid housing construction." This is one area at least that the Liberal policy has 

had some, I suppose, good — if you can use that word — because of the mass exodus of people leaving 

Saskatchewan. We now have more houses vacant and up for sale than ever in the history of our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Twenty per cent vacancy right in Saskatoon. What about this Government and 

housing starts? According to their own White Paper, the number of housing starts in 1970 was only 1,600 

compared to the year before of 5,400. That is the Government's figures. Those of you who read the Toronto 

Globe and Mail Report on Business will know that the starts are only about 900, not 1,600. The White Paper 

is like the Budget, it tends to inflate a little bit of the revenues and expenditures. There is nowhere in the 

years between 1963 and 1967 a figure as low on housing starts as in 1970 under the Liberals and the Premier 

of this Province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I say to the Premier and the Treasurer, that if he was less concerned about checking 

under his bed after he goes home every night for Wafflers and started doing his homework to get this 

Province going we wouldn't be in such a mess as we are in right now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I had to note with some interest, Mr. Treasurer, the Government promise — another 

broken promise no doubt if the people should ever mistakenly re-elect them again — the Last Will and 

Testament . . . 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

449 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Unfortunately, when we take over the Government, the beneficiaries, that is the 

people of Saskatchewan will likely have to undergo some very drastic remedies to get the economy back on 

an even keel again. But do you know what they promised this time, again, about the hard-pressed local 

property tax? In 1964, 1967, the Premier — and I have the quotes here — talks about his record with respect 

to the very high rates of local taxation. Page 38, 1967, a speech from the old colonel himself, then the 

Treasurer. Do you know what he said? He said: 

 

Our Government has been concerned since taking office at the very high rate of local taxation in 

Saskatchewan. We do propose to make increases to lower the rate of taxation, local taxation. 

 

That was in 1967 before the election. Then, in 1968, property taxes were increased again under the Liberal 

Party. You know, Mr. Premier, that in the period between 1964 and 1968, during that period, all these years 

of big concern that the Liberals talk about, that local property taxes have increased four times over what they 

were between 1960 and 1964. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Today, in Saskatchewan, under the benevolent concern of the Premier and the 

Treasurer, we now have property taxes four times the load than we had when we left in 1964. Four times the 

load in 1960-1964. Out they come again and trot that same old election propaganda stuff in 1971. "We are 

going to lower the property taxes for you this year. We are going to lower it again." In fact I haven't had a 

chance to check the exact wording but I shouldn't be a bit surprised that the present Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

took those words directly from the colonel as well in this speech. Same old words, same old promises. 

 

Grants are going to be 50 per cent of the election budget. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — You said 100. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I am going to tell you what we are going to do on the radio, on Monday, Mr. 

Premier. But I want to tell you right now what your Government has done about the percentage of grant 

assistance. You say you are going to give 50 per cent. Just take a look at the Department of Education report 

tabled a few days ago by the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac). Total cost of education over $154 million. 

What was the Provincial grant? Only $62 million, less than 40 per cent of the Education budget. Now let's go 

over that once more for the Minister of Education. If you are listening Mr. Minister of Education, less than 

40 per cent is the contribution by the Provincial Government, made by this Government under this particular 

budget. 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . some of those figures. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Treasurer, if I have the wrong figures, it is because I have been reading too many 

of your Budget speeches, Mr. Treasurer. You can't get the right figures in the Budget 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

450 

speeches that you deliver. I can tell you that if you would listen to a few of your corporation lawyers that 

dominate your Party over there, you would know that you would be able to make some tax decreases. 

 

I want to say just a few words about taxation, just very briefly trying to relate it to the comment made by the 

then Treasurer in 1967, when he was making his great election speech in that particular year. When in the 

Budget, he very proudly said or words to this effect: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to announce that there will be no tax increases and no changes in the tax 

structure. 

 

That was in 1967. But in 1968, and I have already told you what happened, up goes the sales tax, up go the 

deterrent fees, up go the property taxes, up goes the cigarette and tobacco tax — taxes, taxes and taxes! If 

there is any way that you can describe this Government with a word, it is taxes. One other word maybe — 

incompetence. 

 

I should like to tell the Treasurer that there is one tax that you could have done away with in this Budget and 

we, on this side, regret that you didn't do away with it. That is the tax on the sick, the deterrent fees. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — When the Treasurer and the Premier say that we are going to be wiped out, if there is 

any one single political issue that is going to wipe them out, that is the tax on the sick, the deterrent fees. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I want the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) to know that when we go around the 

country telling the people about the actions of this Government, that I am reminded and smile — difficult it 

is to smile under these circumstances — of your words on deterrent fees, that this Government is putting on 

deterrent fees because it wants the people to know that they are participating in their own recovery. When 

they are flat on their back, this Government is taxing the people because it wants them to know that they are 

participating in their own recovery, Mr. Minister of Health. 

 

We regret very much, Mr. Treasurer, that the deterrent fee was not removed by this Government. 

 

Now a word of two that was said very grandiosely by the Treasurer on co-op movements and IPCO. It was 

an addendum to the speech that wasn't in the speech by the Treasurer. "Why," he said, "the New Democratic 

Party is against the co-operative movement." He said the New Democratic Party is taking a stand against 

pollution. He said that the New Democratic Party ought not to take a stand against polluters. He said that we 

as Members of the Legislature ought to be protecting our friends and I tell the Treasurer that we are not like 

the Liberal Party protecting your friends. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

451 

MR. ROMANOW: — When we see injustices done no matter where they are, we will be taking a stand 

publicly, politically whenever we have to do so. I am telling you this, Mr. Treasurer, I am saying this: that 

there are all sorts of signs on that river, that Saskatchewan River, put up by your Government saying that you 

can't fish because of the mercury pollution. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Who is causing it? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Just hang on for a minute, Mr. Treasurer. I want to tell the House about the friends of 

the co-operative movement. 

 

MR. STEUART: — You can wiggle . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I am learning how to wiggle by watching you deliver your speeches now for four 

years and I shall never be able to do it as well as you can do it. That is true and I am glad that I won't be able 

to. 

 

These big friends of the co-operative movement have been cutting back on the Department of Co-operation 

year by year. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Oh! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — "Oh," he says. He doesn't accept that word. Well your own Estimates — just listen to 

this — last year you budgeted $525,000. Way too small for the Department of Co-operation. This year, is 

there an increase? No! Does it even hold the same figure? No! $470,000 it is cutting back on the Department 

of Co-operation left and right. Oh boy, with friends like that who needs enemies. That is all that I can say. 

 

I want, before I adjourn this debate, to make one more comment about this balanced Budget, Mr. Treasurer. 

Do you know how the Treasurer balanced this Budget? It is very interesting about the sources of revenue by 

this Treasurer and how he balanced it. In the newspaper report, they reported a few days ago that there would 

be a Federal equalization payment of $60.1 million. The Leader-Post, as usual, was wrong. It is $70.6 

million. $70.6 million from the Federal-Liberals. The Liberal boys have come in to bail out their Liberal 

friends here in Saskatchewan because they are in political trouble. I recall how the Treasurer and the Premier 

used to say, all the time going up and down the province: "You know under the Liberal Government we are a 

have province now and that means that we don't get any equalization payments." We are a "have" province, 

that is what he said. Now all of a sudden we are a "have not" province getting $70.6 million. The Treasury 

would be absolutely broke, this Province would be bankrupt or on the verge of it if it wasn't for the 

Federal-Liberals handing out millions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — If it wasn't for Otto Lang and Pierre Elliot Trudeau, old fuddle duddle himself, 

coming in to help out the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), this Government would 

be broke. They saved the bacon for the Treasurer. $70.6 million in equalization payments. What happened to 

the 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

452 

"have" province? I can tell you what happened. It got had, that's right. The have province disappeared when 

the CCF Government was defeated in 1964, but will reappear when the next election takes place in 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — That is only a part of the revenue story. There is another part to this story. $70.6 

from the Federal Government. They say no taxation. I say that is false. They are putting into the coffers of 

the public from the Crown corporations a total of $16.1 million. You add that $70.6 and the $16.1 and you 

have $87 million. Are they (a) from Ottawa or (b) from those big bad bogey Crown corporations that the 

CCF Government put in? If it weren't for the Crown corporations, this Government would be flat broke. If it 

wasn't for the corporations and the surplus from their revenues this Government would be broke. I oppose 

this form of activity, Mr. Speaker, because it is a form of taxation, indirectly. These corporations if they are 

making profits are there to provide a service at the least possible expense to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — But they are taxing them through the back door. Taxing them to the tune of $86 

million. So if you take away the $86 million, Mr. Treasurer, and you are left now with the Budget figures of 

population and all the retail trade, what do you have? You have a Bogus Budget 1971. It is the only way that 

we can describe this Budget — Bogus Budget 1971. It inflates unrealistically and inaccurately the revenues 

and expenditures. It is so incongruous in its phony optimism in the circumstances that Saskatchewan finds 

herself in today, that is serves only as a reminder to the people that the Liberal Party cannot and will not be 

trusted come the next election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I say that the people of Saskatchewan, drawing on your experience in 1967 and 

1968, don't buy this Budget. I can say to the Treasurer from travelling around the province, that the 

unemployed worker and the hard-pressed farmer won't buy this phony bogus Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — You betrayed once in 1967 and that was once too much. You know, Mr. Speaker, I 

predict that there will be another exodus after the next election. There will be an exodus of those who now 

occupy the Treasury Benches to this side of the House, at least an exodus of some of them. I wonder who of 

those who will get defeated will emigrate out of the province. 

 

MR. STEUART: — To the Senate. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — To the Senate? I like the ring of Senator Davey Steuart. It has a nice sound to it. Or 

Senator Frank Radloff or Senator Charlebois. That's a good one too. The junior Senator from 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

453 

Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It won't be Romanow. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — You are right it won't be Romanow. I wonder, Mr. Treasurer, what you will do? 

Whether you will return to some of your former businesses. What will these gentlemen do? Some of them 

maybe will retire to writing their thoughts on the Waffle, like my friend from Athabasca (Mr. Guy), some 

will read and re-read their speeches condemning the New Democratic program, like the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs (Mr. Guy) and shaking his head and saying, "Too bad I didn't spend more time telling the 

people about our program." 

 

I don't know what they do but whatever they do, we on this side wish them all the best of luck. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — But all I can say is that they probably won't have it quite as hard under an NDP 

Government as we have it now under a Liberal Government. And who knows perhaps even some day we'll 

soon be able to record the re-entry of Thatcher's hardware to Saskatchewan's economic family. All I can say 

is the sooner an election is called, the better we can get on this task of building a new Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, as there is so much to say and to talk about this particular Budget, I am 

going to beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 

 

RETURN NO 68 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East-Cumberland) moved that an Order of the Assembly do 

issue for Return No. 68 showing: 

 

The number of square miles that were re-forested in 1970 with the saplings from (a) the 

Provincial tree nurseries (b) other sources. 

 

HON. J.R. BARRIE (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the information 

required by the Member with the present wording would not be satisfactory to him. I, therefore, move, 

seconded by the Minister of Municipal Affairs, the Hon. Mr. Guy: 

 

That all the words after the word "miles" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

454 

In respect of which during the fiscal year ending March 31, 1970 reforestation work was 

done through (a) planting from: (i) provincial tree nurseries (ii) other sources (b) other 

reforestation methods. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 50 
 
MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw South) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 50 

showing: 

 

(1) (a) The Department of Public Works construction projects that were commenced in 1970. 

(b) In each case, their value. (c) The location, and the dates that they were commenced. 

 

(2) The number of building construction workers who were directly employed in each of 

these projects (a) as of March 1, 1970 (b) as of July 1, 1970 (c) as of December 1, 1970. 

 

(3) The number of the said projects that were still uncompleted as of February 1971, and the 

names of each. 

 

(4) The number of building construction workers that were employed with respect to each of 

the uncompleted projects, as of February 15, 1971. 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, no doubt the Member would like the 

precise exact answers for it, therefore, I move, seconded by the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) that 

Return No. 50 be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word "projects" in the first line be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

"That were in progress during 1970. 

 

(b) that involved Government assistance, licence or approval during 1970. (c) In each case 

their value; the location; the dates of completion, actual or estimated. 

 

(2) The estimated number of man days for each project". 

 

I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is the complete information the gentleman wants and I'm sure he wouldn't 

want less than complete information. I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North). 

 

RETURN NO. 72 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 72 

showing: 

 



 

February 26, 1971 

 

 

455 

(a) The amounts received by the Government of Saskatchewan from the Government of Canada in 

respect of ARDA projects in (i) 1968-69 (ii) 1969-70 (iii) 1970-71 as of February 1, 1971. (b) The 

projects in respect of which these amounts were paid. (c) The locations of each of these projects. 

 

HON. D.T. McFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture): — I move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of 

Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) that in Return No. 72: 

 

That the word "February" be deleted and the word "January" substituted therefor. 

 

There are two reasons for that, Mr. Speaker, the first is that our records have just recently been brought up to 

date to January 1st 1971 for each project so it would save a great deal of work in compiling these records. 

The second reason is that claims made in December have been reimbursed but most of the claims made in 

January have not been reimbursed so a change in the date would have little effect on the answer. I think we 

shall be able to get the information that the Member wants without a great deal of work and going back over 

records we have. I hope that recommendation, Mr. Speaker, is acceptable to the Member. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:07 o’clock p.m. 

 


