



















































Hansard: February 25, 1971


325 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

8th Day 

 

Thursday, February 25, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to introduce the following groups of 

students situated in the galleries: from the constituency of Morse represented by the Hon. the Premier (Mr. 

Thatcher), 62 students from the Caronport High School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Heppner; 

from the constituency of Rosthern represented by the Hon. the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), 44 

students from Hague Consolidated School District under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Reimer; from the 

Assiniboine School from the constituency of Regina South West, represented by Mr. McPherson, 27 

students under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Thompson; from the constituency of The Battlefords 

represented by Mr. Kramer, 82 students from the Cairns School, North Battleford, under the direction of 

their teacher, Miss Liddell; from the constituency of Shaunavon represented by Mr. Larochelle, 37 students 

from the Climax School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. F.W. Herron; from the constituency of Last 

Mountain represented by Mr. MacLennan, 80 students from Earl Grey under the direction of their teacher, 

Mr. Wyatt; from the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale represented by Mr. Romanow, 41 students from 

the W.C. Bates School, Saskatoon, under the direction of their teachers, Mrs. Head and Mrs. Thomas; from 

the constituency of Lumsden represented by the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), 28 students from the McLean 

School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Morton. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members will wish to join me in extending to each and every one of these pupils and their 

teachers a very warm welcome to the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

INCREASE IN BENEFITS — DEPARTMENT OF WELFARE 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have an 

announcement that I should like to make which will be of interest to the House. I should like to announce 

that the Department of Welfare will make increases in the benefits under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 

effective April 1, 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — These adjustments in benefits are the result of the Saskatchewan Government's 

decision to pass on a savings as a result of changes in the Guaranteed Income Supplement to the clients of 

the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. People are aware 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

326 

effective April 1, 1971, the Guaranteed Income Supplement will be increased to $55 per individual and $95 

per couple from its 1970 level of $31.83 per individual. These increases will be received by individuals in 

their May cheques. Our records indicate that 575 people will not have a budget deficit after the Guaranteed 

Income Supplement increase. In addition there are 2,500 Saskatchewan Assistance Plan recipients who will 

have their benefits reduced. We calculate that this will result in a savings to the Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan of approximately $700,000. 

 

In selecting those areas of the program to adjust the allowances, consideration was given to those parts of the 

program where the need was greatest. Major emphasis was given to our senior citizens and their health 

needs. Priority was also given to personal allowances of recipients. We hope that these increases in personal 

allowances will assist these people to play a more active part in the community. It is proposed to distribute 

these funds in the following manner based on program projections: first to maintain health benefits for those 

persons who become ineligible for SAP as a result of the increase — cost $30,000 per year; (2) to increase 

the comfort allowance for SAP recipients in Special Care Homes from $10 per month to $15 per month at a 

cost of $140,000 per year; (3) to extend 100 per cent drug coverage to all SAP recipients in Special Care 

Homes at a cost of $14,000 per year; (4) to improve the drug coverage of all SAP recipients from its present 

50 per cent to 70 per cent drug coverage, a cost of $140,000 per year; and (5) to combine household and 

personal allowances for adult SAP recipients and increase the amount of this by approximately 15 per cent, a 

cost of approximately $375,000 per year. Saskatchewan Assistance Plan recipients will receive these 

adjustments in their May cheques. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to add the comments 

from this side of the House to the affect that the statement of the Minister (Mr. MacDonald) is very much 

welcome. We congratulate the Government on making these changes. We believe that many of these 

changes should have been made sometime ago and without referring to anything that has been previously 

said in debate — there were comments made in my remarks about the need for this sort of change — we are 

of the view that however belated they are they are welcome on behalf of those who will be receiving them, as 

I say belatedly, we congratulate the Government on making them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Mitchell (Bengough). 

 

HON. A.R. GUY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned the debate last night 

I had congratulated the new Leader and Deputy Leader of 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

327 

the NDP Opposition and I had commented on how quickly they had moved to the left after the Wafflers had 

shown their support for Mr. Blakeney. 

 

Now as the Throne Speech draws to a close we have heard many speeches from both sides of the House and 

I should like for a few minutes this afternoon to review for the people of Saskatchewan the position that has 

developed as the result of the speeches. 

 

Government speakers have broadened and enlarged on the Throne Speech as well as outlining additional 

policies and programs which we feel are a progressive approach to the problems of the day. The Opposition 

have presented their criticism and their alternatives in the form of an election platform better now known as 

"Waffling Allan's Manifesto." I would suggest that from these two documents the strength of the 

Government and the weakness of the Opposition will be clearly seen. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition opened the debate with a two and one-half hour speech. Thank heavens he 

divided it over two days or I don't think that we should have been able to stand it. Although he touched on 

many subjects we noted that he carefully avoided the Throne Speech as such and we failed to find out really 

what his position was on many of the important issues facing Saskatchewan today. 

 

I was surprised to hear that the Leader of the Opposition agreed with the Winter Games, because after all 

they had been good for Saskatchewan. And over the last few months since he became the Leader, anything 

that is good for Saskatchewan certainly doesn't appear to be good for the NDP. He has attacked everything as 

you will see later on. 

 

My colleague, the MLA from Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) deserves a special word of 

thanks for his efforts as President of the Games and the interest that he took in the whole endeavor. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — In fact one would have thought that all the Saskatoon Members of the Legislature would have 

been most enthusiastic supporters of the Winter Games held in their home city. Well, apparently this was not 

the case. It was almost unbelievable when one of the Saskatoon Members, the Deputy NDP Leader, Roy 

Romanow, stated in a Press release January 21 and I quote: 

 

As far as the Winter Games are concerned the presence of 59 MLAs will have no effect. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that these remarks from the Deputy Leader will lead to his defeat in the 

coming election by the people of Saskatoon. Because what he is saying is that the Premier, the Minister of 

Youth, other Cabinet Ministers, private MLAs shouldn't have shown any interest in the Games, shouldn't 

have sponsored the Provincial banquet, shouldn't have attended any of the events. As a host province that 

would have been a fine image to present to the rest of Canada. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

328 

If there was one individual in this Legislature who should have given his full support to the Winter Games, 

and who should have recognized that the attendance of every Member of the Legislature as well as every 

citizen of Saskatchewan was desirable it should have been the MLA for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. 

Romanow). 

 

Now I was also pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see that the Leader of the Opposition's (Mr. Blakeney) attitude 

towards Homecoming '71 is changing, because he mentioned in the Throne Speech that he is now in favor of 

the promotion of tourism. It was almost incredible in November when the Leader of the Opposition launched 

a seething attack on Homecoming '71. Now I could make my own comments in this regard, however, I think 

the reaction and the views of the people of Saskatchewan were best summed up by the Editor of the Prince 

Albert Herald, November 17, 1970, when he stated and I quote: 

 

Attack on Homecoming by Blakeney ridiculous. 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

One wonders what the NDP will attempt to ridicule next in order to gain publicity for the 

next Saskatchewan election. We are beginning to believe that the NDP Leader would be 

willing to wreck this province if the end results put him in the Premier's office. 

 

Finally the editorial said: 

 

Mr. Blakeney may use any political gimmick he wants in the next election campaign but he 

should remember that the citizens of Saskatchewan are trying to promote their province and 

not the ambitions of a political party which appears to be desperate in its quest for power. 

 

And I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this editorial hits at the very heart of the NDP attitude towards this province. 

As I said earlier, they are prepared to wreck the province if it will mean that their lust for power can be 

fulfilled. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) is the mastermind of this attack. Such statements 

along with those made by his Deputy (Mr. Romanow) regarding the Winter Games are ill-becoming the two 

men who hope to lead their party to an election victory in this province. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) then turned his attack, not to the problems of the farmer, the 

unemployed or the needy, but to the greatest industrial complex this province has ever seen, the new pulp 

mill at Meadow Lake and its predecessor, the one at Prince Albert. Although Parsons and Whittemore is one 

of the best known, most respected pulp mill developing companies in the world we continue to hear them 

classed as promoters with the inference and innuendo that they are somehow not honest. If there is one 

Member of this Legislature who should avoid the use of the word promoter it's the Leader of the Opposition. 

One's memory doesn't have to be very good to remember back a few years when he was head of the 

Securities Commission. During that time some of the most shameful promotions ever perpetrated on the 

citizens of this province were carried out. Now I haven't time today to go into all of these promotions that my 

friend opposite was involved in but I am sure that there are still many people in Saskatchewan who have 

never forgiven him for the famous Columbia Metals promotion, 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

329 

who will remember the giveaway of mineral leases for a few cents an acre to Tommy Douglas' and Clarence 

Fines' rich Eastern friends and several other promotions of a similar nature. 

 

For some reason, while these promotions were occurring, the Leader of the Opposition was not so concerned 

about saving our resources for future generations, or he would have put a stop to it instead of aiding and 

abetting those promotions which cost the unwary public hundreds of thousands of dollars at the hands of 

these unscrupulous promoters allowed in the province, in fact even welcomed by the Securities Commission 

and the CCF Government. 

 

However, the promotion of all promotions wasn't a sell-out of natural resources, it was far worse — it was a 

sell-out of human resources. It was while Mr. Blakeney was in the Provincial Secretary's Department that the 

most dastardly act every committed in this Province was carried out. This was when he and his government 

allowed, and approved, the setting up of a certain commercial cemeteries by friends of his government. An 

Eastern promoter who moved his unscrupulous operation from Ontario to Saskatchewan, was so pleased at 

the reception he received by the Security Commission and the Government, that he held a tea for the present 

Leader of the Opposition during the election campaign in 1960, as a minor part of his obligation for the 

opportunity to carry on his promotion. This unscrupulous promotion allowed stealing from the dead and 

much anguish for the living, until the Liberal Government put a stop to it by passing the Cemeteries Act the 

first year we were the Government in 1965. 

 

As a Member of a party with a record like that, one would think that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Blakeney) would be careful what he says about promoters and the sell-out of resources to rich friends. The 

people of Saskatchewan have long memories in this regard. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition then turned for the next 20 minutes towards 

Federal-Provincial relations, and if anyone could make any sense out of the NDP stand on this question, it 

would be a miracle. One minute he was for equal rights, the next moment he concluded with the statement 

that Quebec may need a different relationship with the Federal Government than other provinces have. Mr. 

Speaker, I think from this mumbo-jumbo of the Leader of the Opposition, the people of Saskatchewan 

learned one thing, that he is not prepared to put his position on the records of this House and I shall tell you 

why. If you have listened to the Federal leadership candidates who are contesting the NDP leadership in 

April, you will find that the leadership candidate whose views best represent those of the Opposition of 

Saskatchewan, is a Mr. John Laxer. 

 

What is Mr. Laxer's stand? It is that Quebec should have the right to separate, even if it caused a civil war. 

Now Members opposite may deny that this is the position but the Deputy Leader (Mr. Romanow) knows that 

several nights ago in Saskatoon more than 200 people at a meeting gave a standing ovation to Mr. Laxer's 

stand on the issue. He tried to prevent Mr. Laxer from making his speech but the people demanded that he sit 

down and allow him to be heard. This shows the support that the NDP have in Saskatchewan for separatism 

in Quebec. 

 

Now if one needed further proof of the NDP's attitude 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

330 

towards Quebec separatism, it was provided to the country last fall in the most explicit manner. All 

Canadians were shocked at the events which took place in Quebec last October. The fact that law and order 

could be so severely tested in Canada had never really been considered by the majority of our people. It was 

a time to test the unity of Canada as it had never been tested since confederation. It was a time for leadership 

and a time to put aside political aspirations and work for the unity of the Canadian nation. And for the most 

part this was done, and as a result Canada came out of the crisis determined to hold confederation together 

and determined to control the forces of lawlessness, terrorism and violence from taking over from the rule of 

law and authority. 

 

The weekend of Pierre La Porte's death was the most difficult that any Government of Canada had faced for 

many years. If Prime Minister Trudeau has had one shining hour since he became Prime Minister it was in 

that moment of peril when he acted forcibly, calmly and with decision. 

 

Robert Stanfield, Leader of the Conservatives, must also be commended for putting aside party politics and 

placing the unity of Canada foremost. The speeches to the Canadian nation on that night by these two 

political leaders did much to allay the fears and tremblings of Canadian citizens. It is most unfortunate that 

the same cannot be said for the NDP. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Where were they? 

 

MR. GUY: — While the Prime Minister, his Cabinet and Members of the House of Commons from the 

Liberal, Conservative and Creditiste parties were sitting around the clock trying to find a solution for the 

crisis at hand, you ask, where were the NDP Members of Parliament? Well, Mr. Speaker, almost without 

exception they were out here in Saskatchewan politicking. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Although their duty was to be in Ottawa attending to the crisis at hand, they neglected their 

duties and put partisan politics ahead of the welfare of their country. Every single one of Saskatchewan's 

NDP Members on that fateful night when the crisis was at its highest pitch, and the Members of Parliament 

were going through sleepless days and nights, were going around the hustings in Saskatchewan playing 

politics with the future of Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — And when their leader, T.C. Douglas, could finally be found and took time out from his 

politicking, he made the most disgusting politically partisan speech ever heard in a time of deep crisis. He 

was a disgrace to his party and to his nation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Subsequently when the decision was made to proceed with The War Measures Act, it was the 

NDP that opposed it. The other parties had their reservations but on the assurance of the Prime 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

331 

Minister that legislation would be brought in at the earliest possible moment, they went along with it for the 

good of Canada. When the new legislation did come along after long debate again it was the NDP that 

refused to co-operate or to vote for the legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only think that any political group like the NDP that opposes all legitimate measures to 

control terrorism and to maintain law and order must have personal reasons for its opposition and I can 

assure the people of Saskatchewan that those reasons are not in the interest of Canada and its people. 

 

It was a sad thing when unity was needed in the House of Commons and a show of strength was needed 

across the country to proclaim to all terrorists, criminals and those supporting violence, that such actions will 

not be tolerated, Saskatchewan NDP Members broke this unity and weakened Canada at a time it was sorely 

needed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Now the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) turned from that to discuss inflation and 

unemployment and since that time speakers on both sides of the House have spent considerable time on 

these subjects. Members on this side of the House have not denied that these two problems have been severe 

but at the same time we have outlined the widespread action on many fronts that we have taken and the 

action that we shall continue to take as outlined in the Throne Speech. 

 

When one sifts the wheat from the chaff of the many speeches we have heard dealing with the subject, there 

are several significant facts that the people of Saskatchewan will understand. 

 

First of all inflation and unemployment would never have reached the limits in Canada that it did if the NDP, 

labor unions and their labor friends had co-operated with the Price and Incomes Commission and the Federal 

Government when they were asked for voluntary wage restraints two years ago. They should also recognize 

that of all the provinces in Canada, Saskatchewan did the best job within our own jurisdiction of controlling 

inflation and unemployment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — The people of Saskatchewan must also realize that of all the provinces of Canada, although 

severe enough, unemployment has been consistently lower in Saskatchewan than in the rest of Canada. 

 

I was pleased to see that Canada Manpower said a week ago that Saskatchewan may be leading the Canadian 

economy in an upswing. Their report also proved that the contention of the Opposition that the only reason 

our unemployment figures are the lowest in Canada is because so many of the people have left the province, 

is completely untrue. The report shows that the labor force for January, 1971 is up more than 9,000 from 

January, 1970. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

332 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — The people of Saskatchewan must also recognize that there would have been more people 

working now and fewer people leaving the province looking for work if the labor unions and the NDP had 

co-operated with our "Make Work Program" last summer. People will not forget that as soon as the crash 

program was announced in the last session of the Legislature, the plumbers' union, the mechanical union, on 

the urging of Members opposite went out on strike and prevented many of the projects from being started 

early enough to provide substantial winter employment. 

 

And finally on the question of inflation and unemployment the people of Saskatchewan must realize through 

our Throne Speech that we are taking action to provide additional employment for our working people as 

well as our students, and that while the Opposition were loud in criticism, they were silent with any 

constructive suggestions of additional measures that we could take. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that the Opposition's main contribution to the Throne Speech Debate has 

been placing on the record some of the main planks of their so-called Program for Progress. One has to 

admit, I'm sure, that it is a remarkable document. It is almost unbelievable that a party that continually claims 

to be progressive and in tune with the times could reach so far back into the tombs of the past to find their 

program for progress for the 70s. Surely there are people in their party who are aware that the 19th century 

philosophy of Karl Marx, the dreams of Lenin, and the unkept promises of the CCF of the 1940s, make poor 

material from which to draft a program for the 1970s. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Their basic philosophy of nationalization, socialization and state control didn't work in the 

1930s when the CCF adopted it in the Regina Manifesto and I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that it will 

not work in the 1970s. In 1944 the Socialists said that our natural resources must be brought under public 

ownership and development. Their failures with the resulting loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars of the 

taxpayers' money fill pages and pages of the financial statements of this province from 1944 to 1964. As a 

result for 20 years we saw our natural resources lie idle. Our pulpwood and our timber rotted in the forests. 

Our minerals lay undiscovered in the ground and our potash lay deep under the prairie sun as the great 

custodians of the wealth saved them for future generations. 

 

And as a result, Saskatchewan slipped far behind the rest of Canada in her industrial and resource 

development. As a result our young people left the farms and the province in search of an industrialized and 

an urbanized way of life. 

 

I can tell the NDP opposite that their government wasted more forest resources in the 20 years that they were 

in office through under-utilization than a pulp mill will use in 50 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

333 

MR. GUY: — Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, must ask themselves what effect will this program have 

on the future development of Saskatchewan? It is only too evident that the NDP programs for socializing our 

industry, limiting foreign equity and investment, and the confiscation of potash and other resources, are the 

reasons why in 20 years the Socialists had two potash mines while we have 10, two fictitious pulp mills 

while we have two real ones, why Anglo-Rouyn Mines refused to put their mineral find in production until 

the government changed in 1964, and why there were only a handful of mining companies in the province 

under the Socialists and more than 100 under the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this 1970 program for progress is the greatest threat to the future of this province since the 

great depression. We could lose everything that your Government has worked so hard to achieve in six short 

years. Should the NDP with this program be elected, we would lose our potash mines, our second pulp mill 

would never be completed, Wollaston Lake could be forgotten, and every mining company in Northern 

Saskatchewan would disappear. 

 

Mining companies in Manitoba will tell you this is true. Their royalties have doubled in less than two years 

and will be doubled again this year while corporation and income taxes are the highest in Canada and likely 

to go higher. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, can a young developing province afford this kind of treatment from the Socialists? 

The first shockwaves of the NDP program are already being felt in the mining industry. Several companies 

are considering halting their plans for the coming year until after the results of the election are known. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — I submit, Mr. Speaker, that there is no province in Canada that can survive two experiments 

with Socialism. Saskatchewan had one experience and one is enough. At a time when new industry is needed 

to provide jobs for our youth, and our resources are on the verge of development, we can't afford to trust our 

destiny to a group of fuzzy-headed Socialist planners and thinkers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — The question of the NDP agricultural program has been well discussed and enough to say that 

Saskatchewan farmers never did and never will believe in the socialization of land. 

 

The new NDP program is liberally sprinkled with broken promises of the past as well. The new leader 

promises a major public works construction program to combat unemployment. He promised the same thing 

in 1960. However, at a time when Saskatchewan's unemployment rate was the highest in history at 7.2 per 

cent, the Leader of the Opposition at that time a Minister, presented a major public works program budgeted 

for $2.4 million and then he spent one-half of it. Compare that to the Liberal works program of $17 million 

and decide who is more concerned for the unemployed. 

 

Another broken promise that has returned to see the light 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

334 

of day is one to provide public housing. Again I'd ask you to compare the records. Federal legislation came 

into effect in 1949 under a Federal-Provincial arrangement. They let it sit for four years and never built a 

house. Then they took five years from 1955 to 1960 and never built a house. In fact in 15 years they built 344 

units compared to 1,004 in seven years of Liberal action. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Another prominent pledge was to build new parks and recreation areas. Again they had 30 in 

20 years, we've now got a total of 74 after seven years of Liberal Government. 

 

But now we come to the top of the hit parade. The promise that has made the election platform every year 

since 1943 and has been broken just as regularly. We all recall how Tommy Douglas, then Woodrow Lloyd, 

went around the country thundering "An NDP Government will pay 100 per cent of the costs of education." 

The new leader, not to be outdone, says they are going to have a massive reduction in mill rates. What a 

hollow ring this promise will have when you consider that they never once paid more than 42 or 43 per cent 

of the costs of education and almost every year the mill rate went up. This compares most unfavorably, I 

suggest, with the largest grants in history that were made last year which enabled units in many cases to hold 

their tax rate and in many cases to reduce them for the first time in many years. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I don't think their sales tax proposal will create any enthusiasm when we remember 

that in 1944 the sales tax was two per cent and when we chased the Socialists out in 1964 it was five per 

cent. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most frightening and dangerous aspect of this platform is the one I referred to 

last night. We all recall the number of agencies that the former government set up as rest homes for their 

Socialist friends, whose main function was to organize and spread the Socialist propaganda. We all know 

that more government agencies mean more interference with an individual's rights and responsibilities and I 

suggest the people of Saskatchewan must be concerned when we consider the election program of the NDP 

which promises the establishment of 19 new agencies, boards, commissions and departments. I should like 

to go over a few of them for you: 

 

(1) a special department of economic development; (2) a Saskatchewan development corporation. Mr. 

Speaker, past experience shows that for the only economic industry that the NDP can get into this province, 

the Premier could do it before breakfast without needing any agency. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — (3) a land bank commission to take the farmers' land away from them; (4) machinery-testing 

branch; (5) sharply increase the Department of Labour — you know where that came from — the labor 

bosses of the NDP who reside in Eastern Canada and the United States; (6) an environment department; (7) a 

board of approval for new industries. I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that board probably wouldn't have to sit more 

than once every 20 years. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

335 

Now here's a good one — (8) a new central planning agency. This is where the political action will be found. 

(9) an ecological advisory council; (10) special division of government to promote small business; (11) a 

lending agency for small business; (12) provincial housing authority — we've already got one, where have 

they been — (13) consumer affairs agency; (14) a rent review board; (15) a health planning council. Here are 

two that I think maybe we'd go along with. (16) a human rights commission and an ombudsman and if the 

NDP were in power we could tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the individuals in this province would need 

somebody to protect them from the Socialists. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Now here's a good one, (17) a hot-line to government information and referral centre and in 

brackets — open only to Socialists. This should be changed to the propaganda-spreading centre. That's what 

it would be. Who's going to be at the end of it? The Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow)? 

 

And finally (18) electoral boundaries commission. They didn't need one the 20 years they were in 

government but all of a sudden they are promising it again now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think if we need one example of the difference between fuzzy-headed socialism and down to 

earth liberalism we have it here. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Can't you just see the kooks and the hippies and the yippies all flocking to Saskatchewan to 

help the NDP plan, think and argue their theories in these agencies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, what this province does not need is any more Socialist agencies. Mr. Speaker, 

these are only a few of the major planks in this platform but they are enough to show the NDP program for 

the 1970s is created from broken promises and past failures and as such cannot be taken seriously. 

 

As an alternative I would ask our people to peruse our Throne Speech and our Budget which will be 

presented tomorrow. For in these programs you will find outlined the necessary framework and policies to 

stimulate our economy, provide initiative to those who want it, security for those who need it and positive 

action towards the problems of today. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, a number of Opposition Members, including the 

Leader (Mr. Blakeney) have attempted to analyze recent population changes in this province and attribute 

some political significance to these changes. I suppose this is an exercise engaged in by all opposition parties 

even when no political 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

336 

significance exists as is the case now in Saskatchewan. 

 

Population statistics are difficult to analyze at any time and it is even more difficult to know why people 

move from one place to another. People are more mobile today and in a free society such as ours they can 

move across provincial boundaries without giving us any reason. We do know that we have perhaps the most 

difficult climate in Canada, many of our citizens are retiring at an earlier age and with much better pensions. 

They are healthy enough and prosperous enough to move to a better climate and some of our older people are 

doing this. In Saskatchewan we have maintained one of the lowest unemployment rates in Canada so it is 

very unlikely, Mr. Speaker, that many people are leaving to find jobs, although there are no doubt some in 

this category. 

 

However, changes in farming methods are certainly a factor in any population change on the Prairies. In 

1944 when the CCF came into power in Saskatchewan, there were about 480,000 people living on our farms. 

When the NDP left in 1964 our farm population was down to 290,000 people. Over 40 per cent of our farm 

people, Mr. Speaker, left farms during the 20 years the CCF were in power. I note that the new NDP election 

platform now suddenly expresses concern for the family farm, the towns and villages of our province. This 

concern, Mr. Speaker, is rather amazing in view of some of the following facts. During their 20 years in 

office, the NDP stood idly by and watched the disappearance of 30 per cent of our farms and more important 

the disappearance of 40 per cent of our farm people. Almost 200,000 of our farm people simply disappeared 

under the NDP. 

 

Now we realize, Mr. Speaker, that many of our farm problems are beyond the scope of any provincial 

government. However, the Liberal Government in the past seven years has taken a number of significant 

steps to help our rural people. Farmers for example have been allowed to use purple gas in farm trucks to 

decrease their costs. The state tax laws have been changed to protect family farms and small business. We 

have new grants to farmers for clearing land, seeding forage, building hog barns and hay shelters. We have 

greatly increased equalization grants to our rural municipalities to help them provide services. Some 

examples of this are as follows: 

 

In the R.M. of Wawken, where I live, the grant was $500 for many years up until 1964 under the NDP; by 

1968 it had risen to $6,000. In the R.M. of Martin, near me, this grant was $1484 in 1964 under the NDP; by 

1968 it was almost $11,000. The same figures apply to all of the rural municipalities in my constituency. 

Natural gas, Mr. Speaker, has been brought to every population centre in my constituency with the exception 

of one village and we are working on that one. 

 

In 1970, legislation was passed to protect our implement dealers so they can provide better service to farmers 

and survive in our small towns. 

 

The present Government has made serious efforts to reverse the policy of centralization which was initiated 

under the CCF. Many examples of this are on record, Mr. Speaker, and I shall mention only one that applies 

to my constituency. Under the CCF a Provincial correctional institution, the Court House and the Land Titles 

Office were all closed down by the NDP in the town of Moosomin. These buildings were all under the 

control 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

337 

of the CCF Government. 

 

I am pleased to note, Mr. Speaker, that a $185,000 Provincial building is now under construction in 

Moosomin and the Land Titles Office which was taken away by the NDP will be moved from Regina back 

to Moosomin. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Roads in our rural areas have been greatly improved and by the end of this year when 

work is completed on No. 9 and No. 47 Highways all necessary reconstruction will be done and all highways 

will be blacktopped in my constituency. 

 

I could mention many other programs started by this Liberal Government which have helped rural areas: 

establishment of a veterinary college and a soil testing lab which will greatly benefit farmers. We have 

assistance in paving main streets, a new plan, which has helped many towns, including towns like Grenfell in 

my constituency which received $54,800; Broadview over $44,000; Rocanville over $119,000. A new 

program of last year has helped six centres in my constituency to gravel streets and lanes. These include 

towns like Fleming, Wapella and Welwyn. We also have new grants and programs for snow removal and 

maintenance on rural roads. We have recently as you know, guaranteed loans to help farmers increase their 

livestock herds. We now have assistance to towns in establishing airstrips. Whitewood, for example, 

received $2500 and Moosomin $2500. We abolished the hated NDP mineral tax on farm land. We have 

greatly improved rural telephone services. We have enacted labor legislation to prevent strikes and to ensure 

that essential services are provided to our rural people. We have provided new incentive grants to help 

industries locate in rural areas. We have improved credit and selling legislation to protect our consumers and 

we have established the homeowner grant. Mr. Speaker, the NDP had 20 years to act on these matters and 

did nothing. 

 

I should remind you, Mr. Speaker, that all of these valuable programs were introduced in the past 7 years by 

a Liberal Government and often they were bitterly opposed by the labor dominated NDP. And make no 

mistake, Mr. Speaker, many of these benefits will be taken from us if the NDP ever again form the 

Government in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, our ideas on population growth and population location are changing 

rapidly. I would predict that the rural way of life is going to be increasingly attractive to greater numbers of 

people. We have our problems in rural Saskatchewan but they often seem insignificant when compared to 

some of the traffic, drug, pollution and crowding problems of a more heavily populated area. 

 

In my opinion, rural Saskatchewan is the best place in the world to live and the best place to raise a family. 

Quality of life is more important than the popular obsession of establishing ever larger population centres. 

 

We are basically an agricultural province and we should be proud of it. We can produce the best beef and the 

best grain in 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

338 

the world and this is what we should be doing. We need a plan to allow older farmers to retire in a 

prosperous and dignified manner and to allow younger farmers to take over our farms and raise their families 

in the ideal social climate of rural Saskatchewan. I would emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that any such plan would 

have to be on a completely voluntary basis. We have qualified and energetic young people anxious to farm 

and we must do all in our power to make this possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will certainly never be accomplished with a Socialist Government whose chief concern is 

the destruction of individual initiative and the eventual nationalization and take-over of all our resources 

including farm land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are nearing the end of the Throne Speech Debate and in my opinion we have failed to 

discuss quite an important aspect of the current political situation in Saskatchewan. There has been a 

dramatic change in the political thinking of the people of our province and especially the rural people. 

Several factors are responsible for this change. Some of these factors are as follows: 

 

The recent events in Quebec, the antics of the Wafflers, the internal troubles of the NDP, the more active 

political role assumed by the labor bosses where we see evidence of this every day when the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour puts their propaganda notices on our radio stations. We have political activism on our 

university campuses and much publicity is given to various radical groups. The groups I have mentioned, 

Mr. Speaker, are all Socialist, all left wingers — their radicalism varies only in degree. When the next 

election is called in Saskatchewan the voter will have only two choices. He can vote for the free enterprise 

Liberal party or he can vote for the left wing NDP party. There is no other choice. Now for some people, Mr. 

Speaker, the choice will be relatively easy. For the radicals, for the Maoists, separatists, revolutionaries, 

university radicals, wafflers, women's lib, advocates of easier drug laws, labor bosses — these groups, Mr. 

Speaker, are perhaps more radically left wing than most of our present NDP, but being left wingers they had 

no choice but to support the left wing New Democratic Party. 

 

Now I should suspect, Mr. Speaker, that some of the moderate NDPs and this includes many of our friends 

opposite, are not too happy with the support of some of the groups mentioned above. But make no mistake 

they are part of the NDP support. They cannot be ignored in the party and their influence is steadily 

increasing. It is no wonder that the sincere rural NDP supporter is becoming confused. Many of these are 

fine hardworking citizens of our towns, villages and farms. They have suspected lately that they no longer 

belong in a labor dominated NDP. Now that they see the increasing influence of the radicals and the 

Wafflers they are sure they no longer belong in the NDP. They are leaving that party in large numbers. The 

rural based moderate Socialist party that these people have faithfully supported over the years has simply 

ceased to exist. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Every day, Mr. Speaker, on the radio, the television and the newspapers, these rural 

people see where the present NDP, some place in Canada, is either actively supporting or sympathizing with 

radicals, the separatists, the American draft 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

339 

dodgers, university agitators, wafflers and so on. The moderate NDP supporter doesn't want to be associated 

with these undesirable people. 

 

MR. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege with respect to 

gentlemen's agreements that have been arrived at between the Government and the Opposition with respect 

to the division of radio time in this House. I ask the House Leader on the other side of the House to pay some 

attention to gentlemen's agreements that have been arrived at. 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the gentlemen's agreement was 323 and I 

think the Hon. Member may be 30 seconds over and he has about a paragraph left so I'm sure the Hon. 

Members will be glad to hear what he has to say to finish off. 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, I was late in getting started — I'll be as brief as I can. The moderate NDP 

supporters, Mr. Speaker, don't want to be associated with these people and this is why they are leaving the 

party. They don't want to be Members of a party dominated and run by labor leaders, labor lawyers and 

influenced by the groups I have mentioned. 

 

We welcome these moderate NDP supporters into the Liberal party. We need their support, we need their 

ideas. This swing away from the NDP is increasing rapidly in rural areas. Every time I go to a public 

function in my constituency, a bonspiel or an auction sale, I have people known as former NDP members 

come to me and offer their support in the next election and I am grateful for it. Their ideas and their support 

will help the Liberal Party solve the problems we know exist in our rural areas. I predict that this political 

shift will be a major factor in the next election. The NDP may gain some support from the increasing number 

of radicals and so on but they will lose far more of the moderates who don't want to be associated with these 

groups. 

 

I will support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry that our time has been run over a bit, 

however . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I beg your pardon, Mr. Speaker. My understanding and the understanding of our whip 

that we were to have 42 minutes . . . this Liberal Government does not intend to give anybody freedom of 

speech and this today was a good example of it. They are not only using every Government vehicle in the 

country and every Crown corporation to propagandize people, they also want to take over the gentlemen's 

agreement on air time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, may I add my congratulations to the Members who have spoken before 

me and especially to our Leader, 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

340 

the Hon. Allan Blakeney, who I think, has left little for the Liberals, after his hard-hitting analysis of the 

many things that were not included in the Throne Speech but should have been as well as those things that 

were included in that meagre anaemic document that passes for the Throne Speech in 1971. After 7 years of 

mismanagement by this band of buccaneers who have governed and legislated on behalf of the rich while 

they were extracting every penny they could in taxes and fees from businessmen, farmer, labor and worst of 

all, the old age pensioner and other pioneers on fixed incomes. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I hear the Member for Credibility Gap, the Premier holding forth over there again. He 

seems to want to cut in a little on the radio time again. We have the latest on the credibility gap in the paper 

here today — I'll read it for the Member. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Let's hear it. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — 

 

Incredible — Schreyer — Leader Post. 

 

They finally got it on the front page, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Ed. Schreyer said Wednesday that the Saskatchewan Premier, Ross Thatcher, claims 

that the Manitoba Government begged the New York firm to take over the integrated forest 

industry development at The Pas is incredible conduct. 

 

Mr. Schreyer said he had been contacted January 19 by an official of Parsons and 

Whittemore of New York who asked if the Government would be interested in retaining the 

company for marketing the development's products. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's a different story. The CBC . . . 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Very well, I'll take the CBC news report as well. 

 

The Government had the Northern Manitoba Development placed under receiver last month 

claiming four companies involved were in default of provincial loan agreements valued at 

about $90 million. 

 

Mr. Schreyer said he told the official he would be interested in seeing the company fee scales 

and he received a letter in January containing specifications. The Premier said he replied to 

this letter, two weeks later, saying he needed more detailed information. I didn't call them, he 

said, they called me. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We are expected, Mr. Speaker, to believe and receive all the assurances from this 

Premier and he can't even get up in 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

341 

this House and make one statement without it being, well something less than truthful, I'll put it that way. 

 

We have another one here. I haven't read this one, it has been handed to me by one of my colleagues. 
 

Premier Schreyer of Manitoba, from CBC, February 25. Premier Schreyer of Manitoba says 

he has received an apology from Saskatchewan Government's pulpmill partner, Parsons and 

Whittemore of New York. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — 
 

Premier Schreyer says he received a telephone call from the New York firm apologizing for a 

controversy that has erupted in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — 
 

The controversy centres around a statement by Premier Thatcher that Mr. Schreyer's 

government has been begging Parsons and Whittemore to take over a forest industry 

operation at The Pas. The Manitoba Premier says nothing of the sort has happened. He says 

he has been contacted by officers of the company offering their services but in his words, "I 

didn't call them, they called me." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — 

 

Mr. Schreyer says the conduct of Mr. Thatcher in the whole incident is incredible. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — You haven't got the guts or the decency to apologize and you know you sit here and tell 

this House something other than the facts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Now I just ask Hon. Members to try and maintain a little bit of decency in 

this Chamber and never mind talking about guts and decency. Now go ahead. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, those are the only words I can find to described the Premier, or the 

Member for Credibility Gap. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — These people, Mr. Speaker, have gone on for seven years. They have rooked every 

single thing in Saskatchewan including the Socialist enterprises — that's the only place they can make any 

money, that and out of highway's overexpenditure. I just 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

342 

wonder how many deals there are that the Premier knows about and how many deals are enriching the 

coffers of the Liberal Party. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — You know you might as well keep quiet, Ross, you know you are the Member for 

Credibility Gap. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — You are the one from Battleford! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — And the gap is getting wider. Now the Premier denies deals, he denies many things. I 

wonder if he will deny the deal with one of the members of the Liberal executive from North Battleford, 

$400 per acre — Department of Highways — for a piece of submarginal land just west of Battleford. I 

wonder if he'll deny that. $24,000. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I don't even know what the Hon. Member is talking about. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well you better check, you'd better check, Mr. Speaker. If you don't know check the 

records. That is what your Government paid for 50 acres of submarginal land that has no more value than 

$50 an acre and you paid $24,000 for it and that is only one example of deals. There is more to deals going 

on than we know about in this province and certainly, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I wonder if the Hon. Member would give us the name of what he's talking about. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes. Mr. Mike Gabruch. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — We'll have the Minister of Highways check into it. I'm sure most people think we 

give too much money for the land, or didn't give enough. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I'm still on my feet, Mr. Speaker. Would this little fellow sit down? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! That's the end of that. Member for The Battlefords continue. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I hope the Member will have that document brought in, the dismal record of this 

Government. Our leader outlined part of our program which will be a new deal for people, NDP, New Deal 

for People. 

 

HON. A.R. GUY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

343 

MR. KRAMER: — Now we've heard the garbage man a little while earlier, the now the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, and he's not even worth replying to. This new deal for people will be an end to the "DDT 

program" — dismal deals by Thatcher or Trudeau if you wish. The dismal record of this Government during 

the past seven years can only be equalled by the record of a former Liberal Government in Saskatchewan, 

during the thirties and prior to 1944. The difference is, they did in seven years what it took a former Liberal 

outfit to do in thirty. There is not a single yardstick that doesn't indicate that this Government is an abject 

failure. That is why the Premier's madly, madly searching for issues. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — What about the pulp mill? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We'll come to the pulp mill, for issues that will take the public eye off his sorry record 

of administration. We were promised 80,000 new jobs before his Government took office. That was 

supposed to be in the first four years. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What a laugh. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — They've been in office for seven years, and we've got less jobs and about 80,000 new 

taxes. If their record is as good, if it's as good as they say it is, why did 101,000 people leave this province 

since this party took office in 1964? Why? Most of those who left were farmers. Provincial taxes have 

doubled since this Government took office, and there are few people in the province who would say that 

services are even any better or as good as they were in 1964. This Liberal Government, as I said before, has 

used public funds to enrich its friends, it is forcing civil servants and departments to prostitute their 

information programs for political propaganda, and you've only got to turn it on the radio or TV, you hear it, 

more DDT. You can scarcely turn on your radio or TV without hearing a stream of government propaganda 

that would put Adolph Hitler's machine to shame. 

 

Crown corporations or Social enterprises, "Socialist Enterprises," as the Premier would call them, such as 

Government Insurance, Saskatchewan Power, Saskatchewan Telephones, are being forced to pour out 

thousands and thousands of dollars in false propaganda, and are also supporting scores and scores of civil 

servants on their payrolls who are doing nothing. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! Member on a point of privilege. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Hon. Member has said we have forced the Power Corporation to spend 

thousands of dollars on false propaganda. I ask him to say what they have said that is false? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Everything. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

344 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The Leader of the Opposition on a point of order. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I really must ask that you ask all Members including the Premier not to interrupt 

proceedings, and ask for information. This is not a point of order. Any Member is, of course, thoroughly 

entitled to make charges as the Premier knows, and the Premier, if he doesn't like it, can ask at the end of the 

proceedings in the proper way, and if he doesn't want to do that, he should really restrain his impatience and 

allow Members to have their chance as we accorded his chance to him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Regarding that interruption and the question, I shall simply say, the public of 

Saskatchewan knows, the only thing they've got to do is listen, Mr. Speaker, to the Government sponsored 

Saskatchewan television broadcasts, Power Corporation broadcasts. They are all loaded with political 

propaganda, and paid for by the public. Yes, paid for by the public. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Besides that they've got their organizers and public relations men on the payrolls of 

those same companies doing nothing but sponsoring the Liberal cause. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Name them. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Farmers . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Who? Name them. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I'll name them, you know who they are. Plenty of them. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Name them. Who are they? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, may I continue? Farmers throughout the length and breadth of this country 

are in trouble. They are in trouble because they have a Liberal Government in Ottawa and a Liberal 

Government in Regina. There are some bright spots on the agricultural front but it has certainly not been 

through any action on the part of the Government. Least of all, by the Provincial Government here. The 

bright spots are oil seeds and cattle, but unless Liberal Governments take action that is being recommended 

by the farm organizations, and put these commodities under the control and management of the Canadian 

Wheat Board, we know very well what we are going to get and that we're going to get into a feast and famine 

economy with those items as well. Having said that, we, the farmers of Saskatchewan know very well that 

we are not going to get that kind of action from a Liberal Government because the Liberal Party is full of 

buccaneers that think the same way as the predators and the grain exchange. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

345 

MR. KRAMER: — We know that they have Richardson of the Grain Exchange in the Trudeau Cabinet, and 

we know that most of the Liberal Members across the way, certainly, the Premier, believe that the Grain 

Exchange is a great god of private enterprise. If they, this Government here, is ever elected in Saskatchewan 

again, Mr. Chairman, it will be the end of the Canadian Wheat Board. It will be the signal for the jackals of 

the Grain Exchange in the open market, once again, to declare open season on the western farmer and 

pounce on them as their legitimate prey. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — This Government, Mr. Speaker, doesn't want to talk about the farm problem. There are 

farm Members over on the other side of this House who are sitting mum as dummies, and do not dare to 

speak up for the western farmer. They don't dare to talk. None of them have talked about the Task Force and 

what it's going to do to the farmers. They hope that announcements for industrial development are going to 

provide an issue that will take the minds of Saskatchewan people off their dismal failures. They forget that 

they have not done anything constructive or meaningful for Saskatchewan's greatest industry, the agricultural 

industry that will always be the important sector of Saskatchewan's economy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — But even in choosing the industrial development issue, the Premier and the Liberal 

Party can find small comfort. The resource mess is becoming more and more obvious to the Saskatchewan 

people. It is a mess of eager-beaver giveaways, to promoters who are, naturally, willing to take any given 

amount. But worse than this, it seems this so-called, would-be business Government has not been content 

with only giving away. It appears as if they have been paying some companies to take our resources. The real 

truth of this situation will only be told as it was told in Manitoba, after a New Democratic Government got 

elected and was able to ferret out the truth of the bad deals with foreign promoters, bad deals that were sold 

to the Manitoba people by a former government as good deals. Manitoba people, in 1966 were told the same 

story, as we are being told in Saskatchewan. They were told about the millions of dollars of foreign 

investments that were going to be brought to Manitoba, and when the truth was exposed a short while ago, 

not only by the New Democratic Manitoba Government, but in the Financial Post (hardly a friend of ours 

politically) we found that not a single dollar of foreign capital had been brought into that province. It's pretty 

obvious now that the former private enterprise government of Manitoba was taken out on a snipe hunt by the 

foreign promoters and like most snipe hunts, ended up with the Manitoba taxpayers and people holding the 

bag. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Plenty of evidence in Saskatchewan without looking at pulp mill deals, indicate that the 

Liberal Government of Saskatchewan is prepared to pay any price, spend any amount of the public money in 

order to get some publicity in the industrial development field. You know, I should like to think, that things 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

346 

were better than they are, but you know, when I think that the former Premier Roblin, Mr. Speaker, is a 

pretty sound businessman, he's forgotten more about business than the hardware merchant (the Premier) 

across the way will ever know. You can throw all the knowledge of the Provincial Treasurer, the 

second-hand dealer from Prince Albert in with it and you're going to find that the total is no more. Roblin 

has still forgotten more than they will ever know. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — And it seems that in spite of all his knowledge, Roblin got taken. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — So, that even he got taken, so I don't know whether we can feel too sure. 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — It was the NDP who put in the money. Roblin didn't 

put in the money. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Don't try to weasel out. They are trying to clean up the mess that was left for the people 

of Manitoba by private enterprise, and don't try to twist it around. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Who put in the money? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The Government of Manitoba, the new Government of Manitoba has simply lived up to 

the deals that were made as gentlemen, and they had to, and it wasn't until they uncovered the truth that they 

placed the mill in receivership and the Members opposite very well know this. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Gave away $80 million. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I won't talk about Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, we've got plenty of fiascos. We've got plenty 

of fiascos, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan without going to Manitoba. We spent $5 million. We heard 

somebody talking about a mine at Anglo-Rouyn. Well we paid $5 million dollars for that mine in roads 

alone. What have we received in royalties? Less than $100,000 after five years, and the royalties this year 

won't even pay the maintenance on that $5 million worth of roads to Flin Flon. It won't even pay the 

maintenance. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — This is more DDT (Dumb deals by Thatcher) dumb deals, more Liberal DDT. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — You're hurting my feelings, Eiling. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I certainly intend to hurt 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

347 

your feelings if the truth is going to hurt them. I'll get to Anglo-Rouyn. The promoters got the angle and 

Saskatchewan got the ruin out of that deal. 

 

Earlier in this debate, the Premier spoke disparagingly about SaskAir. I want to tell the Members opposite 

and the House, that SaskAir was never created to make money, but was created to provide a service for the 

North, for northern development, and that service was good. It was a better service than that being received 

now at less cost, and the cost we shall never know, Mr. Speaker, and I'll come to that. The cost of turning 

that over to the friends of the Liberal Government, NorCanAir, will never be known, 'till once again a new 

government is elected to ferret out the truth. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — This Government right now through the Department of Natural Resources is 

subsidizing NorCanAir and other aircraft companies in the North by paying enormous bills for phony fire 

fighting in Northern Saskatchewan. I raised the question in the House last year. Too bad the Attorney 

General isn't in here now, maybe he could call for the RCMP again. I pointed to the rapidly rising cost of fire 

protection in Northern Saskatchewan ever since the Government gave away our aircraft company and 

airborne fire fighting equipment to some of its private enterprise friends in Prince Albert. And the situation 

has continued to get worse. Countless thousands of dollars were spent in an area north of Lake Athabasca 

where there isn't any appreciable amount of timber to protect. This Government is fighting fires this year on 

the moss, the lichen and the rocks, the barren lands. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear, you're quite right, the barren lands. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — This Government was paying its friends vast amounts of money to protect non-existent 

timber in an area where no timber exists, and if it ever did exist, there would be absolutely no possibility of 

ever getting it out to market. Let the Attorney General inquire into that, and I don't care whom he used to 

investigate. I'll say one thing, Mr. Speaker, that when we're elected there's going to be a complete public 

analysis of what has happened in that forest branch. We're going to want to know why Government funds 

have been spent in subsidizing these aircraft companies. 

 

This Government announced nearly a year ago the possibility of a pulp mill for the Meadow Lake area. 

Strangely enough when they met 46 sawmill operators — and I notice that Doughty Davie isn't here, and I 

notice the Minister of Natural Resources in his seat — when they met the 46 sawmill operators who were 

being put out of business in that area, they told the Government, plump and plan, they were not happy and I 

don't think the Minister of Natural Resources will deny it. Nearly a year after they had been thinking and 

talking about this pulp mill, they told them — the sawmill operators — "Look fellows, you're all washed 

up," and there wasn't one single policy at that time, not one single one to assist these 46 mill operators, and 

the Minister said, "You have to face the facts of life, there's nothing we can do for you." 46 native 

Saskatchewanians, and all their help, were being put out of business, denied their right to enter 

Saskatchewan forests, in the hope that Parsons and Whittemore were 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

348 

going to come in. Mr. Speaker, they will be getting the sawmill. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Yes, when? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — They will be getting the sawmill, it's in the process of being built, but it's only replacing 

other mills that have either been burned down or gone bankrupt under the Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — And they will be phasing out. One thing I want you to remember, and want this House 

to remember, that if these people continue, and this monopoly continues, Saskatchewan people will be 

paying double the amount and farmers will be paying double the amount for their lumber than they did 

before. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, when this Liberal Government says they put people ahead of 

politics, they should have been prepared with some phasing out arrangements to protect these 46 sawmill 

operators who had spent most of their lives in the woods, other than the cold, hard statement, as I mentioned, 

from the Minister of Natural Resources, "You've got to face the facts of life." The Government had nothing 

to offer these woodsmen, and when they saw the anger that was being generated, it was only then they did a 

hasty road fix on their policy to meet the operators, and they promised to meet the operators one by one in 

order to disperse them singly and in pairs before they got together in a concerted move as a group. Mr. 

Speaker, it was amusing at that time to see our would-be hero, the little Provincial Treasurer turn tail and run 

away from that meeting on the trumped up excuse that the one hundred thousand dollar airplane would have 

trouble landing in Prince Albert if he didn't get away pretty soon. That gives us some more Liberal DDT. 

People of Meadow Lake, sawmill operators from around the area, are asking how come the Government is 

prepared to spend millions of dollars in helping to subsidize foreign promoters from New York, France, 

Australia, Ethiopia, Rio de Janiero, any place, but nothing, nothing for Saskatchewan people. Big deals for 

foreign promoters, nothing for Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I've already encroached on my time, on the time of my friend, Mr. Bowerman, I've 

encroached on it with his permission. I'm only half through. The DDT Program of this party that sits 

opposite, a Government that tries to convince the people of Saskatchewan that they are creating new 

employment, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that is simply not true. During the last seven years scores of 

Saskatchewan's sawmill operators have been put out of business. There were 160 according to the answer 

that was given in this House last year. If you took that group of sawmills with 10 men to a mill, it becomes 

1600; with 15 men to the mill, 2400 people have been put out of work because the timber permits were let to 

others. Now the men in the pulp mill are getting more money, I'll agree, but there's no such thing as creating 

new employment. If there was, we shouldn't have lost those 101,000 people from Saskatchewan in the last 

seven years. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

349 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I spoke to the people of Dore Lake, I had a delegation of people, Indians, who came 

from Dore Lake. They asked "What's going to happen to our lake?" The biggest problem foreseen in the 

North is pollution, Mr. Speaker. I'm not worrying about that pulp mill too much, really. I think it's probably 

just another pipe dream like the Primrose Forest Products mill that the Premier was going to build, so I'm not 

really so worried about it. Five years ago on April Fool's Day, Mr. Speaker, in 1965, a tremendous 

announcement just like this at Meadow Lake. What happened? We got a $2 million road through the 

muskegs, no saw mill. That was it. Yes! Last year they had a Liberal contractor up there spending a lot of 

money, and they spent about $300,000 trying to patch up the road. They still didn't have it patched before 

freeze-up. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Were the moose complaining? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Now, the thing I am worrying about, very briefly, Mr. Speaker, is the pollution of the 

Churchill water shed. That is more important . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — . . . to be concerned with and if their assurances that there will be no more pollution in 

that area than there was at Prince Albert, if their performances are no better than they were with the Prince 

Albert pulp mill, then the people of the North have cause for concern. That's the only pure water shed left 

that is not polluted in Canada. I say that at Meadow Lake the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) said to us, 

"There is no pollution at Prince Albert. Anybody who says there's pollution from the Prince Albert pulp mill 

in the river is a liar." 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — No, I didn't. No, I didn't. I did not. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, that's what was recorded. This was as I heard it. He's been telling us continually 

that . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We have an advertisement from our partners, you know, Parsons and Whittemore. I'd 

say this and we helped to pay $500 for this ad. Yeah, a full-page ad in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, the 

Leader Post and I think it was put into other papers. Oh, yes. What do they say here? We helped pay $500 for 

this: 

 

Tests conducted downstream from the Prince Albert pulp mill by the Saskatchewan Fisheries 

Branch inspectors showed no detectable difference in dissolved oxygen level. This is the 

most important criterion for fish survival. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 60 per cent of the oxygen is gone out of that river before it comes from Alberta where another 

gutless, private enterprise government refuses to lay down the law. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

350 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — All right. We've lost 60 per cent of the oxygen from the river and we have 40 per cent 

of it left until we get to Prince Albert . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — . . . about five or six parts per million. What is the oxygen level of the river before it 

joins the forks, 15 miles east, Mr. Speaker? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Seven parts per million! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — What I'm saying is that there is less than one part per million, less than one part per 

million . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — I'll table it tomorrow. Seven parts per million, yesterday, or about a week ago. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely not true. That statement. And . . . 

MR. STEUART: — Sure it is and I'll table it tomorrow! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — . . . and he can table it if he wants to. I happen to know that there have been tests taken 

in that river and it's not true. That is contrary to the facts. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I'll table it tomorrow. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I've talked enough about DDT — that's the pollution party over there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Dirty deals by Thatcher, dirty deals by Trudeau, dirty deals by Davey . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the people of Saskatchewan have one choice. One 

choice when they go to the polls, whenever you dare call an election, the choice is NDP or DDT. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — There's no other way to judge it. That's not all of the DDT that you've spread around. 

There is more DDT-destruction of democracy by Thatcher. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

351 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — These people appear to be so confident, but is there a man over there who doesn't have 

to hang his head in shame after the Redistribution Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The Redistribution Bill that says, "Fine, it's a coward's ball game." A coward's ball 

game for weak sisters. They say that the people are prepared to vote against us and for them. Why, Mr. 

Speaker, why then are they so afraid that they've got to load the dice, two to one in some places? 

Representation by population has been thrown out. It's no longer true. Right here in this province, right here 

in this city, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at Albert Park — it seems to me they had a nominating convention 

there — the man in Albert Park, the new Liberal candidate for Albert Park must be a proud man. Less than 

4,000 voters will elect a member there. In Mr. Blakeney's seat, Regina Centre, 18,000 will elect a member 

there. Four and one-half times the voting power in Albert Park than the people of Regina Centre. And you 

people talk about democracy — you should be thoroughly ashamed. A coward's ball game is what it is for 

weak sisters . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — . . . weak sisters who are afraid to stand up in a fair fight. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — You haven't got the guts to be defeated by the people who elected you so you shuffle 

around, you shuffle boundaries around here and there, draw your phony lines. Yes, I noticed the new 

Minister of Labour (Mr. MacLennan), Last Mountain — the Member for salamander, it's a small riding over 

there too — he ought to cry for shame, "more destruction of democracy," more DDT and in spite of those 

unfair boundaries, in spite of this shuffling, you are still in a state of fear and cringing and you're still going 

to be beaten, Mr. Premier. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The people of Saskatchewan are well-known for their fair play. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Somebody says something about walking. Yes, that's right, these shoes that I'm wearing 

are made for walking and they're going to walk right all over you, not only in The Battlefords . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — . . . not only in Redberry, 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

352 

Turtleford, and Meadow Lake, you're going to be licked in all of them, Mr. Premier, because you haven't got 

the guts to stand up in a fair fight. You will be beaten because of destruction of democracy — DDT — 

pollution, dirty deals by Thatcher. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — You want some more? Well, I just happen to have some with me. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say before I go off the air that I certainly will not be supporting this meagre 

document. I have a great deal more to say that is going to be a condemnation of this Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, right. Mr. Speaker, let's take a little look at the marvellous record of this outfit. 

The city of North Battleford is a good example. The city of North Battleford, what happened there, during a 

15-year period prior to 1970 — let's take a look. What happened with the population? From 1955 to 1960, a 

gain of 1,500 in population. From 1960 to 1964 a gain of 1,250. What happened in the five years under the 

Liberals, as loss of 308. The record is here. What happened to the tax structure in my city? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Acid test. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, its' the acid test, Yes. Long since done. All right, Mr. Speaker, how do we look for 

tax increases? Well, I'll tell you how we look for tax increases — up more than $1 million since 1964. We 

just doubled the taxes on less taxpayers than we had in 1964 and this from a Premier and a party who 

promised to cut taxes. Mill rate up by another seven mills this year. Tax cuts! Small wonder that our children 

have got to move to Alberta, move to British Columbia, move to Manitoba in order to find something to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. I'm surprised that the Premier of British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba aren't 

putting damage suits against this Government here for forcing all the people out of the country and forcing 

their unemployment and social welfare rates up. They ought to be sued for damage. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — You know they tell me the Premier has been standing up there bragging about his 

unemployment — he even had to play politics at the Canada Winter Games. Yes, there's less unemployment, 

he said, at the Canada Winter Games opening. Less unemployment in Saskatchewan than anywhere else. He 

reminds me of the man who stands up and says there's no hunger in my house after everybody has starved to 

death. Mother Hubbard's cupboard! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

353 

MR. KRAMER: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that there just isn't one single thing that anyone 

could say that would be able to persuade me to give even a little support to this . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Anaemic document! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — . . . Yes, anaemic document. You know, Mr. Speaker, about all it is good for is a file 

folder and we're a little short of them, I understand. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — So I just can't, Mr. Speaker, I just can't give any support and I am just going to vote 

against this — I think you gathered that. I am going to vote against this Throne Speech, against the motion, 

but for the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.R. BOWERMAN (Shellbrook): — My hon. colleague from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) has dealt 

to some extent with the record of the Government's mismanagement in this province and from the response 

from the front benches that we have noted, as well as the back benchers, he certainly has been cutting pretty 

close to the bone. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, at the outset I wish to add my congratulations to the mover and 

seconder of this debate. Indeed it was a difficult assignment but they came through extremely well, I thought, 

considering what they had to work with. 

 

I have many times before now and I certainly take the honor and the privilege again to congratulate the 

Leader of our party, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney), for his success at what we all termed a 

very dynamic leadership convention last year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — We, with the people of Saskatchewan, look forward to the days when his 

competence as a leader will be called upon to fill the Premier position of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to limit myself by trying to debate the provisions of 

the Throne Speech. I am now more appreciative of why the rules of the House have provided such latitude in 

Throne Speech debates. 

 

I should prefer to begin my remarks with two or three matters that are obvious to the constituents of 

Shellbrook. I suggest that these observations indicate an attitude of smugness and misrepresentation by the 

Government and as a result are affecting the province as a whole. I speak with reference to 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

354 

the growing mistrust by the people of Saskatchewan because of what this Government says, it has done, and 

what it will do, as related to the facts. I suggest there is a growing and justifiable lack of confidence by the 

people in the leaders of the Government in this province. I suggest as well, Sir, that the mood of 

Saskatchewan people today is one of questioning Why. Why are we in this whole befuddled and confused 

political mess that we are in? They look at Ontario with a Conservative Government and the Liberals being 

fast defeated, they then look at Manitoba with a New Democratic Government and a Conservative 

opposition and with few, if any, Liberals and then I suggest they look at Alberta with a Social Credit 

Government, with little or no opposition in Alberta, I say you can look at British Columbia with a Coalition 

Government of Social Credit, Conservative, with the New Democrats in opposition and few Liberals. And 

then I say the people of Saskatchewan look at Saskatchewan and begin to ask themselves, why us? Why are 

we saddled with this fading brand of Liberal political harangue? I suggest that the provinces of Canada west 

of Quebec have long ago decided that be it a Conservative government, be it a Social Credit government, be 

it a Coalition government, or a New Democratic government, they say that any government is better 

government than Liberal government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Western Canada, I suggest, cannot afford Liberalism — either provincially or 

federally. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Western Canada, I suggest, cannot afford Liberalism — either provincially or 

federally. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — The major problems of Prairie agriculture today are a direct result of Liberals in 

Ottawa and Liberals in Saskatchewan. I suggest that this growing mood of non-confidence in Liberal 

Government leadership in Saskatchewan and in Ottawa is indeed a fact. 

 

May I point out to you why I believe that this kind of Liberalism which we have in this province is 

unbecoming of the best in Saskatchewan and is not deserving of the people who have supported them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — I ask the Hon. Members of this House — as well as the Press — and the people 

who listened in to radio Saskatchewan to reflect on the totally unnecessary and belligerent harangue which 

convulsed this House a couple of days ago. This came as a direct result of a statement by the Premier of our 

Province (Mr. Thatcher) castigating a contemporary Premier in the Province of Manitoba. Evidence for 

which he has not yet placed before this House nor has he had the good grace or the honor to withdraw. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

355 

Let's ask ourselves how this whole matter began and I say let's analyze it. I say let's scrutinize it and when we 

do I say we shall see the mosaic of the confused political mess in Saskatchewan and we shall understand 

why the people are losing confidence in the Thatcher-Steuart generation of Liberals. 

 

We might ask ourselves again — how was it? The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) was debating the 

Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. And one might logically ask, how in the world did the 

Premier of Manitoba (Mr. Schreyer) get in on that debate. The Premier of Saskatchewan made an 

announcement of a pulp mill. I suppose he recognized that his Government's program was a bit thin for an 

election year. Then, on second thought, maybe he planned it that way. When one stops to think of it and 

rationalize a bit that announcement was made on the morning of the same day that the Leader of the 

Opposition made his major address in this House. The Premier undoubtedly thought that he could grab the 

headlines and fill the front pages of Saskatchewan's news media and that as a result he would suppress the 

critical and damaging review of his Government's failure by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Besides that the Premier thought it would be good election "gimmickry" to announce a pulp mill and attempt 

to confuse, once again, the people of Saskatchewan about the real issues in an election year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Things as I recall it remained rather cool to this point but the devastating analytical 

approach of the Leader of the Opposition began to reveal the hollow nakedness of the Premier's folly. And 

then true to his pattern the Premier made a last ditch attempt to divert attention from the weakness of his 

own position and he castigated the people, the Government, and the Premier of Manitoba, and he did so 

without having any foundation for his accusations. 

 

This is not the first time. This is simply one among many times and, in fact, I suggest it has become a habit 

of the Premier. It is a pattern of the Premier and it is a cunning and ignoble device used frequently by the 

Premier and his Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). 

 

Let me refer to the meeting of the Provincial Premiers just last summer in the host Province of Manitoba. 

The Hon. and ignominious Premier of this Province after receiving all the gracious hospitality of the 

Manitoba people, their government and their elected Premier, while he was still a guest in that Province, 

berated and treated with contempt his host and fellow Premier. 

 

Some people, in fact, may think that this has merit. Obviously the Premier himself must have thought that it 

was rather a cute and cunning way to perform. Mr. Speaker, I say to you that the people of Saskatchewan do 

not believe that this is good manners. I say that the mood of the people in this province is one of disgust and 

non-confidence in the Thatcher-Steuart approach to leadership and government. I believe there has been an 

alienation of trust by the Government of the people for whom they have sought and received its mandate for 

Government. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

356 

This growing lack of confidence among Saskatchewan people stems from a rejection of trust which I suggest 

had its beginning in 1962. This is when the Thatcher-Steuart Liberals began to develop their technique. They 

developed the Medicare crisis and its party took on the actions of a Keep Our Doctors' Committee. 

 

Then in 1964 they adopted Medicare as a part of its political platform because of its popularity with 

Saskatchewan people. Then with the smell of election victory in 1964, these politicians, their minds crazed 

with the possibilities of Government, sold the Saskatchewan people a bill of goods. They sold them the idea 

of 80,000 new jobs — 20,000 were supposed to have been provided in the first four years. I suggest that it 

sold them the idea of an increasing population in Saskatchewan. It sold them on the idea of lower taxes. It 

sold them on the idea of improving Medicare programs and implementation of a drug program. And it did 

receive a vote of confidence from the people of Saskatchewan, but not one of these programs that I have 

mentioned have been implemented to this date. 

 

Now let us compare a program of only 18,000 new jobs in seven years including the Premier's pulp mill 

which was supposed to have provided 4,000 new jobs with those of Alberta and Manitoba. During the same 

period in Alberta they have provided 138,000 new jobs for their people, while in Manitoba they have 

provided 57,000 new jobs. 

 

We might ask: did the population increase? No! The population decreased 17,000 people from 1964 to 1971. 

That's 2,500 people per year on an average while the other provinces in Canada have increasing populations. 

 

Property taxes are up 60 per cent since 1964. Total Provincial taxes are up over 70 per cent since 1964. The 

premiums have increased and deterrent fees have been placed on Medicare. No Provincial drug program has 

been implemented to date. This is not only broken promises, this is an alienation of the trust which the 

people placed in their elected Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — In 1967, with the fear of losing the next election, because of the sagging economy 

in the province, this Government called an unprecedented election during the harvest of 1967. An election 

called almost one year before it was due. Certainly it was long before they were required to face another 

session of this Legislature and to present another Budget to the people of this province. 

 

Fully aware of the distressed economy in the province and the necessity for huge tax increases to meet 

spending, the Government deliberately went on the hustings promising a new industrial Saskatchewan. They 

spoke of a burgeoning economy. They promised to lower taxes and to stop the exodus of people from 

Saskatchewan. And, of course again, they were going to improve Medicare and implement a drug program. 

 

Saskatchewan people again gave them a mandate, but to date none of the mentioned programs have been 

accomplished. In fact in September 1967, jobs in manufacturing stood at 15.8 thousand. In September 1970, 

jobs in manufacturing still stood at 15.8 thousand and this is according to Dominion Bureau of Statistics 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

357 

figures. That is a total gain of nil jobs for four years in a new industrial Saskatchewan. That means from 

1967 to 1970 that for every new job that was gained in manufacturing, we lost a job. 

 

People of Saskatchewan will not forget that that includes the Premier's pulp mill, which as he boastfully said, 

won him the 1967 election. 

 

I think they sold, or they attempted to sell, a burgeoning economy or what they called a burgeoning 

economy. The per capita investment in Saskatchewan since 1968 is down 17.9 per cent while our 

neighboring provinces are up from 3.4 per cent to 14.9 per cent. 

 

Immediately following its election victory in 1967, the Liberal Government had to begin raising new taxes 

and from virtually every conceivable tax source available even down to the picayune tax on hot dogs. This 

tax binge ended in the grand tax finale on Black Friday in 1968 with $35 million worth of new taxes on the 

people of Saskatchewan. That, I suggest, Sir, was another breach of trust. 

 

Did they increase the population? No! They accelerated its decline. The traumatic loss of population in this 

province since 1967 has been 32,000 people. This is a population the size of the city of Moose Jaw 

evacuating this province in three short years. Our population in Saskatchewan today is less than it was a 

decade ago. People of this province know now that Liberal times are hard times and that Liberals cannot be 

trusted by what they tell you. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — They know also that the Premier of this Province is unfit for the best interests of 

our province and his party is not deserving of the trust or confidence of the electorate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — There is an old adage that says, "There is honor among thieves" and I suppose that 

means there is a certain code of ethics that motivates the various aspects of our society. Perhaps a 

gentleman's agreement might be in the same class. Maybe my legal colleagues would use the term Common 

Law. But among all of these I think they denote a sense of fair play, a sort of living by a moral law where the 

written law does not prescribe. 

 

But not so with our Premier and his Liberal Government when it comes to the democratic rights of balloting. 

Not so with the Premier and his Liberal Government when it comes to drawing electoral boundaries to save 

their own political hides. I say that this looks like Quebec's Duplessis era beginning in Saskatchewan. I say 

to Members of the Government that without trying you couldn't have planned a surer base for social unrest 

and inevitable social upheaval. A social distress like that which now plagues the Province of Quebec. 

 

Nothing can bring social disunity and unrest quicker than to say to one of Saskatchewan's citizens, or to a 

segment of its citizenry that because you do not share the political views 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

358 

of the Liberal Premier of this province that your vote will have to include another three of four people's votes 

to equal one Liberal ballot. 

 

This is a major threat to basic democracy. It has done and will again lead people to oppression and tyranny. I 

suggest that the mood of the people in Saskatchewan is one of fear and mistrust for the kind of Liberals that 

now occupy the seat of Government in this province and indeed their feelings are justified. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — I want now to turn to the industrial and civic pollution of the Saskatchewan River, 

about which we have been promised so much by the Premier and the various agencies and departments of 

this Government. 

 

Even those Members of the Government who have spoken in this debate have left the impression that 

everything is okay with industrial effluent from the pulp industry at Prince Albert. If the Hon. Members of 

the Government will understand the reason for our constant reference to this particular industry it is because 

that industry pours liquid effluent into the Saskatchewan River in volumes almost equal to the river flow of 

the North Branch at periods of low water. 

 

We are greatly pleased with the recent announcement by the Government that a secondary water treatment 

plant will now be installed at the mill complex. People of our constituency and of our province proudly 

relate to this major water course. We see in it the great potential for recreation and natural resources which 

are so abundantly and dramatically provided within its drainage system. I might say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 

one of the great experiences of my life was to have had the privilege of canoeing this river from the borders 

of Alberta to the borders of Manitoba and to have seen first hand the physical and aesthetic beauty it 

contains. I wish that this experience and privilege will always remain for my sons and theirs and for your 

sons as a heritage never to be lost throughout the centuries. 

 

I say to the Premier and his Government and to any Premier and succeeding Government that the people of 

this province will not tolerate long the destruction of this great river which is our province's namesake. They 

will not allow it to become the sewage drain of industry or civic administrations, regardless of how large or 

how impressive those reasons may be. 

 

The pollution which is now entering this river is already causing stagnation and death to its aesthetic and 

resource value. This major crisis to which the Government now says it is turning its energies, is 

commendable. In doing so, they will have both the sympathetic understanding and the support of the 

Saskatchewan people. But when the Premier and his Government misrepresents and misleads the people of 

this province in the face of evidence both researched and obvious, then it becomes an alienation of trust and 

Saskatchewan people lose confidence. 

 

I might ask the question that if liquid effluent from the pulp company has, since its beginning, been cleaner 

when it went back into the river than it was before it came from the river, why are we now asking the 

industry to spend $1.2 million to 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

359 

provide secondary treatment? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — I say that this kind of issue dodging by the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer 

creates ample and reasonable doubt and concern in the minds of Saskatchewan people about any proposed 

new pulp mill dumping what they might call, pollution-free effluent into one of the last major water systems 

of our province and nation, namely, the Churchill River system. 

 

I want briefly to turn to a specific issue in my own constituency. I wish to mention the destruction of the Old 

Wood Burner at the former sawmill site at Big River. 

 

It is extremely difficult to understand why governments which are elected to represent people so frequently 

act inconsiderately of that trust. That Burner has stood as a landmark almost as long as this land has been 

known as the Province of Saskatchewan. Not only was it a physical landmark but indeed it recalled an era 

and a generation that will not live again. To the people of Big River it was a part of their heritage and a part 

of their pride. It served to remind them of a life of lumbering and of the early fur trade which has long been 

the basis of that community and is now a fast fleeting experience of our time. 

 

I want to ask: what earthly good has come as a result of the destruction and disappearance of the Wood 

Burner which has stood so long in that community? What singular objective has been served by taking the 

cutting torches to fulfil its demise? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say again, why this indiscriminate destruction of a historic community trust? 

 

I want to turn to what I am convinced is another breach of confidence by this Government. It is in the area of 

mental health. I suppose one should have grave doubts about the veracity of this Government in mental 

health particularly following the indictment by the Frazier Commission Report on mental health care in 

Saskatchewan. There will be few Hon. Members who will not recall the enthusiastic debate which ensued 

over the introduction of Bill 84 in the 1968 session. 

 

This was when amendments were made to the Mental Health Act introduced by the Minister of Public 

Health. Briefly, that Bill amended an Act of long standing originally proclaimed by that new and imaginative 

people's Government in 1945, the CCF. 

 

Basically that 1945 legislation provided that an estate was free from claim for costs of mental health care if 

that estate passed to the father, to the mother, to the husband, to the wife, to the child, to a brother or to a 

sister of the deceased providing the beneficiary was residing in Saskatchewan. Similarly that estate was free 

from claim if any portion of that estate passed to a dependant whether or not that dependant resided in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Basically the 1968 amendments removed that protection of The Mental Health Act and once again the costs 

of mental patient care in Saskatchewan mental institutions were to be recoverable from the family estate. The 

provisions of that amendment were 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

360 

made retroactive to 1945 — nearly 25 years of retroactive legislation. Some may say that this is an 

over-simplification of the facts. It is, however, adequate to lead us to the point I wish now to discuss. 

 

I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Debates and Proceedings of this House in 1968. I want to make some 

selected quotation from the second and third readings of The Mental Health Bill 84. These quotations may 

become rather lengthy but it is well for the Members of the Government to get the full impact of that debate. 

I turn, Mr. Speaker, to the Debates and Proceedings, 1968 session and on page 2255 I want to quote the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) on what he has to say with respect to that Bill. 

 

All this does not touch the Mental Health Program. It has no bearing on the Mental Health 

Program. It only has a direct bearing on what happens to estates of those people who die in a 

mental hospital, and this still isn't as fair as it might be. If someone is in a mental hospital 

and happens to move out a week before and dies outside the mental hospital, the Act is still 

very unfair and should be looked at again. This has nothing to do with the mental health 

program. It is what happens to the estates of people who die in mental hospitals. 

 

That is the opinion of the Provincial Treasurer with respect to the Bill almost three years ago which was 

enacted by this House. 

 

May I quote now the present Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) in his rebuttal in that debate and I 

quote from page 2257: 

 

I'm a little surprised to hear the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) say that if 

someone doesn't die in a mental institution, the Act doesn't, in effect, apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn further on in the debate and once again quote the present Leader of the Opposition 

carrying on in that same debate. 

 

But as I read Section 8A, it provides that where a person who was admitted to an institution 

after December 31, 1964, thereafter dies, then his estate shall be chargeable. It doesn't say, 

dies in the institution, it just says dies. I say that the Bill says that, if a person dies having had 

care after 1944, it doesn't matter when he dies or where he dies, his estate is subject to the 

tax. 

 

I turn now to the third reading of that Bill and I quote again of the present Leader of the Opposition, on page 

2461: 

 

I would like to ask the Minister when he closes the debate to reiterate the assurance that he 

gave us in Committee that no charges would be made against the estates of anyone who did 

not die in an institution. This assurance he gave us informally in Committee and I would like 

him, if that is the position of the Government, to repeat it when he closes the debate. 

 

I should like now, Mr. Speaker, to turn to the closing of that debate and the words of the Hon. Minister of 

Public Health (Mr. Grant). I read from page 2462 and I quote: 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

361 

One last point. I am afraid that I am going to have to sign this in blood to satisfy the 

Opposition, but once more I'll repeat in this third reading that in the case of patients dying 

outside the institutions, their estates will not be attached. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want now to refer to a specific incident in my constituency and I say if there is one, there are 

probably a dozen or more. In fact the Minister said back in that debate that he expected to collect about 

$300,000 from that kind of cases. 

 

In 1959 a neighbor of mine was placed in a mental hospital at North Battleford. His sickness and incapacity 

was of long standing before his admission to that hospital. The family farm as a result was operated in the 

father's name and it remained an asset in the father's name through the dedicated work of that son. May I add 

that during the same time that son suffered from polio and remains partially paralyzed and handicapped as a 

result of that illness even to this day. 

 

In 1968 the Administrator of Estates pressured that son to purchase the farm. Naturally it could only be done 

through a bank loan or by applying to the farm credit corporation and the facts are that it is really the second 

time that this son will have had to pay for that farm. 

 

In 1968 the Department of Public Health advised the son that in view of the fact that little or no additional 

assistance could be provided his father in the Saskatchewan hospital that could not be provided in a regular 

nursing home that he therefore make arrangements to move his father to a nursing home as soon as possible. 

And this was done. And the now deceased patient lived almost one and one-half years in a private nursing 

home in Saskatoon. 

 

The following is a quotation from a letter from the Administrator of Estates to the son as the Executor of the 

father's estate dated October 7, 1970, and I quote: 

 

In addition, this office on behalf of the Department of Public Health, will be filing a claim in 

excess of $17,000 pursuant to the provisions of Section 8 of The Mental Health Act. 

 

An enquiry by the son as to the exact amount of that claim by the Department of Public Health drew the 

following reply from the Administrator of Estates' office, dated October 20, 1970. I quote: 

 

With reference to your recent enquiry we wish to advise that the amount of claim under the 

provisions of Section 8 of The Mental Health Act is $17,165. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Public Health in fact signed his name in blood when he signed the claim against 

this estate. Every Member of the Government who stated his position and voted for this legislation in 1968 

put his bloody signature to the same thing. A more despicable act of legislation is indeed difficult to find. Let 

me quote the totally unpalatable excuse of the Minister on behalf of his Liberal Government in a letter 

addressed to myself on January 27, 1971. I think I can find the letter. This is a letter addressed to myself by 

the Minister 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

362 

of Public Health (Mr. Grant) dated January 27, 1971, and I quote in part. 

 

As I recall the circumstances relating to these questions, both the Members asking these 

questions and I, were thinking about the kind of case where the patient was discharged from 

the institution to resume a normal life in his community and died sometime after he had 

returned home. 

 

The Department does not attempt to keep a continuing record of the whereabouts of 

discharged patients in order that the Minister's claim could be made when they die. When I 

stated during the debate the Minister's claim would not be made, I was referring to the kind 

of case where the patient had returned home and the Department would have lost contact 

with it. 

 

Why should the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) expect me to believe this letter any more than I should 

have believed what he said in this House three years ago or almost three years ago. I suggest that the Liberal 

Government would send a bird dog to get the last money out of that man if they could get a bird dog to go. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — It is all right, it is all right. The people of Saskatchewan think it is very cruel, 

indeed they do. They do in my constituency. 

 

I want to comment briefly on the rebuilding of the Big River Saw Mill with the added feature of a chip mill. 

I commend the Government on its final decision to rebuild the sawmill industry in Big River. It seemed to 

take a number of announcements, a special trip by the Premier plus a nominating convention to get that plan 

properly in motion. But the people of Big River expected a fair amount of political fanfare from the Premier 

before the plans were really activated and as usual in that regard they were not allowed to go away 

disappointed. After having sat in this House on the Crown Corporations Committee and listened to the 

Premier and the Provincial Treasurer rail against the former Government's bungling over the Big River mill, 

I now see the developments which are taking place in the reconstruction. It simply makes a living mockery 

of anything this Government can say for its own efficiency and business ability. 

 

I must say to the Hon. Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) that I really didn't believe he and his 

company of advisors were serious on the location when they had their sod-turning ceremonies for the 

beginning of the construction of that new mill. The location is on top of the hill, almost a half a mile or more 

north of the original mill site and of the present mill. If there was evidence at the beginning of an unqualified 

mess for the sawmill industry, it can now be seen in the reconstruction of the Big River mill. Ever since the 

industry has operated in Big River, since 1908 or 1909 — and you have just finished destroying the Wood 

Burner surviving from the mills that were built in that day — they have wisely used the economic and other 

long-established benefits of Cowan Lake. It has been used for the last 40 to 50 miles of transportation. It has 

been used for the purpose of booming the logs together and for the purpose of log storage during the heat of 

the summer cut. This 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

363 

long established and economically proven practice for log handling has now been scrapped. Logs are being 

dry-decked to the new yard about 30 acres in size, half a mile or so from Cowan Lake. The new yard is now 

full of logs and only half of the winter cut it out. During my most recent trip to Big River they were 

attempting to use what they call a "log jammer" which had been obtained in British Columbia and brought to 

Big River by rail for the purpose of high-decking logs in the new yard in order that they could get the rest of 

the winter's cut into that yard. 

 

During the few hours which I watched the pitifully inadequate performance, the operators hopelessly gave up 

on the machine and got up and walked away. I understand now that it has subsequently been loaded on the 

flatcar and returned to British Columbia. They have now hired a local operator for $12 per hour and I 

understand he works approximately 20 hours in the day to high-deck logs and this piece of machinery which 

he is using is similarly inadequate for the job. 

 

When I spoke to the Government's locally appointed Member of the Board — the Saskatchewan Timber 

Board that is — and raised the question of the sawmill location, he indicated he knew very little about the 

lumbering business but he really was interested in two things only. 

 

First, he had a business in Big River. Second, he wanted that sawmill in Big River regardless of the cost. I 

can appreciate the concern of the Liberal businessmen in Big River. Not only he but many others were 

likewise facing a serious situation if the sawmill were not to be reconstructed. Perhaps because of his closer 

association with Government policies he realized the scant possibility of getting the mill reconstructed. 

 

This seems to be the Liberal Government's approach to resources development. Not too much concern for 

Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan's natural resources, I say and our Party says, is the rightful heritage of 

the people of our province. They are not the preserves of private interest. We believe that Liberal policy of 

selling our birthright is both unwise and unnecessary. 

 

New Democrats place their confidence in Saskatchewan people. We believe they are capable of developing 

resources for their own benefit and this does not discount the acceptability of large resource industries where 

and when these industries can benefit that principal objective. I do say, however, it does preclude the sellout 

of a major resource if the province as a whole does not receive the principal benefits from such a sale and the 

rights of the citizens are not fully protected against the unhealthy environment. 

 

There has been a fair amount of misrepresentation by the Thatcher-Steuart type of politicians about the New 

Democratic Party positions on the development of this province's forest resources, including pulp mills. 

 

But then who, I ask, can really trust what the Premier has to say about any province's pulp mill industry? 

Without any equivocation whatsoever his convulsion in this House about a New Democratic Premier 

begging a New York firm to invest in Manitoba's Churchill Forrest Industries has been totally disproven. The 

fact that he came to this House and continued in the perpetuation of that untruth by tabling some documents 

that failed to 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

364 

support his claim, one of which he could have known nothing about because it was written five days after he 

made his accusations in this House. 

 

I say again, this Government demonstrates the caution with which all Saskatchewan must proceed in 

accepting statements emanating from the Premier and his Government, particularly those relating to the pulp 

industry over which he seems to have become so paranoid. 

 

Liberals in Saskatchewan would like to leave the impression that the former CCF Government and somehow 

the New Democratic Party did and does not believe in development of industry, using such companies as 

Parsons and Whittemore. I suggest if there is any doubt about this among the Members over there or for 

anyone in the Province of Saskatchewan, then look at the potash industry, or look at the oil industry or look 

at Uranium City. Here is an industrial complex which your Government has not to this day developed in all 

of the mineral activity of which they talk. But there is a major different, I suggest, in how Socialist 

Governments proceed with their industrial development programs. 

 

First, they properly assess and properly research the resources base and then they plan for progressive and 

continuing development, getting the best possible deal available for their people. 

 

I say, unequivocably, to the Premier and his Government, that without that assessment and research having 

been completed for this province's forest industries as early as 1959 or as late as 1959 — whichever you 

want to call it — under a Socialist Government, that this Government, this Liberal Government, could not 

have proceeded as far with the pulp mill industry as it has, perhaps even to the point of not having a pulp 

mill industry in the province today. 

 

I refer to the Sandwell Report. This is a report which the Provincial Treasurer commented on in the House 

yesterday. This is the report which deals with "A study of resources and industrial opportunities for the 

Province of Saskatchewan," from Sandwell and Company, Stanford Research Institute, Menlo Park, 

California. This dealt with prospects for a pulp and paper mill development in Saskatchewan. I want to quote 

to the House, Mr. Speaker, the acknowledgements that are placed here on the first page. May I quote them to 

the House. 

 

In September, 1958, the Government of Saskatchewan through its Industrial Development 

Office and its Economic Advisory and Planning Board completed arrangements with the 

Stanford Research Institute under which the Institute would conduct a study of resources and 

industrial opportunities for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In response to specific requests of the Government arrangements are to provide for 

participation in certain phases of a study by the Economic Corporation of Montreal, Canada, 

and Sandwell and Company Limited, Consulting Engineers, Vancouver. 

 

Accordingly this report on the prospective pulp and paper industry of Saskatchewan, market 

data and projections were prepared by the Institute. Resources and financial data, engineering 

estimates, and a draft of the report 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

365 

were prepared by Sandwell and Company. The report comprises Part II of "A study of 

resources and industrial opportunities for the Province of Saskatchewan." 

 

That was a report completed in 1959 and let me refer you, Mr. Speaker, and this House to some of the 

material which is available to those who were seeking to undertake forest operations in this province. I quote 

from page 75 of the report. 

 

The following is a list of forest publications available from the Province of Saskatchewan's 

Industrial Development Office. Saskatchewan Forests prepared by Natural Resources in 

1955; Saskatchewan Forests, 1951-55; Statement presented by the Province of Saskatchewan 

to the British Commonwealth of Forestry Conference in 1957; Forest Resources of Prince 

Albert area of Saskatchewan, Forestry Branch, 1953; Forest Resources of Meadow Lake 

Area, Forestry Branch, 1954; Forest Resources of Cumberland Lake, Flin Flon area, Forestry 

Branch, 1955; Forest Resources of Pasqua and Porcupine Area, Saskatchewan, 1952; 

Forestry Resources of Buffalo Narrows in Saskatchewan, Forestry Branch, 1956; The 

Growth and Yield of Jack Pine in Saskatchewan, Forestry Branch, 1956; The Growth and 

Yield of Black Spruce in Saskatchewan, Forestry Branch, 1953; and The Growth and Yield 

of Aspen in Saskatchewan, Forestry Branch, 1957. 

 

And this Government lauds itself for having brought a pulp mill into Saskatchewan. Let me turn now and 

read to you some of the study which was undertaken and I suggest, Parsons and Whittemore along with 

many others have studied this report. 

 

Chapter 1 — potential markets for Saskatchewan pulp and paper, Overseas markets, 

Canadian markets, United States markets, paper and board, etc. 

 

Chapter 2 — the Forest Resources in Saskatchewan, management and administration, pulp 

and paper mill areas, forest resources and species, photography and climate. 

 

Chapter 3 — nature and location of the initial development. 

 

Let me deal now, Mr. Speaker, with a couple of quotes from the summary. 

 

Saskatchewan is referred to as the wheat province of the Canadian Prairies. However, 

non-agricultural production has accounted for a rapidly increasing share of the Province's 

total commodity output, particularly in post-war years. For instance, major developments 

have occurred in petroleum gas, potash, sodium sulphate, steel fabrication and other 

manufacturing. 

 

This is back in 1959. 

 

In line with the Saskatchewan Government's general policy of encouraging the development of industry in 

the province this report evaluates Saskatchewan's forest resources comprising three-fifths of the Province's 

total area in terms of potential pulp and paper development. Let me quote No. 7: 

 

It is believed that an arrangement could be concluded 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

366 

with the Provincial Government which would protect an industry from unrestricted 

competition and thus promote stability of the pulpwood cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people go on at great length and try to suggest that they are the only ones able to entice a 

pulp mill to this province. So may I suggest that without this basic work having been done, the pulp mill or 

any other enterprise could not logically have been undertaken at this time. 

 

I want briefly to reply in closing to the Premier and others who have commented on the New Democratic 

Party's stated position with respect to the Government's Indian and Metis Department. The New Democrats 

believe that the policies of the present Government toward the native people are failing and that they are 

doomed to failure. They are failing because these are policies imposed by the Government rather than 

policies developed co-operatively with native people and their leaders. I say they are failing because they are 

policies rooted in the middle-class values of the white majority and they are failing because they are policies 

which fail to recognize the wide variation in the conditions and aspirations of people of Indian ancestry, 

which range from Treaty Indians on reserves in rural Saskatchewan to urban Metis locked into poverty on 

the fringes of Saskatchewan's towns and cities. 

 

Above all I suggest they are doomed to failure because they do not recognize that the goals to be pursued 

must be those arrived at freely by the native people themselves, not those prescribed by white man's society 

for their own decided good. 

 

Since the founding of this continent and the settlement of its Great Plains Region there have been decisions 

made by Governments that have on the whole adversely affected our native Canadian culture. 

 

I respectfully accept that the decisions of earlier Governments to establish reservations may have been made 

in good faith and I respectfully acknowledge as well that even when they ordered the Militia to leave Fort 

Garry and round up what they termed "Renegade" chiefs and their people to force them on to those 

established reservations that this too may have been thought to be the right answer. 

 

I do not impugn the motives of former Governments when they established these boundaries, established 

their treaties or those departments of Government, nor do I impune the motives of this Government when it 

proposed to establish a Provincial Department of Indian and Metis Affairs. However, Mr. Speaker, I did, just 

as respectfully raise what I thought were legitimate questions to such a proposal. Any serious perusal of 

world history will show that the aggressive and ambitious philosophy of a dominant culture eventually 

invades the good faith and honest motives of its own legislation. I suggest the same results are again being 

perpetuated because of the same ambitions and the same inherently aggressive nature of the dominant society 

today, a society or culture that is motivated and driven by the idea of the amassing wealth, caught up into a 

concept which we call standards of living, the peak of which enviable status can only be reached by 

affluence and money power. 

 

I say, contrast that kind of a society with the kind of a culture that has never known or had any use for 

monetary and fiscal wealth. One that has no inherent urge to amass personal 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

367 

wealth and capital. It is a culture where the object of their efforts is to satisfy only the physical and emotional 

requirements of life, as life is being lived. It is a culture where status and promotion come, not from serving 

oneself, but for his ability and skill as a provider and protector of others; a culture where time was never 

measured as an equation of the dollar bill or by the division of a day into minutes and hours or any kind of 

units of time; a culture where the motivation was based upon immediate needs and not upon wants or 

aspirations for the future. What I am attempting to say is that surely the day is long gone when the white 

man's government will interpret what is best for native Canadian culture and then pass legislation to 

accomplish their interpretations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Hopefully as well, the day is long gone when Governments will segregate its 

people racially, culturally or otherwise by establishing specific departments of government and specialized 

programs that can only serve to sustain the existing differences and prejudices that now exist. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — I say, if this Government has earnestly and consistently sought the advice of 

Saskatchewan Indian people, and if they have been totally involved in the decision-making process, and if 

the Indian people have in the end result, played the major role in determining the Department's function, then 

indeed, I have added confidence in the Department of Indian and Metis Affairs. 

 

But, if this is not true and if these objectives and ends have not been served, then a Department of Indian and 

Metis Affairs has no justification for existence, and under a New Democratic Party Government, it will cease 

to be. 

 

I have not, Mr. Speaker, commented on the very depressed position of agriculture today. This has been done 

very ably by my colleagues. Nevertheless I feel no less the interest and concern that is so prevalent among all 

farmers in Saskatchewan today. Perhaps I shall have time later in the session to deal with those subjects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this motion. It lacks the confidence and trust of Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. I.H. MacDOUGALL (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, before I make any comments on the splendid 

Throne Speech I want to congratulate the Member from Assiniboia-Bengough (Mr. Mitchell) for his speech. 

He represents his constituency well and his people have good reason to be proud of his efforts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — I congratulate the seconder of the Throne Speech, the 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

368 

Member for Watrous (Mr. Schmeiser). He delivered a sound level-headed speech and I sincerely hope his 

constituency continues to support this energetic, enthusiastic, hard-working Member. Thirdly, I want to offer 

my congratulations to the new Leader of the Opposition. He is a more moderate individual than his rivals for 

the leadership were. He has a tough job trying to contain the various elements within his party and I sincerely 

hope he can stand up under the strain because he is the best thing that happened to the Liberal Party since the 

election in 1964. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — People now know that the new Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) is an 

avowed Socialist, controlled more so than his predecessor, by the real left wing, the Wafflers and so on of 

the Socialist party. I refer one and all to his policy statement as printed in the Leader-Post, February 10, 

1971. 

 

Lastly, I should like to congratulate the citizens of Regina for their forethought, in relieving the former 

mayor of his onerous duties as mayor, because now they have a full-time Member representing Regina South 

East in the Legislature, and we look forward to having him in the House when crucial votes are taken. We all 

want to know where he stands. We have been waiting for a long time to find out. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne, there was mention made of many projects for rural areas, tax relief, in the 

form of increased homeowner grants, increases in funds for education, pollution control measures, littering 

control, special-care homes, and many, many more. 

 

In the area of highway construction, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, with thanks, to the Minister of 

Highways (Mr. Boldt) the progress that has been made on the highway system within the Souris-Estevan 

constituency. Highway No. 9 was completed from Carlyle to the Junction of No. 18; work was commenced 

on the re-oiling of No. 47 north of Estevan and this is scheduled for completion early in the spring of 1971. 

Many times I have to do a lot of work for the people of the Weyburn constituency but that, too, is 

understandable, because there is work scheduled to be done on some of those highways over there, and most 

of the time they come to me for a little help. 

 

While re-oiling for the time being will be welcomed by the people of Estevan, I want to point out that this 

can only be a temporary measure, which will last only two or three years, and I urge the Minister to make 

plans for the re-building of this highway No. 47, within the next three years. Highway No. 47 is now too 

narrow, the roadbed cannot take heavy traffic for any extended period of time and it should be rebuilt to 

match the standard of the northern portion of the road between Benson and Stoughton. That portion of No. 

47 happens to be in the Weyburn constituency. On this I have the backing of the entire city of Estevan, I am 

sure. The traffic count on No. 47 north of Estevan averages well over 600 cars per day. 

 

The Estevan Automotive Dealers Association have presented me with briefs, Mr. Speaker, outlining the 

necessity of the rebuilding of this road. They point out the loss of business to the city from the north and I 

again urge the full consideration by the Minister of our problem. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

369 

In the area of crash winter works programs to aid employment I want publicly to thank the Government for 

providing the Woodlawn Regional Park with some $5,000 for river clearing and other winter works within 

the Woodlawn Regional Park. Incidentally, the authorities and the men who did the work, made an excellent 

job on this clearing project. We have even convinced the Department of Natural Resources to spend some 

money in the Mainprize Park, to the amount exceeding some $2,000, for a winter works project improving 

their concession stand in that fine little park. 

 

I should also like to point out that a further $20,000 was made available for a winter works project on the 

Souris River from Boundary Dam through Roche Percee to the roadside park at Highway No. 39. This, Mr. 

Speaker, was on a $2 for $1 cost-sharing basis between the Government of Saskatchewan on the one part and 

the R.M. of Estevan, the R.M. of Coalfields, and private individuals, on the other part, who raised $10,000 

amongst them. I am sure it will help to alleviate the flood conditions that have existed in the area each 

spring. The municipal men supervised the project and I am very pleased to report they too did an excellent 

job — a job which is still being carried out, but should for the most part be completed before the end of 

March. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note that the Opposition has moved an amendment which in effect condemns the Government 

for the Throne Speech and the good things contained therein for the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 

Saskatchewan, I believe, want us to spend money on improving highways, they want some local tax relief for 

education, they need a further increase in homeowner grants to alleviate local taxes, they want us to provide 

student employment. They want an increase in the minimum wage rate. The people of Saskatchewan want 

changes in The Workmen's Compensation Act. All these things are forecast in the Throne Speech. 

 

It appears Canada and Saskatchewan are on the economic upswing. The Socialists, however, have done more 

to hamper this upswing with their anti-American, anti-foreign capital propaganda than any other single factor 

in this country, except maybe the CBC. 

 

Referring back to the NDP election platform for Saskatchewan: "(1) limitation of foreign capital and where 

possible reclamation of ownership of foreign owned resources; (2) consideration to bringing the potash 

industry under public ownership; (3) scrap the Indian and Metis Department." Two of these planks alone, 

Mr. Speaker, should be enough to make the people of Saskatchewan scared stiff of an NDP Government. 

Their new manifesto has one other bad effect on new capital coming into this province. It makes foreigners, 

and more particularly Americans, wary about investing their money in a province that could overnight 

confiscate their industry and bid them goodbye. I ask people of Saskatchewan to consider most seriously the 

implications of electing a Government with proposals like that. Where would we be in the oil industry 

without a good deal of U.S. capital, invested in the exploration for oil? Where would the constituency of 

Souris-Estevan or the constituency of Weyburn be? Americans spent millions of dollars exploring for oil in 

our area, and in the process helped nearly every municipality in the area. Prior to the oil operations, rural 

roads in the southeast corner of Saskatchewan were virtually non-existent. What a change in the last 16 

years! 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

370 

I submit that many Canadian companies spent money developing the oil industry in Saskatchewan, but 

nearly all of the major companies are affiliated with major U.S. companies. I, for one, am happy to see 

anyone spend money in this province regardless of who he is, or where he comes from. Our resources don't 

do us much good in the ground, or in the case of our forests, left to wave their branches in the wind. I feel 

much of this economic nationalism is just so much Socialist balderdash. But again, it permeates their whole 

biased thinking from T.C. Douglas right down to the least of our brothers' keepers, like the Member for 

Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). 

 

The case of Home Oil of Calgary is a good case in point and sometimes, I think some of our Liberals in 

Ottawa get too excited about this Socialist propaganda. Sometimes they become victims of the left wing 

segment of our society. A company, such as Home Oil, is offered for sale. If there is no Canadian buyer 

willing to come forth, why should the Government step in to prevent such sale to an American buyer? These 

foreign companies have to comply with Canadian law and if they are good corporate citizens, I fail to 

understand why we should interfere with such investors. 

 

Certainly most American companies located here hire most of their staffs from the Canadian labor force. 

And this, my friends, means jobs. While we hear the NDP scream about the United States investors coming 

into Canada, we never hear them say we should keep American trade unions on their own side of the 

international boundary. This all seems quite strange to me. 

 

I note where Mrs. Grace Hartman, secretary treasurer of C.U.P.E. in an address at the University of Toronto 

in March, 1970, told that particular gathering that the United States based international unions took $35 

million out of Canada in 1967 and sent back less than $17 million in benefits and wages, making a profit of 

some $18 million a year gouged out of Canadian workers. Mrs. Hartman point out that this made Canada 

rather unique because it is the only sovereign country in the world whose major labor base resides in a 

foreign country. So, let's not get carried away by our criticism of foreign investment in Canada. I can only 

say let's get it, and in large quantities, wherever we can get it. 

 

To go back for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the second point in the NDP "Program for Progress" — they 

would consider taking over the potash industry. How much money would be involved? $700 million or $800 

million? Well, this becomes a joke when you examine point No. 8 of the NDP program which talks about 

"sharply reducing taxes." I can't help but think, surely we have grown up enough in our thinking, to realize 

by now you can't spend money like water on one hand and lower taxes on the other. As our fearless Premier 

often points out, there is no magic in Government spending. If we give you something, you must be prepared 

to pay for it. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, what Blakeney and Company would attempt to sell the people is this: elect the Socialists 

and forget about heaven, it will be here! We will give you everything. Everyone will be put to work, and 

above all, someone else will pay. 

 

There was still another plank in the NDP Manifesto which the native people all over Saskatchewan should 

watch with interest. They want to abolish the Indian and Metis Department . Why? 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

371 

Of all things Premier Thatcher has done or tried to do, it is to upgrade the standard of living for our native 

people. He has done and tried to do more to help them find employment, decent housing and a better 

education than any white man in the last 100 years. He acted sometimes under difficult circumstances, while 

others watched and the NDP criticized. Now, if Saskatchewan elects an NDP Government the Indian and 

Metis can kiss all this progress goodbye and they can go back to welfare. They — the NDP — certainly are 

their brothers' keepers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you compare the stand taken by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) who has 

thrown his verbal obstacles in the way of progress consistently, his stand on the pulp mills, on Indian Affairs, 

you name it, compare his stand to the forthright stand of this Government, led by Mr. Thatcher, what can our 

voters do but re-elect this Government. Mr. Thatcher has taken some tough stands on balancing his budgets, 

he has taken positions sometimes unpopular at the time, with some segments of the population, such as his 

fight on inflation in which he led the nation with his six per cent guidelines. He dared to differ with Ottawa 

on the white paper on taxation. Mr. Speaker, this takes courage. He did it and in so doing he has won the 

respect of all of us throughout this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP keeps howling for an election. Let's give it to them, the sooner the better. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will have to choose between the 

common-sense approach and the approach of the left wing Wafflers, and that seems to be most of the NDP 

these days. The lines are drawn and clear. The sooner the better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, in my opening remarks I 

should like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne. I think the mover 

made a very commendable effort in discussing timely topics which had little reference to the Throne Speech. 

 

I must also congratulate the seconder of the motion for what I consider a very erudite speech and I am sure 

that he put considerable time into preparing it and I certainly enjoyed listening to both of them. 

 

I congratulate my new Leader who has the honorable role of emulating the unforgettable Woodrow Lloyd. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I also congratulate my friend Roy Romanow for being moved into the high 

position of Deputy Leader. These two young, energetic leaders assisted by other young leaders, will 

undoubtedly lead the New Democratic Party to victory when and as soon as the election is called. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

372 

I could not pass by without congratulating the Hon. Member for Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. 

Charlebois) for the excellent job that he did in making the Games in Saskatoon such a success. Yes, and all 

the volunteers as well and as a matter of fact all the people who worked together, co-operated and 

co-ordinated to make Saskatchewan this great province, known to the rest of Canada. 

 

I particularly want to thank him for having noted that my granddaughter, Wendy, who is a Saskatchewan 

product and had considerable training in Saskatoon, was able to reach near the top by taking a Silver Medal 

and a Bronze Medal in figure skating . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — . . . and dancing. I feel that it is an honor for my family and I am sure it is an 

honor for all of us having been raised in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, getting to my speech, I should like to say this, that the outgoing Liberal Government has 

presented a whitewash document . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — . . . which they call their Throne Speech and which clearly demonstrates the 

failure of this Government in coming to grips with urgent and vital problems of this province. Even worse, 

this Speech demonstrates that this Government has no awareness that serious problems do indeed exist in 

this province. It is therefore necessary that the Members of this Legislature, and more specifically the 

Opposition, expose this Thatcher Government to the people of this province in simple and understandable 

debate. And particularly because it is through our democratic parliamentary institutions that it is inherently 

the prerogative of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition to criticize and give alternatives to the programs of the 

Government and that is what I intend to do today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I welcome the opportunity, Sir, to associate myself and my colleagues in service 

to the Saskatchewan people and I shall try to prove that this Government does not deserve to administer or 

govern the affairs of this province. And I intend to prove that it is not in the interests of our people to 

perpetuate an unimaginative administration which in my opinion is not even a housekeeping Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it is a tragic image of Canada to those who travel, study or experience. And I did a 

lot of travelling last year for good reasons to see thousands of healthy, young, educated Canadian youth 

walking along the highways, our roads and our streets, sleeping on river banks and under the trees of our 

parks. They may be tired, bearded or even dirty, but they are unhappy, these young people that one meets in 

his travels, those who stand on our highways with extended hand or a sign begging for a ride, east or west, 

just as long as they can get out of Saskatchewan. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

373 

I think it is sheer nonsense, Mr. Speaker, to hear the Minister for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) say that these young 

people are hippies, yippies and revolutionaries. Such generalizations, Mr. Speaker, are as untrue and as 

obnoxious as for someone to say all politicians are liars, crooks, egotists, or that they are all the same stamp 

and brand as the Hon. Member for Athabasca. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I think that it is true, Mr. Speaker, to say that the prodigious numbers of the 

unemployed youth are a demonstration of a symptom of the failure of our governments and of the social 

institutions to meet the challenges of our technological and technocratic times. 

 

I must admit, as a Canadian, that we, to some extent, are a selfish lot, unfortunately, and sometimes, because 

we are in a class or a group which is employed and have incomes near or sufficient to meet our daily needs, 

we are at times prompted to condemn and denigrate those who are not so fortunate. But I think it makes us 

feel guilty, particularly in this Legislature, to feel that after all, this is our failing for what we call a just and 

democratic society. Apparently it is not so just, nor is it that democratic. Essentially, I think we are 

sufficiently unconcerned to make the necessary timely sacrifices, such as would alleviate or remove the 

causes of such a national calamity as is evident today all around us. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, I for one believe that these matters should be our concern. We should find fair, just and 

effective answers to give all those human beings who have been stranded, who are lost and displaced, who 

have lost hope, dignity and even self-respect. It is through no fault of their own that they find themselves in a 

hopeless, degraded situation. True, I admit, there may be a few that do not want to help themselves anymore. 

Maybe they are beyond help, but there are not too many of these. Most are waiting for our society to find 

positive answers and it is up to government to supply those answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some may be poets of nature or they may be poets of another kind, but most of the people that I 

know, that I meet, that I associate with have the same kind of desires as other people have, as Members of 

the Legislature have. They want jobs. They want homes. They want a family. They want a degree of 

happiness. They want to build. These, Mr. Speaker, are the preservers of our nation. These are the strength of 

our democracy. These are, as well, those who can and do sometimes effect a revolution in a corrupt or 

inadequate society, even if they are not all philosophical, romantic leaders who may sometimes be basically 

unstable or non-conformists. I admit, Mr. Speaker, that I dislike conformity, for I believe that progress can 

only come with change, with reforms. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — But I believe that progress can be and must be achieved through parliamentary 

and democratic process. I agree, Mr. Speaker, with the mover of the Speech that the forces that have 

demonstrated themselves in Quebec recently are destructive. And they are destructive both to the 

revolutionaries using that 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

374 

force, as they are to those who resist force. So for the progressives here or wherever they may be the choice 

is clear and each must judge how to obtain changes democratically and in time before it is too late. 

 

One may ask about the role of Governments in such situations. I am afraid that I must admit that 

governments in Canada are sick and they don't know where they are going. I will also admit, as I see it, that 

our society is a sick society. I believe the environment of governments are in the confinement of a paraplegic 

society and until we recognize what our disabilities are, only then shall we be able to find a cure for our 

social and economic problems or ills. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Mr. Speaker, Liberals have said time and time again that people are only 

secondary when compared to business and industry. I have heard it too often. Indeed they have proven this 

belief. This is a concept which no normal, decent, self-respecting Canadian can accept, be he a politician or 

of any other calling. Logic cannot accept such a conclusion of values, after all, we are people, Homo 

Sapiens, if you like, who find ourselves on this earth spaceship, endowed with a degree of intelligence which 

no other living creature appears to have. This to me, Mr. Speaker, is sufficient reason why all other resources 

of this globe, animate or inanimate must be valued from the point of view of people. And how these 

resources can be developed and used in sustaining this intelligent human species. There appears to be no 

other philosophical purposes for social activities but to find the greatest degree of dignity, self-respect and 

some kind of ultimate happiness. And it is hard for me, at times, to see why we do not follow that kind of 

course. That is why my colleagues and many other people who have involved themselves in politics, and 

mine, I assure you, will now be short, for it has been long — 20 years . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — . . . that we have involved ourselves in not only that but in philosophy and ethics 

as well as other positive thinking and action as has been proven by my colleagues in this House during this 

debate. It is all done in the belief that somehow we may help to bring about the kind of essential condition in 

this space world that will make our survival safe and secure. 

 

But then, Mr. Speaker, there are others including a few in the Government opposite, who do not agree with 

such purposes and such human destiny, if their work is assessed and judged under a political microscope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recall that Robert F. Kennedy once said that there were two kinds of justice in America and 

we can say there are two kinds of justice in Canada. There is one for the rich and one for the poor. This was a 

practical observation which I think applies to Saskatchewan, because I can ask: what has the Government 

done to help the poor to get on their feet? What has it done to provide decent housing? I must say this 

because I see hundreds of shacks in my own community of Prince Albert. And I ask: what has it done to 

provide free universal education for people? After all we are only as strong as our weakest 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

375 

citizens. Under this Government the poor souls reap and sweat while the rich, like locusts and parasites 

devour the harvest. 

 

The poor are disunited, I agree, and their truths are rejected by those who are in power. So truth must hide 

behind closed doors while injustice and falsehoods parade on the television screens, in speeches, in reports 

and sometimes in this Legislature. 

 

And when we are outraged, Mr. Speaker, against injustices and falsehoods the establishment requires that we 

simulate and conform to old outdated traditions and when we are forced to do so we may lose our souls to 

gain the approbation of this hard and harsh society politically orientated. 

 

Why does government persist in saying all is well when it is not well. Take housing for instance. Paul 

Hellyer said on December, 1970 in an article "Housing and People," and I quote: 

 

The Canadian housing situation is bad and getting worse. At least this is true for many 

Canadians who are now searching for accommodation, for young married couples, those who 

rent and, seriously, for the poor. 

 

And then again he said: 

 

Who is responsible for the situation? And the answer is, we are forced to the conclusion that 

our governments have failed us. 

 

And I say that this Government sitting opposite, is certainly to blame. I am not saying this because I dislike 

the Hon. Members opposite. They are very fine people just as we are here. I am not talking about gentlemen 

but their programs. I put the blame on them, because constitutionally, Mr. Speaker, the Province has the 

prime responsibility in housing and in other matters, and they have badly failed in that responsibility. They 

have tried, as I know and as Hon. Members know, to delegate some of these responsibilities to municipalities 

and boards, but housing is still controlled by real estate promoters — you don't like the word — then 

developers if you like that better. And these have lagged as badly as the Liberal Government has. 

 

That is why the opportunities for housing were passed up by most of the municipalities. No new homes 

could be built. It could have been a boom for municipalities and people. Land could have been bought up 

many years ago, as has been done at Saskatoon, at reasonable prices instead of the outrageous demands by 

promoters and developers. Paul Hellyer estimates there could have been a saving of 50 per cent on the cost 

of land alone if that had been done. That is why I say the Government has failed, and the municipalities 

which have shared responsibility have failed too. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, the rich, the mandarins of our society have restricted the flow of money and charge 

outrageous interest rates and they control the price of land and of the dwellings. Free enterprise planners, 

promoters, officials and politicians in some cities which they control, prohibit the building of modest homes 

— not so much in Saskatchewan but certainly in Toronto — and thus perpetuate slums and poverty and 

hopelessness in our country. At best they suggest living in high-rise apartments at high rentals which are 

owned by these same rich 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

376 

mandarins. 

 

Imagine, Mr. Speaker, the employment, the business, the personal happiness of many people if governments 

would decide upon an extensive program of home-building for all those who are in need of family homes. 

And in Saskatchewan, as I said previously, we need thousands of homes. I know they do in my community, 

Regina and every town and village. I said 1,000 in my own city and another 1,000 in rural parts. We have 

records of the needs of these people. Another 20 per cent, according to experts, require repairs but have not 

the money to proceed with these repairs. 

 

Henry Ford said, and I quote: 

 

Money is only a transportation system conveying goods from one person to another. 

 

I should like the Liberal Government to tell us how much it has done to transfer funds to provide housing for 

the poor, from one person to another, the unemployed and others in need. Let this Government tell us how 

the much vaunted industrial program which they talk about will provide for the very urgent needs of our 

people. Nothing in the Throne Speech! Nothing substantial. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I must charge this Government that its administration of provincial affairs is a negative 

one, a destructive one and full of dangerous precedents. I, of course, recognize in all fairness that all the 

blame for the trouble that we have in Saskatchewan cannot be laid at the feet of the Liberal Government 

here. They have been encouraged and supported by their Liberal counterparts in Ottawa who are controlled 

by the powerful interests of Canada. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that, Federally and Provincially, Liberals join together like thieves robbing the 

innocent, the poor and the handicapped of their constitutional rights. The Liberals here and in Ottawa have 

sold the historic traditions of William Lyon McKenzie, of Sir Wilfred Laurier, of Papineau and of Riel for a 

mess of pottage, sold the Liberal traditions, the Liberal philosophy of a great party to modern capitalists, the 

modern counterparts of the feudal Lords of the old world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for too long they have been serfs, slaves and lackeys, who have continued to bend to the 

establishment, who have licked the boots of the powerful elite known as the private enterprise establishment. 

They only practise Socialism when it is politically expedient. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Mr. Speaker, Liberals of the past were willing to give their lives for the rights of 

Canadian people and if they could rise out of their graves and see those who call themselves Liberals I think 

they would do so. 

 

They would denounce these same Liberals and the leaders who falsely use that name today. The modern 

Liberal priority is not people, but it is the perpetuation of the power of the banks, the financial institutions 

who are often controlled internationally from outside of Canada, of mining companies, of international oil 

companies, of international machine companies — 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

377 

one of them is going off the market I noticed today, International Ferguson — of international chain stores, 

of bread manufacturers, of tobacco and liquor interests and of other industrial corporations, such as Wood 

Enterprises Pulp Mills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to continue after supper, and could we call it 5:30 o'clock p.m. now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to summarize what I said before supper, I think it is very clear what I said. 

Tonight I shall deal with such things as the economic security of our people, because I think the Throne 

Speech fails to indicate what course this Government is prepared to follow in this Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province depend essentially on our soil resources. No one here will argue 

with me, I am sure, that the millions of acres of prairie and parkland of Saskatchewan are not the greatest 

resource we have. We have other resources in abundance, of course, such as mineral wealth, potash, 

uranium, other minerals. They are limited in their development and possibilities and limited in production as 

the Government is well aware of. We also have forests producing wealth, but this is like a drop in the bucket 

in the overall picture as compared to the enduring soil that can produce from year to year with proper 

husbandry. One only has to travel to the East or to the West, British Columbia, or to Ontario and this fact 

becomes clear to any Canadian. Yet I ask, Mr. Speaker, what priority has this Government given this 

essential industry with the exception of a few more sheep that some farmers will be able to buy and a few 

more calves given to Indian and Metis people, or opening the doors of financial institutions who will 

continue to extract high interest rates from the primary producers. There is really nothing else. There are no 

grants of forgiveness to bonafide farmers or to those who desire to farm or ranch and who may be eminently 

suitable to that calling or to others who are highly qualified to establish themselves in a primary industry. 

There are indeed no loans of forgiveness, as I have said, or loans for farmers who wish to establish 

themselves in larger units. There is no policy whatsoever. Yet, the same Liberal Government with their 

friends in Ottawa give millions of dollars of public tax dollars to Mr. Landegger from New York to 

perpetuate his baronial estate. For our economy, for the building of a strong primary industry, for agriculture, 

for farmers' sons, for graduates of agriculture, there is nothing but the involvement in debt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — But if you are a promoter, Mr. Speaker, you don't need to know a thing about 

housing, about contracting, about forestry, and as long as you are a friend of the Liberal Party in 

Saskatchewan, as some people I know, people in Prince Albert, and in New York, you can get no end of free 

money, free capital, forgivable loans, Federal grants, tax concessions and reduced power and gas fees. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Indeed, this Liberal Government will pay up, even if the projects are not proven, 

as I shall indicate tonight. I say to 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

378 

this Government that policies should be fair to all people and they should be as good to the agricultural 

industry as they are for other industries. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Simply, because Saskatchewan cannot exist if farmers and ranchers continue to 

mortgage themselves forever. Saskatchewan must expand and must grow in order to compete with other 

parts of the world. The Government has to do something about it. 

 

Imagine, Mr. Speaker, if the 12 or 20 or more millions of grants that are coming from Ottawa to 

Saskatchewan were used to help the farmers, the fishermen — I mean communal fishermen — fur farmers as 

well, forestry people and other primary producers. We could save these people in those industries and those 

resource areas. Imagine if we invested our millions of dollars in mineral development, be it potash, or be it 

oil. We could develop as well our sands, our peats, our clays and create new industries. This money could be 

used to develop our own resources, for ourselves and for the Saskatchewan people with the use of Federal 

credit for those who need to be helped. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — For example, in the last few days I have been asking some questions of the 

Government. I wanted to know where we stood as far as one of the new industries are concerned. This pulp 

industry happens to be in my constituency. For the enlightenment of the Member for Estevan, who is not 

here just now, who doesn't seem to understand the difference between public ownership and private 

ownership, I should like to point out that I received some very interesting answers. We all know the amount 

of money that the Government has put in, the amount of guarantees the Government has put up. Look at the 

answer I got to the question. It tells us that is spite of the fact that there may be profits, we won't be able to 

receive any dividends until 1976. If this were a public corporation like the Timber Board or any other 

corporation, we should get the profits every year and benefit from the profit each year. But this profit is 

going to lie in the Prince Albert Pulp Company's treasury. Who is going to benefit I don't know, but we won't 

be able to touch a penny of it until 1976. Surely that is worth considering when you try to decide the 

difference between private enterprise and public companies such as we have, in the Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

compared to a corporation operated by the Government. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's for the election after next! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — There is another thing, I am sure the Hon. Member from Saskatoon will agree 

that this is not good what I am going to point out. I am sure he will be as concerned as I am. For example, we 

are a minor shareholder in this Prince Albert Pulp Company. We own only 30 per cent. I am not going into 

the details, I am not going to argue against the things we have already threshed out. I am saying this, that we 

do not control that company. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

379 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — When I read the reports in such newspapers as the Financial Post, I find out that 

pulp, ordinary pulp is today selling for $170 to $175 a ton. Then I find out that whatever arrangement has 

been made between this Government and the company, the people that control the company, Mr. Landegger, 

that our pulp, the best in Canada, is being sold for $135. If this was a company controlled by us, with the 

Government as a major shareholder, we should be able to say where that pulp is going to go to, and what the 

price will be. But the way it is we have absolutely no control over the price, and I estimate that another $9 

million is being dissipated into the air. 

 

With these couple of arguments, I think no amount of arguing from the Hon. Members opposite could 

convince sensible people that it is better to have it the way they have it, or whether it is better the way we 

have suggested it should be, particularly with our own resources. I can make it very, very simple so that even 

the Member for Saskatoon City Park-University can understand. 

 

You must remember, Mr. Speaker, that in 1929, the Dominion Government turned over the natural resources 

to the people of Saskatchewan. This is a constitutional fact, that means these resources are ours, just the 

same as the farm that I own is mine under the system that I live. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — The Government of Saskatchewan did the same as I did. I cleared the land, I 

broke up the land, put a crop into my land, I conserved the soil so it would produce in the future. Certainly 

logic says that I am entitled to that crop. The same thing with the Province of Saskatchewan, we have 

protected the forest industry, spent money on it, and on top of that we have built roads into the areas, brought 

in conservation programs, tried to see that the area is not contaminated. We have had decent programs of 

selective cutting. Yet today here is a Government that is willing to come in and let somebody from outside 

take the wealth out for next to nothing. They say this makes logic. 

 

I'll give you some more facts about what this Government is doing. Right in Prince Albert, somebody 

decided he wanted a factory to build homes. I think they gave a name to the proposed factory called Ad-Fab. 

Of course these people opposite don't believe in politics, these people who formed this company were 

Liberals, I guess you couldn't help that. The Mayor of Prince Albert, Mr. Longworth, a councillor of the city 

of Prince Albert; Mr. DuCommyn, another councillor; Mr. Martin, Mr. Martin's son, and a very prominent 

Liberal, Mr. Pelligrene. They had the old box factory which was worth as far as I was concerned, at least 

$100,000, which they have now valued at $200,000 which they received from the Government opposite for 

$30,000. The records are there from last year. They used that particular area to establish this new factory. 

Who put up the money? The people of Canada and Saskatchewan. The Government of Canada put up 

$300,000, the Province of Saskatchewan through SEDCO put up $230,000 of non-interest loan, forgivable in 

five years. These people got $520,000, they have a factory now which 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

380 

cost a half a million dollars, all they put up was $30,000, and they haven't produced one house yet. You 

swallow that! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — You tell me that your policies are in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan 

and you tell me that your policies are in the interests of the primary producers but you haven't given one cent 

to the farmers in grants or forgiveness, but you have given millions of dollars Federal and Provincial to the 

pulp mill, to Ad Fab, to a plant in North Battleford, to another plant in Prince Albert, The Domtar Creosoting 

Plant. All across the province millions and millions of dollars of people's money is given away but nothing 

for the people. This is private enterprise government, this is their way of doing things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know I can't convert any Member opposite. Somebody said that I was stubborn, but I think 

there are no more stubborn people than my hon. friends opposite. I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that every 

day when we begin our sessions, you Sir, lead us in a prayer before our Session commences. But this setting 

is not enough because thereafter, we have experienced bickering, interruptions, party politicking, which 

follow your prayers. I say this with all sincerity that with such ethics and morality we can only sink into the 

deep abyss of degeneration and despair. To be moral and responsible is to act positively and not negatively. 

So I say that this should be the attitude of the Government, a positive attitude, to discover and understand the 

needs of our people. Whether you want to listen to me or not, at least try to understand what I am trying to 

tell you on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, nearly a million of them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Because I believe in a positive way that we can still save this province. I can tell 

you this, when the New Democratic Party is elected, and it is going to be . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — . . . we will set up, just as we set up SEDCO and many other programs and 

policies that the Government Members now know and use, we will set up a corporation, a Saskatchewan 

Development Corporation. The Hon. Member from Estevan this afternoon, was trying to tell us, that the 

policies of the NDP of setting up corporations impose more taxes on the people of Saskatchewan, would 

burden them with more taxes. We don't have to do that, when you have a Government in which the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to have confidence, they will use their savings and put their savings into that 

development corporation, to develop their own farms, their own province and benefit from the profits 

thereof. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, just as important, as saving our economy, I think that 

we shall have saved our self respect and our dignity and our social structure, just as 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

381 

people in other parts of the world have done. I could give you examples of West Germany, Japan, sure the 

standards aren't as good as here but we have high standards because of the very large surplus of wealth. But 

they have done things that we can do. We can go forward the same way as many other people went forward 

to a better destiny. 

 

Surely after this seven years of Thatcher experiment of dog eat dog, free enterprise jungle, of spying on civil 

servants, a sell-out of resources, of derogation of people, no decent person including some Liberals opposite 

who sit in this Legislature would want to perpetuate this kind of Government and the political system it has 

built up and represents. I am sure the Members opposite, Sir, who see the light are disgusted with what is 

happening to our human natural environment. 

 

Let us talk about the Minister of Mineral Resources — he is not here. I am sorry to get up again as he did, 

some years ago when he said that we must exploit these resources because we are not sure that they will be 

here 30 years from now. Well, I'll tell you, Sir, that if this Government stays, not 30 years, but another five 

years, there will be no resources left. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They were all there when you left, I'll tell you. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I don't want anybody opposite to get me wrong, I believe in co-operating. I think 

we could co-operate as we did in the recent situation of the Canada Games at Saskatoon. We did a wonderful 

job. We could co-operate right here and get things done for the people of Saskatchewan, if you would only 

learn what it's all about, and you haven't learned because you haven't had it hard enough. Some of you have 

struggled, I know that many have had hard times, including the Hon. Treasurer. He knows what labor is all 

about. He worked in the woods as I did, and he knows that he knows, and I know he knows. But he gets tied 

up in a situation and he hasn't got the guts to get out of it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this about the Members on this side of the 

House, that we are determined to work with our leaders towards the goals that have been outlined by my 

colleagues so far, that will give our people a peaceful, safe, prosperous environment. And we're going to be 

concerned and sympathetic towards their needs, and we're going to be dedicated to this province and this 

country. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's what the Wafflers say, isn't it. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I don't think any person, Waffler or anybody else who could have made a lesser 

contribution than the Hon. Member made this afternoon. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

382 

AN HON. MEMBER: — The truth hurts. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — But I do say, Mr. Speaker, this, this is what I'm trying to get across, that we 

might have to take unorthodox steps in order to bring order out of the chaos that exists. And I remember, and 

maybe it wasn't such an important event, but I do remember when the Diefenbaker administration was faced 

with a bad economic situation here in the West, and that in spite of the recommendations of his budget 

bureau or whatever they call it in Ottawa, not to proceed, nevertheless, Mr. Diefenbaker came through with a 

program of giving some assistance to farmers. They called it an acreage payment and I received some of 

those payments. True, it was paid only once every second year, it appeared to me, and I think I told Mr. 

Diefenbaker, I think I said to him, it's strange but you must think that we only have hard times every second 

year. We have hard times every year, but at least he did something. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — And the Provincial Treasurer knows. I told him before and I shall be talking 

about it in the Budget Debate, he has consistently told us, and he knows he's wrong, consistently told us that 

the important thing was to balance the budget. And I shall repeat what I told you, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, 

one time, the way you balance the budget, I could balance it anytime, a grade four kid could balance it that 

way. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — You know last year, I had a deficit of $3,000 on my farm, I'll have a little bit left 

from a sessional indemnity, and I'll be able, instead of seeding a thousand or eight hundred acres of crop, I 

could put in 200 acres into crop and balance my budget. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Price of barley went up. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Oh yes, big deal, ten cents. I can balance my budget, but that isn't going to save 

me. I may have to go to the banks and borrow money because I had a crop failure. And because you've got a 

crop failure in the Province of Saskatchewan and the economy is bad, you should have the foresight to 

borrow a few millions of dollars for capital construction and capital works and thus put people to work and 

put money in their pockets. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Keep it up, Bill, give it to them, Bill. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Let's look at some of the performance of this Government, Mr. Speaker, let's 

look at it. We have often heard in the past few days, and for years now — seven years — we've heard from 

the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer, whom I like very much. I mean he's a very funny . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — All Liberals are good. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

383 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It's that Irish wit. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Yes, I was going to say that. I didn't want to use the word, funny, but I did like 

his Irish wit, but anyway he said that foreign industry must be encouraged and assisted because our own 

people won't invest in resource industry. Now you're not going to like what I'm going to tell you in a few 

minutes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I want to charge today, Mr. Speaker, I want to charge this Government with 

insincerity and deliberate misrepresentation of the facts when they make such statements, and I'm going to 

prove it. The first thing to remember, Mr. Speaker, is that it was this Premier, who is not in the House right 

now — I'm not saying he's not honest, he probably is sincere personally — but I'm charging his Government 

with insincerity, because what did they do? At Hudson Bay? They wiped out the Saskatchewan investors, the 

Saskatchewan people, who put up Saskatchewan money, shareholders from Prince Albert, friends of yours, 

Mr. Provincial Treasurer, who put up money in that mill, because they wanted to own a part of the industry 

of Saskatchewan. And what did your cold colleague, your Premier, do? He sold them out for 57 cents on the 

dollar to whom? To MacMillan-Blodell. Before he foreclosed on them, why didn't he offer them the same 

kind of deal? Why didn't he think of these Saskatchewan investors and tell them? We will let you have the 

factory, we'll forgive half of the mortgage, you can have it for 57 cents on the dollar. Oh no, they were 

Saskatchewan people, they were Canadians. But you had to find somebody from outside, 

MacMillan-Blodell. That's right. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, I was just talking about you, and I think you should 

hear this because this may even make you think, of what you have been doing, how you have been sinning. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Can't make him think. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I do admire the Premier, he always has a smile on his face. I'm not going to 

repeat what I said, he should have been in his seat. The record is there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Now the Athabasca pulp mill. I'm not going to go very deeply into that now, 

there will be another opportunity when you bring the Bill in. And to prove my point I'll use another 

illustration to bring out more forcibly what happened between the Government and a private industry. I want 

to talk about a situation that developed in Meadow Lake. I asked the question the other day. I asked, "Have 

there been any representations from the people in Meadow Lake to establish an industry?" If those aren't the 

exact words, if you want me to read exactly what I said, I could read it. They made it an Order for Return to 

make sure that I didn't get the answer 'till maybe after the 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

384 

election, Mr. Speaker. But I know the answer. I met with good Liberals up there in Meadow Lake, people on 

the Liberal executive, and some who were not Liberals, it wasn't just one person who told me the whole story 

about the sawmill, and it's a sad story indeed. And I asked the Premier this, and he's refused to answer my 

question. Who and what, and I know and I could give him the names if he wants me to, but I asked this 

question in a general way, "Did the local people who interviewed you, Sir, get any consideration?" They did 

not, Mr. Speaker, because they were Saskatchewan people, local people, Canadian people. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — They had no money. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — They were not the Barons from New York, they were not Mr. Landegger, so Mr. 

Premier bypassed them after MacMillan-Blodell turned down the sawmill in Meadow Lake, and though he 

had every reason to believe that they would be able to form their own company, and get grants from the 

Federal Government, and the Provincial Government, so they could own the sawmill in Meadow Lake, to be 

owned by Saskatchewan people, by Canadian people, those who he says and the Provincial Treasurer says, 

refused to invest, but they were willing to invest, and they were Liberals, and yet what happened? The 

Premier ran to Mr. Landegger, bypassed his people at Meadow Lake, went to Mr. Landegger, and made an 

agreement with Mr. Landegger to establish a sawmill in Meadow Lake. And he dares to get up in this House 

and say, "Well the Canadian people won't invest, that's why we can't have our own industries." With that 

kind of attitude, that kind of behavior, nobody will ever have confidence and invest. You let down the people 

in Hudson Bay, you let down the people in Meadow Lake, and you let down the people all across the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And you took the smile off his face. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — And the smile is gone from the Premier's face. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Our constitutional Liberal Government will sell us and make us slaves of the 

international capitalistic exploiters of humanity, any day, any day in preference to letting our people develop 

their own resources. 

 

Now under the former CCF Government, Mr. Speaker, we took a pride in developing our own resources, 

whether it was through Crown corporations or through Saskatchewan planned companies. 

 

MR. GUY: — Tell us what it was, tell us what it was. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I will, I will, if you just keep quiet for a minute, I'll tell you about it. I could give 

you the figures. We made millions of dollars of profit, and I'm not talking about the Power Corporation or 

the Telephone Corporation. And I need not be ashamed, standing up here before you, Mr. Speaker, for 

having tried to do something for industry for our people in the 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

385 

Province of Saskatchewan, even if some of it didn't work out. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — The Timber Board. The sodium sulphate plant in the Premier's constituency of 

Morse, which brings us in half a million dollars of profit every year, and our other Crown corporations, such 

as power and telephones, are good ones for the people of this province. And they were intended by the CCF 

to benefit the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. We did not have to make special deals of giveaways 

to promoters, nor was this Province of Saskatchewan bled for purposes of development nor were people 

required to pay higher and higher taxes to carry out their Liberal projects. Now I want to be fair, I don't think 

anyone can say that I'm unfair because I'm being hard on the Government. That's my job. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — And I must agree that at times we may have to expect some importation of 

foreign industry into Saskatchewan, and Canada. We're living in a private enterprise society in the western 

world, and we've got to be realistic, but only as a last resource, but only as a last resource . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Give it to them, give it to them, Bill. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Apparently, Mr. Premier, they don't like what I'm saying, so I'm going to bring 

up something else. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — In a different way. I still think there can be some chance for conversion of the 

Hon. Members opposite so I'm going to . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You're too optimistic, you're too optimistic. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I think, Mr. Speaker, there is, seriously, I think there is a special and serious 

challenge facing this nation and this Government and province in connection with present and future 

resource development. I'm not going to say it, but I'm going to give you the words of your friend, Mr. 

Fowler, who is associated with the pulp industry, President of the Canadian Pulp and Paper Association, and 

I shall refer to a report he made on November 25, 1970, quoting Mr. Fowler. I have it here. I admire him 

because he tells the truth as he sees it and I think he's right, and I quote what he says. Listen just for a 

moment, you unbelievers. Here's what he says, and I quote: 

 

I think we have generally failed in our approach in the use of natural resources, to recognize 

that we are ourselves part of the natural environment we are exploiting. We have no right to 

neglect the human factors and values 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

386 

involved in the process of using our great forest resources. 

 

This is exactly what I've been talking about, and you don't understand. Well, Mr. Fowler is trying to make 

you understand. And, Mr. Speaker, surely this same statement can be made applicable to all other resources 

whether mineral resources, prairie resources, or any of the resources of our land. And I agree with Mr. 

Fowler when he says that we've been sitting under the same tree rather than running fast enough to reach the 

ultimate goals of our responsibility and our destiny. This is what he said, and that's what I've been saying. 

And I'll also agree, Mr. Speaker, with this, as a Canadian, with the Canadian Foresters which sponsors an 

independent Canada, politically and economically. It is, of course, intended to be a non-partisan 

organization, a non-political movement for achieving a dignified nationalistic stance, which is lacking, 

apparently, today. So let me illustrate, Mr. Speaker, at what has been happening here at home. I must refer to 

the speech of the President of Gulf Oil, I wasn't going to mention anything, but the Premier had to get up and 

he had to read some parts of the speech that was made by the President of Gulf Oil when they were up in the 

Athabasca area, invited by the Minister and Member for Athabasca. Here's what he said. I have a copy of the 

speech. If you want a copy, I'll turn it over to you, all kinds of it, good political stuff for the Liberals. But 

here's what he said, Dr. J.W. Hardy, Gulf Minerals Vice-President. This is the man who said, and I quote: 

 

Twenty years ago when we worked in Manitoba, no one in his right mind would work in 

Saskatchewan with a Socialist Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — 

 

But mining developments are now welcome in Saskatchewan. 

 

Either he was ignorant or he didn't know what he was talking about because we had more mining 

development when the CCF were in power than we ever had under these people here from the hard rock 

Liberal country. 

 

But I'm not concerned so much with this kind of stuff. I'm concerned with something else, and that's my 

personal and national dignity. Because I say, Mr. Speaker, that statement is an insult to the intelligence of the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — It's an insult to our nationalism, to our political prerogatives and our freedoms, 

above all, our freedoms. And sadly to say, the Premier, who sat there with them, got up but said nothing. 

Certainly, the Premier of Saskatchewan listened to this Vice-President of Gulf and failed to defend the rights 

of the people whom he represents, and who elected him to his high office of government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — The Premier failed us as a 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

387 

leader at a critical time. He should have pointed out to this gentleman that we do have rights and freedom, 

and he should have objected to the slander of our people. And I can forgive the Premier and the Government 

many things, for their failures and blunders, which come about from their political biases for maybe they'll 

change their directions sometime. But I can hardly forgive the Premier for failing to show a pride in this 

Province of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan, because this Government and the former 

Government was only here by the will and desire of the people of this province, and no foreigner is going to 

come to this country and tell us that we have no right to choose the kind of government we desire to have. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — This is what hurts more than the economics of it all. 

 

MR. STEUART: — He's a Canadian. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Well he's a heck of a Canadian when he tells us the kind of governments we are 

supposed to elect. The next time the Government sitting there is going to be a New Democratic Party 

Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — And the people will have chosen that Government and no outsider has the right 

to come in and tell the people that they were wrong. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Freedom of speech. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — And what a freedom! Mr. Speaker, when comes the time, surely it is right to 

seriously think and work in the direction of Canadian economic independence as the CIC suggests. I agree 

that we must have a Canadian Development Corporation, and a Saskatchewan Development Corporation to 

foster Canadian participation in our economic growth and resource development. I agree that some 

provincial governments, such as the Liberals in Saskatchewan and in Newfoundland, have encouraged 

foreign control of our resources. I have to accept that a national development program should be allocated to 

best develop the depressed areas of Canada by the Ottawa Government, and unconditionally through 

Canadian ownership, be it private or co-operative or public-owned. 

 

I think that the books in our schools and in our universities are too costly to students — because I know as 

many Hon. Members know if they are sending students to university — that there should be more Canadian 

matter rather than everything about the United States. I say that our approach should not be towards the 

knowledge of George Washington and about New York and about other states but that we should know 

something about the great men of Canada, whether they were Laurier or MacDonald or Woodsworth or 

Diefenbaker or even Thatcher. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Or Louis Riel! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Or Louis Riel, as my Hon. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

388 

seat mate says. I say that in our large cities the television and radio programs today are essentially American 

oriented except for the CBC. For the simple reason that it is a service that is still Canadian. I believe we 

should uphold and improve it because it is still something for Canadians to be proud of. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Very recently the Ryerson Press has come under United States' control. We are 

gradually being sold down the river. I do think also and I have labor colleagues here maybe they might want 

to disagree with me, I don't think they would. I think also in some instances when the United States' union 

executives have vetoed arrangements by Canadian branches as witnessed in the case of the Toronto 

newspaper strike, that it should give us some serious thought as to whether we should not insist that our 

labor unions be Canadian controlled. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to see Canadian architecture, Canadian drama, Canadian 

programs of pollution control. I want to see laws and regulations safeguarding our traditions, our cultural 

development and our resources. It makes us Canadians unhappy to see such as the dangers threatening our 

ocean waters, our oil companies polluting our cities, or mining companies and pulp mills polluting the air 

and waters of our land. And other foreign subsidiaries threatening our general environment and then pointing 

their noses at us, as did the Vice-President of Gulf. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I think the Hon. Members have now got the message. Maybe I can convert the 

few that are left. 

 

You know, Alvin Hamilton is reported in Macleans of December, 1970, as having said this: "My God we are 

Canadians." And this isn't an NDP ramp or a Tory ramp or a Walter Gordon ramp. I could say also, my 

friends in this Legislature, that this isn't a Thatcher ramp either. It belongs to everybody and I hope that 

everybody, every Canadian recognizes this fact and that from now on we shall all have a more positive 

direction for the protection and survival of our land and people. And by that I mean human and natural 

resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose to go closer come. I should like to paint you a picture of what is happening in my part 

of the province as I see it. I see people living there under depressed conditions. I see businesses being 

bankrupted in spite of the pulp industry in Prince Albert. I see farmers living under conditions of poverty, 

working people unemployed, many have left and too many have to depend upon the dole or what we call 

social welfare. As a matter of fact, I may have something to say about that part of it at a later time. 

 

Our young people are transients, not being able to get sufficient assistance either from their parents or from 

the Government for a better education. And so what happened — they've been leaving the farms and moving 

into the larger cities and communities of central Canada and the Coast. Tens 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

389 

of thousands of other people are fleeing from this province and from the North and one asks why this kind of 

thing has to happen. What is it that is wrong with Government policies and programs and it does not take an 

expert to decide what is wrong. The problem is that there aren't any satisfactory policies or programs and we 

don't seem to have a government that is aware that there could be. 

 

I personally believe that people are our main resource and not only good for votes as some Liberal friends I 

know believe. I think that making promises of lower taxes, of bringing industrial development and removing 

restrictions when a political party doesn't intend to keep those promises is unfair to the people of the 

province. 

 

MR. GUY: — That's why you got defeated in '64! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Yes, we got defeated in 1964. 

 

MR. GUY: — That's why you got beat. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — I didn't get beat. 

 

MR. GUY: — But your government did! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — No, the people got defeated because they believed in your promises and later on 

the Premier at a convention made a statement . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — . . . well, the people should have known election promises were never intended 

to be kept. Well, I'll tell you, Sir, that the people on this side do believe that when we come out with a 

program that our promises, God help us, will be kept. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Imagine a Prime Minister disrespectful of the people of this country, and 

particularly of the West, telling us that something should be done with our grain crops. Two previous 

governments had been in power which had told farmers, "You grow wheat, we'll sell it." Mr. Trudeau gets up 

in Winnipeg and says, "You grow the wheat, you sell it." This is how much concern you get from Liberal 

governments. It is about time we had a little more concern from such gentlemen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what has this Government done about tax reductions for people? They have done something for 

industry, which is owned and operated by foreigners I have named. The pulp mill in Prince Albert pays four 

mills of taxes but the people in Prince Albert, as the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) 

knows, pays 102 mills. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Canada Cement, established in Cory, you will all recall, 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

390 

Sir, received a tax concession of many tens of thousands of dollars for a good number of years. But the 

taxpayers of Cory got no such concession. And yet Canada Cement comes out with the statement of millions 

of dollars of profit every year. And the question is who can afford to pay higher taxes and who can afford not 

to pay higher taxes? This Government takes the attitude that people, the peasants, of Saskatchewan — as 

they think of them — they must be the ones that must pay the taxes. 

 

You will recall, Sir, that only a year or so ago the fuel and farm tax — in spite of the low incomes of farmers 

— was increased. The Government comes through with the Throne Speech and says, "Well, we're going to 

increase the Homeowner Grant." They take hundreds of dollars out of the pockets of the farmers and they're 

going to give them another $10 Homeowner Grant and like the boy who like little Tom Thumb put in this 

thumb and pulled out a plum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the acid test may be this, and I am thinking of Franklin D. Roosevelt when he said: 

 

The test of progress is not in whether we add to the abundance of those who have much but 

whether we provide for those who have little. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Now if we judge this Government on that statement by Mr. Roosevelt, then it 

can only be said — and I am saying it — that it has failed the needy people of Saskatchewan and it must be 

put out. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Many young people, including Liberals, in your constituency, Mr. Minister for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and in all constituencies are defecting to the New Democratic Party and even the 

organizers are moving in to help the New Democratic Party to get elected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — They are intent on removing this inconsiderate, heartless administration. The 

Metis and Indian people are supporting the NDP today because they have experienced Liberal unconcern, the 

kind of unconcern the Hon. Member had this afternoon in this House. Do you remember his speech — 

derogatory in every way, Mr. Speaker? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Do the Ministers want me to talk about it? I shall talk about it now or I can leave 

it to the next debate but I will bring up one point. I'm talking to the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. 

Barrie) for whom I have a liking — I don't think it's his fault. I think it is the fault of the Government. For 

seven years now I have begged the Minister to consider putting in a trail down to Deschambault Lake to a 

settlement of Indian people there. Not because I want it, Mr. Minister, but because the natives want to be 

able to get out with their product of 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

391 

fish and fur and maybe go and get a job somewhere. A private individual that lives up at Deschambault, 

there on the road, put in a narrow trail, yet the Government can't find the money to put the road into 

Deschambault. This is only 30 miles over land but when it comes down to providing this $30,000 or $40,000 

for a road, or giving another promoter a grant, we know what happens. Nothing for Deschambault but they 

say that Ottawa is going to give $12 million for another mill to pad the pockets of Landegger. Oh, they've got 

that kind of money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) is not here, but I should like to say this to him that I am pleased that 

he has decided to file the statement concerning the business of the Prince Albert pulp mill. I say it is a 

miracle because for some years now — four or five years — though I have repeatedly asked for this 

information yet it was always denied. They wouldn't give us information; it was not in the public interest 

they said. So I can thank him at this time for bringing forth at least some information as to what has 

happened. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is the responsibility of a government, whether they like it or not, whether it is 

good politically or not, to reveal all their business to the people of Saskatchewan who pay their salaries in 

this House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — And I am glad that a step has been made by the Provincial Treasurer to start to 

reveal some of the information that the people of Saskatchewan should know. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I don't need to tell you that this is a realistic world based on planning, charts, 

statistics, profit and loss statements, therefore, I believe that full exposure must be made because an ignorant 

public is not good for the Government. 

 

The Government of Manitoba exposed all the statements and figures concerning the Churchill industry. It 

was a sad story. Our story in Saskatchewan was not quite so sad. But until this Session we have been unable 

to get any information whatsoever. We've been having difficulties over the past three years getting 

information about the NorCan deal and other deals. Again I say I want to commend the Provincial Treasurer 

for, at long last, taking the step to give us at least something that we can understand and look into. 

 

I don't like the Premier or anyone else getting up and saying, "Well, everything is just fine in Saskatchewan. 

Good things are here and things are improving." We've heard this kind of boasting since the Liberals took 

power in 1964, about the development of this province but there has been nothing new and things have gone 

from good to bad and from bad to worse. They were good when we were the government and then they got 

bad and they have gotten worse since. It isn't just this Government that is to blame. It is also its counterpart 

in Ottawa who have made things more difficult. 

 

Specifically when we look at statistics and reports we find that there is more unemployment now than there 

was a year or two ago. There are more families today with lower incomes who are ending up on welfare than 

there were a year or two ago. The prices to farmers and producers for eggs, hogs and other 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

392 

primary products in many cases are much lower than they were. Fur farmers are going out of business, as the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) has admitted. All this means a lower standard of living for our 

people. There have been more bankruptcies and cutbacks and declining sales in retail establishments and 

inevitable business losses by business people in our province. 

 

Towns and villages are dying. Railway stations are being closed up by railway companies and railway men 

are being dismissed from service. In talking to a man working on the railway the other day, I was told, that 

there has been less freight moving now than he can ever remember in the last 10 years. 

 

My son is a druggist at Unity. He told me that the drugstore business has slipped about 10 per cent during the 

last year as compared to 1969. In 1968 retail stores had a gain but not in 1969 or 1970 across Saskatchewan. 

In one large retail chain store in Regina where I happened to walk into the other day I was told, "You know, 

we haven't sold one single color TV to a farmer this winter." 

 

MR. BOLDT: —That doesn't hurt them one bit! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — But the Hon. Minister of Highways can understand that the farmers haven't got 

the money. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — That doesn't hurt them one bit, they can do without . . . 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Well, maybe they can live without a color TV but I believe that it is good for a 

person to see the best of everything and there's one thing that color TV can give you, it can show you the 

beauty of our country and a lot of other things. And it is a pity that farmers who work so hard — and you 

know what that means, Mr. Minister — that they can't afford to buy a color TV. If you look at the stock 

market, and the bond market you will see that the situation is very comparable to that in 1929. The lows are 

going lower and things are getting worse. Yet the Hon. Premier there and some of his colleagues, say, "Oh, 

everything is getting better. Everything is fine." Well, God keep us from that kind of goodness. On top of 

that we find beyond our country that American troops have now wandered into Laos with instructions to use 

every weapon available, except nuclear bombs. And the question is when are they going to use those. 

 

And so I say to the Members of this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, that things are not so good. You see nothing 

but dissatisfaction, strikes, demonstrations, hopelessness. And no one needs to tell us, including the Premier, 

that we are on the way to good times. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — We're on the upward . . . 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Only if you change governments with a different direction, with a different 

program, a positive direction instead of a negative direction such as we offer to the Hon. Members in the 

Government opposite. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

393 

The sad fact, Mr. Speaker, today is — you know, from the remarks I hear opposite — that the Government 

hasn’t any answers. When we suggest answers they won’t accept them. They don’t want them. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What answers, Bill? 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — You have no program of reduction of the load of welfare. Have you? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — You asked for it. I gave it to you. What is your program to reduce welfare? The 

Minister got up today and he boasted they are going to increase welfare. Well, the people of Saskatchewan 

don’t want welfare. They want work and wages. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That’s why we are putting in a pulp mill. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — All right. You better put in a different government and we’ll do something about 

it. And what are you doing about bringing back the 90,000 people that left the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . pulp mill! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — Yes, another pulp mill to take out our forest resources, to bring in people from 

other provinces and provide these with employment while our own people in Prince Albert, farmers who 

have low incomes who have had deficits, can’t get a job in the pulp mill unless somehow or another they 

know some very prominent Liberal who might speak for them and in that way get a job out in the bush. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — This Government is organized, Mr. Speaker, against farmers, laborers, against 

teachers and other professional people as well. That is my opinion and I think that I have already proven this 

to be a fact. 

 

You had a political heeler on the board of arbitration for trustees and teachers. Right? You have a political 

heeler and spies in the city of Prince Albert in the Department of Natural Resources, and as I mentioned 

before, if one tries to get a job, he has to pass a political test. You call this democracy and freedom. 

 

If you want some more, I’ll give it to you. This is an iron-fisted Government and it has the wrong attitudes. 

Yet living in a democracy, talking about democracy, a government should act democratically. You know 

what I mean by democracy. I don’t mean just a simple majority, I mean acceding to the will of the majority 

of people in this province, which you don’t do. That is one reason why your Government will be out. 

Because,  

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

394 

Mr. Speaker, there must be communication, co-ordination between the Government and its people and 

between various institutions and between teachers and the Government, the doctors and the Government, 

businessmen and farmers and the Government, to find out what the answers are that are required to be found, 

and to have the guts or the courage, if you want to use a better word, to try and implement the suggestions 

that people give you and that the Opposition gives you. Only then we shall be on the way to prosperity and 

better times. Then we shall be able to say things are getting better. We must, Mr. Speaker, in these critical 

times, sit down and try to find out what some of the answers are to our problems. 

 

I see progress in many countries. I see it in Japan, where people co-operate with the Government, I see it in 

some of the social-democratic countries which are trying sincerely to find out what is desirable for the 

people under their jurisdiction. They sit down together, they discuss problems and agree to programs that the 

people want. It could be, if we weren't so stubborn and foolish, that we could do the same thing but we 

sometimes feel that by using a phrase, 'I am a Liberal,' 'I am a Conservative,' or 'I am NDP,' that that is all 

you have to say. Well that's not enough. "It isn't the name," as Alexander Pope said, "that you call yourself, 

it's the things you do that matter." That's what matters, and this Government has not performed or done the 

kind of things that the people want. We may have to make political and other sacrifices, Mr. Speaker, we 

may even make some people angry in order to correct some of these injustices. We may have to transfer 

some of the income from those who have to those who have not. This is a common process. It might be 

necessary to have subsidies, because, subsidies have worked under certain conditions, certain times. In 1931, 

if I may give you an example, some $13 million, it could have been $80 million, it doesn't matter, millions of 

dollars, was set up in a stabilization fund, a program, which ultimately gave the Treasury of Canada a $9 

million profit, but it did a job for the economy. There was no cost to the state but the transfer of such funds, 

which became a profitable situation as I have said, brought about an important achievement, that expanded 

employment, it expanded the mining industry and business profits. 

 

In my city of Prince Albert for example, to get closer to home, if this Government or any Government cut 

out the transfer of funds from the Government to the city of Prince Albert, I would say that 90 per cent of the 

merchants would fold up in spite of the pulp mill. Therefore you must provide funds for capital expansion 

when the economy requires it and you have not been doing that. You made promises, of winter works, but 

you didn't carry out the commitment. I asked the question the other day, how much was spent in Turner 

Lake, as I should ask about any other place. Nothing was done to begin building the school there for winter 

employment. 

 

I remember suggesting to this Government, I think a year ago, to consider a moratorium for depressed 

farmers. This is nothing new, it was done in 1934 when debts were cancelled and moratorium was in effect. 

You may recall the Farm Creditors' Arrangement Act. Oh, I know my hon. lawyer friend doesn't like that, 

he's probably got a lot of money invested in mortgages. He wouldn't like a moratorium, he wouldn't like an 

adjustment act, but as I said there must be sacrifices made and this is one of the sacrifices that people like 

you who have money should be 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

395 

willing to make if you are a good Canadian. Now I recall quite well in 1936 that mortgage companies agreed 

to a blanket reduction between the debtors and themselves, and I ask this Government and this Premier, if 

they have explored that area, are they proposing anything of the kind in the Throne Speech? Not at all. Are 

you intending to meet the lenders in an attempt to save the economy? No. Save the debtors of 

Saskatchewan? No. I am afraid you have done nothing to satisfy the needs and the desires of the people of 

Saskatchewan and therefore you must go. 

 

What have you done about consumer prices? Is there anything in the Throne Speech about that? What do you 

propose to do? Northing. Yet this Government admits that consumer prices are high in general and are a 

warning that when people are discontented there is going to be trouble. I know as well as you know that 

irritation breeds revolution and because this Government has failed in the trust of people there will be if 

nothing else a political revolt and you, my hon. friends and Members of this Legislature sitting in the 

Government, will be sent back to your ranches or wherever you come from. You and your party will be 

completely eliminated for your failures. Don't be downhearted it may be good for you to get a rest. 

 

Just as the Trudeau election proved within the Liberal Party the ascendence of new people so the New 

Democrats of Saskatchewan will also move in after the next election to carry out the job that must essentially 

be done. People know, Mr. Speaker, that Governments must be concerned, because of our system of 

government, our constitutional responsibility that Governments must be concerned with the quality of 

peoples' way of life, with their health, with their education, their character and living standards. 

 

People know that Governments must carry out their duty to protect, conserve and utilize environment, be it 

the soil, wildlife, minerals, air and water. People know that Governments must use their authority to direct 

and control industry, business, labor and professions in a democratic way to achieve the greatest efficiency in 

a national community. And people know that this Government has failed its responsibilities in spite of the 

glowing reports and accounts that we have heard from Hon. Members opposite, the Government benches. 

Our people also know that they must put out the Thatcherites who have failed to legislate according to the 

needs of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could say much more and maybe I shall on another occasion but you must have realized that I 

could not possibly support the Throne Speech or the motion, but must support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C.L.B. ESTEY (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for not being in 

my seat when the Hon. Member's speech ended because I listened for two hours and I had no idea that the 

end was approaching. 

 

However, at the outset, Mr. Speaker, I join with others in this House in congratulating the mover and the 

seconder of the Speech from the Throne for the addresses which they delivered a few days ago. I also 

congratulate as other Members have done, the Member for City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) for the 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

396 

contribution which he has made to the success of the Canada Winter Games. In my opinion few events have 

taken place in the history of our province which have brought to our province such recognition. It is 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the Members from Saskatoon during the last session were not unanimous in 

their praise and support of the Winter Games. 

 

I now want for a moment to refer to Homecoming '71. I do this for two reasons: firstly, a few months ago the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) attempted most unsuccessfully to make Homecoming a political 

football. He was answered by the Prince Albert Herald to which the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Guy) 

referred this afternoon. Secondly, I think the most childish effort since I have been in this Legislature is the 

remark of the Leader a few months ago that he was going to publish or have printed stickers for bumpers, 

'NDP Homecoming '71.' I commend the Leader for having second thoughts on that score because so far as I 

know such stickers have not appeared. 

 

From the information we have concerning Homecoming as of this date I am of the opinion that Homecoming 

will be a tremendous success. I shall also venture that no less than 70,000 people over and above our normal 

tourist trade will return to our province to celebrate with us Homecoming '71. To those Member who may 

not know . . . 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — They won't stay. 

 

MR. ESTEY: — I shall deal with the Hon. Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) when I come to 

refer to that encyclopedia of which I understand he is the editor. The province, as you know, Mr. Speaker, 

was some time ago divided into 12 areas, each with a chairman, to look after our Homecoming activities. 

There are, as of this date, many local committees. According to our Homecoming calendar, there are in the 

vicinity of 300 Homecoming activities which have already been planned. As you are aware, the original 

theme for Homecoming was suggested by the Saskatchewan Tourist Association and the co-operation by our 

Homecoming branch from that association and many other associations in our province has been 

tremendous. It is, of course, our hope that these people who come to our province for Homecoming '71 will 

return in the future and thereby contribute to our permanent tourist industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for the past few days I have been reading the NDP pamphlet entitled "New Deal for 

People." We are told that this represents the NDP platform in the next election. The only conclusion which 

one can come to after reading this rag, which we are told is a proposed platform, is that the Waffle group has 

made great inroads into the NDP party. And that Socialism and the old Regina Manifesto will form the basis 

of the party platform in the forthcoming election. 

 

Under the section dealing with employment, the Members opposite are going to consider and I quote, "The 

feasibility of bringing the potash industry under public ownership." My initial comment, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there are not sufficient monies in the Province of Saskatchewan to purchase even a 50 per cent interest in the 

physical assets of our potash industry. This is rather interesting, Mr. Speaker, the point to which I am going 

to refer is that 10 or 12 years ago the Socialists made a deal on royalties with the initial potash companies 

that 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

397 

came into this province, whereby potash royalties insofar as some companies are concerned, were frozen for 

a period of 12 years. Now, Mr. Speaker, this party proposes in this "New Deal for People" under the section 

entitled "Resource and Economic Development," — they propose this — that they are going to re-negotiate 

these royalties with a view to not honoring the contracts which were negotiated when they were the 

government. 

 

This document, this so-called "New Deal For People," then proposes, as we have heard, to establish the 

family farm. But the document is very silent in its attempt to define the family farm. Mr. Speaker, we are 

looking forward with great interest to a definition of the family farm by the prosperous Member for Kelsey 

(Mr. Messer). We hope to get this definition the next time he is on his feet. It is our hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

his facts on the family farm will not be as inaccurate as the facts which he gave to this House in connection 

with negotiations between Parsons and Whittemore and the Government of Manitoba in connection with The 

Pas pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since last July the people of Saskatchewan have witnessed the fact that the NDP party is split 

asunder. Now, Mr. Speaker, to illustrate that point, I want to refer to a meeting to which my colleague, the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Guy) referred this afternoon. Now this meeting took place in the city of 

Saskatoon in the Deputy Leader's (Mr. Romanow) constituency, to which were invited the aspirants for the 

office of Leader of the National New Democratic Party. At this meeting the Deputy Leader of the New 

Democratic Party of our province was the chairman, and apparently during the time of this meeting a Mr. 

Laxer, a university professor and a Waffler, who is a candidate for the leadership of the NDP party, got on 

the wrong plane when he left Toronto and arrived in Regina. But the meeting was in Saskatoon, typical NDP 

logic. Apparently the deputy chairman of the meeting in Saskatoon reached the conclusion that Mr. Laxer, if 

he didn't arrive before a certain time could not speak but he could only answer questions. Now then, Mr. 

Speaker, at this meeting we had in attendance Mr. Don Mitchell and we had Mr. Fred Gudmunson of the city 

of Saskatoon and approximately 175 other people in attendance, who were members of the Waffle group. 

Now these 175 people refused to leave the auditorium unless Mr. Laxer spoke, and, Mr. Speaker, while I 

wasn't at the meeting, confusion reigned supreme. This is just another example, Mr. Speaker, of the 

benevolent NDP party attempting to throttle members holding other points of view. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to further illustrate this great split which has occurred in the NDP party and I want 

to refer to an article in that well-known newspaper, the Star Phoenix, dated January 30th of this year. This 

newspaper quoted Mr. Don Mitchell whom, I believe, is well known and respected by Members opposite, as 

saying, "We are trying to persuade the party to come on as a strong alternative to Mr. Thatcher, rather than 

what I fear it is doing, hoping there is enough anti-government feeling that the NDP will slip in by default." 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on February 5, in the Leader-Post, the Leader of the Opposition apparently reached the 

conclusion that he had to answer his fellow New Democrat, and I might point out that this fellow New 

Democrat, Mr. Mitchell, made a very good run for leadership, as we all know, at the Provincial Convention 

in July. In this report, the Leader of the Opposition, denied 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

398 

Mr. Mitchell's accusations but the mere fact that the Leader of the NDP party in this province felt that he had 

to reject these views of Mr. Mitchell illustrates that brotherly love within the New Democratic Party. Mr. 

Speaker, the strength of the Waffle group in Saskatchewan can best be illustrated by the fact that a leader of 

the New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan could not be selected at its July provincial convention until Mr. 

Mitchell, a confessed Waffler, was removed from the election by virtue of being the low man on the second 

ballot. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party in our province has been forced so far to the left 

by the Waffle group that its defeat in the next provincial election is assured. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — With the publication of "The New Deal for People" the Members opposite are doomed to 

the role of opposition for years to come. Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that Mr. Lewis, the Leader of 

the New Democratic Party in Ontario, had to publicly denounce the Waffle group. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

that if the Leader of the New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan denounced the Waffle group, he would find 

that a large percentage of his followers are Wafflers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, probably the best evidence of our Government's success in attracting industry to our province is 

the fact that in 1964, 700 million kilowatt hours of the electrical power generated by the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation were consumed by industry. Whereas in 1970, 1.8 billion kilowatt hours of the power 

generated by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation were consumed by industry in our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — In other words, Mr. Speaker, in the last six years, the consumption of kilowatt hours by 

industry in Saskatchewan has increased 170 per cent. This, I submit, is concrete evidence of the Liberal 

Party's success in bringing industry to Saskatchewan. 

 

I now, Mr. Speaker, want to turn to another industry in our province which prospered in 1970 to an extent 

never before realized in its history. And I am, of course, referring to the lignite deposits in the southern 

portion of our province. In 1969, the production of lignite coal from Saskatchewan deposits amounted to 2 

million tons, whereas in 1970, this production amounted to 3.8 million tons. Mr. Speaker, I just want to 

point out to the House, the importance of Saskatchewan Power Corporation to the lignite coal industry of our 

province. The Boundary Dam power plant is presently consuming 2 million tons of lignite coal per year, and 

when the present extension is completed, the consumption will rise to 2.8 million tons per year. During 1970 

large tonnages of lignite were, as you know, purchased by the Ontario Hydro, and at the present time, our 

lignite coal is being blended with American coal in thermo plants in Ontario. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

399 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — I might also point out, Mr. Speaker, that during 1970, the Province of Manitoba was in 

such a position insofar as its power was concerned that it purchased power from the Province of 

Saskatchewan, while Mr. Cass-Beggs runs around the country. Probably, Mr. Speaker, if Mr. Cass-Beggs 

would stay at home they might be able to generate enough power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our industrial development in 1971 will, no doubt, be influenced by the proposed Rabbit Lake 

mining development of Gulf Minerals. At this very moment, Mr. Speaker, heavy equipment and supplies are 

being taken into Rabbit Lake by Gulf Minerals. I might say, Mr. Speaker, the comments by the Member from 

Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) may not be needed or wanted, but they are as naked of intellectual content as 

Lady Godiva was on that famous ride. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — A great deal, Mr. Speaker, has been said by Members opposite on the question of foreign 

investment, and the only conclusion which one can reach is that an NDP government would prohibit the 

development of Rabbit Lake by Gulf Minerals in association with German interests. Millions of dollars of 

risk capital have already been spent by this company and millions more will have to be spent before 

production is realized. Foreign capital, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion creates jobs with good pay. It is 

inconsistent for the New Democratic Party to cry over the lack of jobs, and then take an attitude of 

prohibiting foreign capital to assist in the development of our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — To risk the taxpayers' money to the extent required in Northern Saskatchewan on 

exploration work, would be sheer foolishness. The present Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

realizes that our north must be opened for the benefit of the citizens of Saskatchewan. This is the reason why 

we are encouraging the development of the Rabbit Lake mine. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, especially in regard to the attitude toward foreign capital today of the 

Members opposite, that when we did have an NDP government in office, that government attempted to 

encourage foreign capital to come to the province, but when it is out of office, it abhors the thought of 

foreign capital assisting in our development. We have heard Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, brag about the 

fact that the initial potash mine in this province came into being during the NDP term of office. And that 

potash mine, Mr. Speaker, is 100 per cent foreign capital. We have also heard them take credit for bringing 

the oil and gas interests into Saskatchewan. And at least 85 per cent of that industry was foreign capital. Mr. 

Speaker, I have no objection whatever to Canadian capital being used to develop our resources, in fact, I 

think such should be encouraged, but the plain facts are, Mr. Speaker, that there is not sufficient capital 

which is prepared to take the necessary risks to develop the natural resources of our great country. Mr. 

Speaker, I am convinced that the new deal for people which is apparently, as I mentioned before, under the 

editorship of 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

400 

the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) and one Mr. Mitchell is nothing but a foolish compromise 

between the left and the middle elements of the New Democratic Party. 

 

As has been mentioned in this debate, Mr. Speaker, foreign capital which comes into our province must, of 

course, abide by the laws of this province, and by the laws of Canada. I make this statement, Mr. Speaker, 

and in my opinion it is beyond contradiction. My opinion is that the real reason for the New Democratic 

Party's stand on foreign capital is what might be described as an absolute hatred of anything American. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — The New Democratic policy on foreign capital is nothing but narrow nationalism of the 

worst kind. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — I'll even go this far, Mr. Speaker, to say that I don't think there would be a whimper from 

the Members opposite if our foreign capital came from Sweden or Mr. Kosygin. Members of the New 

Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, continue to refer to giving the citizens of our province an interest in equity. 

It is my opinion that our people are far more interested in positions with good pay than they are in the 

purchase of a share or shares which would probably not show a dividend for many years. 

 

It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that some of the ventures in this province in the next year or two will show such 

results that money can be raised on the Canadian market, and that our citizens will have the opportunity of 

purchasing bonds with a fixed rate of return, assuring them of an annual return and not the insecurity caused 

by the purchase of equity shares. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — Over-riding all of these factors is the factor that these industries give employment to our 

people at good rates of pay and assist secondary industries in our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — Insofar as 1971 is concerned, from an industrial point of view, in our province, it is quite 

obvious now that we shall have two large seed mills in operation; the one owned by Burns and Company 

will be in operation in a few weeks, the other will be completed in a few months' time. The capacity of our 

clothing manufacturing industry, will, in my opinion, double in 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — We already have an extension to one plant in Saskatoon and there is another plant now 

being located in our province. I am also confident that in the next two or three weeks, projects will be 

announced which will substantially increase our capacity to treat agricultural products and process livestock. 

However, the big event of 1971, as far as industry is concerned will, 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

401 

of course, be the Dore Lake pulp mill. 

 

The mill, as has been stated, will be the largest kraft mill on the North American continent with a capacity of 

between 1200 and 1400 tons per day. But, Mr. Speaker, the real advantage of this pulp mill to the Province 

of Saskatchewan, is not its size, but the fact that it will provide jobs with good pay to a district that has been 

neglected for years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — The present plants in Saskatchewan supplying chemicals to Prince Albert pulp mill, one of 

which I believe is located immediately adjoining the Member for Riversdale's (Mr. Romanow) constituency, 

will have its capacity increased. 

 

During 1971 townsites will have to be planned for the Rabbit Lake area in order to accommodate the Gulf 

development, and in the Dore Lake area for the pulp mill development. 

 

A few days ago, Mr. Speaker, a Member of the Opposition made the ridiculous statement that the Athabasca 

pulp mill and Gulf development will defeat the Liberals. This statement, Mr. Speaker, just illustrates the 

gloom and doom theory of the New Democratic Party. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — The people of Saskatchewan realize if the Members opposite do not, that these two 

industries will virtually open up the north country enhancing the opportunities for our people, and bringing 

revenues to our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to open up the discussion which we had a few days ago 

regarding the negotiations over The Pas pulp mill between Parsons and Whittemore and Premier Schreyer. 

But it has been established by documents tabled in this House that the Manitoba Government at least 

contacted a financial house in New York to ascertain the name of a firm to manage the pulp mill and the 

important thing, Mr. Speaker, is that Parsons and Whittemore was recommended to Premier Schreyer by his 

own financial house. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — As the Premier has stated, there are risks associated with the Dore Lake pulp mill, and the 

Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, is prepared to take those risks, and the people of Saskatchewan, I submit, are 

prepared to accept those risks, knowing the outstanding performance of the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we had another gloom and doom speech from the Member for Canora (Mr. 

Matsalla), who, as we all know, occupies the position of Secretary-Treasurer of R.M. 304. Mr. Speaker, 

during his speech, he was asked on several occasions about the unconditional grant received by his 

municipality under a Liberal Government, but he conveniently never answered the 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

402 

question. I want, Mr. Speaker, to illustrate the treatment given to this Hon. Member's rural municipality 

under a Liberal Government as compared to the NDP Government. I want to point out that in 1964, Mr. 

Speaker, R.M. 304 of which the Hon. Member is Secretary-Treasurer, received a grand sum, under a 

benevolent NDP government, of $1,301. But in 1969, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Government being 

benevolent, putting politics aside, paid to his R.M. 304, $11,512. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — Mr. Speaker, in other words, R.M. 304, received eight and one-half times more benefit 

under the Liberal Government than it ever received under the party which the Secretary-Treasurer supports. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — Mr. Speaker, it is quite obvious that I will support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I wish the Hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. 

Guy) would calm down, and learn a few manners and respect the decorum of this House. We listen to him, I 

hope that he would give us the courtesy of also being heard. 

 

MR. GUY: — Right from the horse's mouth. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well if I had a mouth like yours, you know, I wouldn't want to appear in this place. 

 

MR. GUY: — It might just come from that direction. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, let me join with others Members in extending the customary 

congratulations to the mover and the seconder of the Throne Speech. I also express my sincere 

congratulations to our Leader for a job well done in analyzing the Throne Speech and the criticism that he 

extended on the various programs of the Government. Perhaps more important, his presentation of new and 

alternative ideas on the economic crisis Saskatchewan is facing, if they were listened to and adopted by this 

Government, would lead Saskatchewan out of its current depression to recovery and to new economic 

prosperity. There are other commendations I should like to pass on, Mr. Speaker, but time is passing on and I 

should like to comment on a number of programs the Government has presented. 

 

Let me, first of all, comment on the remarks made by the Hon. Minister of Industry and Commerce. I wish 

that he were back in the House, because he is obviously a poorly informed student of economics. When he 

talks to us about insufficient Canadian capital to develop the economy and resources of this country, I would 

suggest that he examine the facts. Because 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

403 

the truth is that in the area of economic development of this nation in the last few years, 94 per cent of the 

capital investment in this nation was Canadian capital, not foreign capital. It is our capital used for expansion 

of American companies using Canadian money borrowed on the Canadian market to expand their holdings 

in our country. Anybody who is talking about foreign capital coming to this nation to develop our country is 

really whistling in the dark and is not informed of the true facts. Mr. Speaker, the fact is that $1.5 billion of 

profits made in Canada is being exported across the border in the form of dividends from profits made in 

Canada from Canadian investment from Canadian capital, exploiting Canadian resources. Mr. Speaker, if 

being a Canadian is to mean anything to us, I say Canada must belong to us. This constant sellout and rape of 

our nation must stop, it must stop now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no nation can pretend to be independent, when so much of its resources and so much of its 

economy is foreign controlled. We are told today that more than two-thirds of our economy is controlled by 

people who are not residents and who are not citizens of this country. This concerns me. If it does not 

concern the Members on the opposite side, well and good, let them admit it. But as a Canadian, I want 

Canada to be developed for our people, not for foreigners. I don't care, Mr. Speaker, whether these foreigners 

are Americans, whether they are Swedes, or whether they are citizens of the Soviet Union the same thing 

applies. This nation belongs to our people and to the generations that are to follow. Obviously the Minister is 

ill informed. 

 

I expected the Minister of Industry and Commerce to tell us something about his department, to tell us 

something about the kind of programs he has in mind, programs that will develop industries, programs that 

will create employment. He didn't tell us a single thing in this respect. The truth is that the Liberals don't 

have a program for industrial and economic development of this country. That is a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this debate remarks have been made that we were not talking about the Throne Speech. 

The truth is, that Members of the Government have not been talking about the Throne Speech either. What 

have they been talking about? They have been talking about the NDP programs. I am glad, Mr. Speaker, that 

they made this their subject. By doing this they admit openly to all the people of Saskatchewan that the 

Liberals presented a Throne Speech that is defenceless. They have got nothing to talk about, they have 

nothing in the Throne Speech for the people of Saskatchewan. The Throne Speech has no solutions to offer 

to the numerous social and economic crisis that are facing the people of Saskatchewan today. Mass 

unemployment, desperate shortage of cash in the farm communities, few markets, rising costs and dropping 

prices for farm products. Any grain the farmers sell, one half must go towards repayment of the cash 

advances. The Hon. Otto Lang was here in Saskatchewan a few days ago. What did he say? He admitted that 

today $250 million is owed by farmers in cash advances. The Minister of Agriculture what did he admit? 

What assurance did he give us? He said there is a "pork glut" and that there are "dairy surpluses," but he had 

no solution. All he did was present a hopeless future for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Throne Speech offers no solutions to the young, to the old, to the native population, 

who have been treated inhumanly by the white society. It offers no 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

404 

meaningful programs to these people. The Throne Speech offers no solution and no hope to the senior 

citizen. It offer no hope for some 200,000 Saskatchewan people who live in poverty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am therefore not surprised that the Premier and other of his colleagues chose to devote so 

much of their time to talk about the NDP program. Because it is a program for progress, a program that 

offers a new deal for the people of Saskatchewan. It is a promise that the New Democratic Party, working 

together with people, will get Saskatchewan on the march to a new and brighter tomorrow. Perhaps it is not a 

perfect document, but what program is? But it is a program to which thousands of Saskatchewan people have 

lent their ideas. A program based on resolutions adopted at our conventions and to which other 

Saskatchewan citizens and people's organizations were asked to make a contribution and to express their 

criticism as well. We are ready and we are willing to put our program to the test and have the voters of 

Saskatchewan pass judgment. I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will accept it in 

preference to this fuddle duddle Throne Speech that was presented to us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Our program offers a new deal for the farmers. It offers a new deal for the workers, it 

offers a new deal for the youth and for the senior citizens. It offers a new deal for the cities and the town and 

the rural communities, for education, health and welfare, for the protection of consumers and small 

businesses. It offers new hope and rights for the Indian and Metis population. It is a program ensuring a clean 

and healthy environment and the development of our resources for the people of Saskatchewan and the 

people of this nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened attentively the other day to the 'numbers speech' presented to us by the Hon. Member 

for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson). I found his figures he was quoting quite cumbersome. I think what 

he was trying to do was to impress us with the record of the Liberal Government as it applies to Regina. I 

was particularly interested in the figures he quoted with respect to capital grants provided for the Regina 

hospitals, the General Hospital, the Grey Nuns' Hospital, the Wascana Hospital. He then went on to compare 

this with the record of the NDP Government. He said that the Liberal record of providing capital grants for 

renovation of these three hospitals is much more impressive. Mr. Speaker, for some reason he omitted to 

mention one fact, that it was the CCF Government who built the Wascana Hospital. He didn't take that into 

account for some reason. I am prepared to forgive him, I shall be charitable, this may have been an 

unintentional omission. But, Mr. Speaker, the fact is the Wascana Hospital has a bed capacity of close to 

300, almost equal to that of the proposed new Base Hospital. Had he taken this into account, he would find 

that for all the expenditures that were made on capital renovation, during the Liberal years, that the CCF 

record in terms of providing hospital facilities in this city is by far much more impressive than during the 

period of the Liberal Government. 

 

He then went on to talk about some other things that have been done during the years of Liberal 

administration. I don't want to resort to a comparison of all the CCF achievements in 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

405 

Regina, as compared to this Government. But just let me mention a few. The Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation building which the Liberals never stop using as a backdrop for advertising purposes, the several 

telephone buildings, the Museum of Natural History, the Public Health building, the Administration 

building, numerous schools, the start of the University. I could go on and on. He mentioned that during the 

seven years of Liberal Government 45 businesses came into Regina valued at $17 million but he didn't tell us 

about the hundreds of businesses that left Regina since the Liberals came into power. He didn't tell us about 

the hundreds of jobs that disappeared since the Liberals came to office. 

 

I need to mention but one industry that the CCF brought into Regina, that is IPSCO, which the Liberals 

opposed. Mr. Speaker, that one industry created more jobs in the city of Regina than all the 45 put together 

under the Liberals in their seven years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish now to make some reference to the items in the Throne Speech under the heading of 

labor. Time will not permit me to analyze all the proposals that have been placed before us. Let me make a 

comment or two on several of them. They say that there will be some amendments to The Essential Services 

Act, the notorious, compulsory arbitration law often referred to as Bill 2. While at this stage we do not know 

what the specific amendments will be, but based on the anti-labor record of this Government, it is fair to 

assume it will be up to no good. As far as we are concerned there is only one thing that ought to be done with 

Bill 2 and that is to repeal it. This is what the NDP Government is committed to do. This is what we will do 

when we form the next government of Saskatchewan, and the workers can be assured of that. 

 

We are pleased to hear that the Government will be increasing the minimum wage. The Minister of Labour 

(Mr. MacLennan) did not tell us what it is going to be, but an increase in the minimum wage in 

Saskatchewan is long, long overdue. Let me remind the Minister that during the 20 years of CCF 

administration, the minimum wage in the Province of Saskatchewan was the highest in Canada. Let me also 

remind him that under the Liberal administration it is the lowest in Canada. Let us look at minimum wages 

in other provinces: British Columbia, $1.50; Alberta, $1.55; Manitoba, $1.50; Ontario $1.50 going up to 

$1.65 on April 1; Quebec, $1.40 going up to $1.45 and to $1.50 before the end of the year; Nova Scotia, 

$1.35; national minimum wage $1.65 and only in the Maritime provinces the minimum wage is equal to that 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Province of Saskatchewan some 25,000 wage earners are dependent on the minimum 

wage. This represents approximately 10 per cent of the non-agricultural labor force. Since Saskatchewan 

minimum wages are lower than most of the other provinces, and have been for a number of months, may I 

urge the Minister of Labour to bring forward a meaningful increase in the minimum wage, say to the Federal 

level of $1.65 and preferably to $1.75 immediately. If there are difficulties in eliminating the differentials in 

one step, then these differentials can be progressively placed out. There is no longer a justification to 

continue with the wage and hours differentials as may have been the case in the past. 

 

The Government in the Throne Speech makes reference there 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

406 

will be some improvement in the Workmen's Compensation. Mr. Speaker, many changes are needed in the 

Workmen's Compensation laws. May I suggest to him that as a minimum that he consider bringing in the 

following changes: 1. Raise benefits to at least 85 per cent of wages from the present 75. Completely 

eliminate the present ceiling of $6,600 a year on which benefits are paid. Adjust all previously established 

pensions to present wage levels. It is grossly unfair to pay workers pensions based on wages they were 

receiving 20 and 30 years ago. In many cases if they were working at the trade, wages would be three or four 

times as great as they were at the time they were injured. The general policy of cutting workers off or 

reducing compensation, or requiring workers to find light work when they are suffering from injury, this 

should be stopped. This should be replaced by a program of rehabilitation and retraining of workers for 

useful and satisfactory employment. Firstly, at best of times, so-called light work has not been available to 

industrial workers after injury. Secondly, light work is extremely difficult to find and demoralizing in many 

respects when you have a skilled worker being placed on janitorial work or asked to wash dishes. The 

adjustment is much too great and too frustrating to the worker. In this period of unemployment, to suggest to 

a worker to find light work, which is not available, I suggest is a totally unfair proposition. Only a program 

of rehabilitation and retraining and putting these people into useful production should be acceptable. 

 

The administration of Workmen's Compensation should be re-organized and perhaps humanized to show 

more understanding and compassion for injured workers. The Compensation Board's main preoccupation at 

the present time seems to be to save money so as to reduce assessment rates for industry. This ought not to 

be the objective and function of the Board. The main purpose of the Board should be to establish effective 

safety rules and programs to protect workers from injury. However if an injury does occur, workers should 

be properly taken care of and helped in every way by the Board, including proper rehabilitation and 

retraining for new occupations so that workers can continue in useful employment and lead normal lives as 

much as possible. 

 

The most competent medical services should be provided to injured workers. What needs to be done is the 

establishment of an effective appeal procedure. This should be a guarantee to workers that they can appeal 

where in their judgment there has been unfair treatment or discrimination or arbitrary decisions of the Board. 

 

I ask the Minister to consider these proposals when he brings in legislation before this House. Mr. Speaker, I 

also welcome the announcement that there will be some improvement to the labor standards particularly to 

protect workers or give the workers some protection in the recovery of wages in the event of default. There is 

a desperate need for such legislation in the light of the increasing numbers of bankruptcies. 

 

I have a number of ideas to propose in this respect. I hope the Government will be proposing meaningful 

legislation in this regard. We shall have a chance to discuss these in more detail when the Bill is before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the extent that the labor laws are going to be improved we welcome them. However, it 

would appear that the Government does not intend to remove the many restrictive laws it has enacted. This 

Liberal Government, since taking 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

407 

office, has conducted a deliberate and systematic campaign against labor. It has enacted viciously restrictive 

anti-labor legislation. Political interference in industrial relations has been the order of the day. Virtually no 

improvement has been made to Labor Standards legislation. As a consequence we have faced a sharp 

increase in industrial strikes. In six years of Liberal Government more man-days have been lost due to strikes 

than in 20 years under a CCF administration. Relations between the Government and its own employees, 

both in the public service and the Crown corporations, are poor and the morale is low. Thousands of 

workers, particularly skilled and most qualified, have left the province and the exodus continues. Our labor 

force is getting smaller while unemployment is rising. The Department of Labour is weak. It is 

underfinanced and understaffed, particularly in the highly skilled positions. We, in the New Democratic 

Party believe that government has a responsibility to treat all citizens fairly and that the Government has an 

obligation to plan for full employment and to establish fair labor standards. Workers need protection of the 

law not to be exploited by the law as they have been under this Liberal Government. 

 

New Democrats believe in free collective bargaining and in good industrial relations. This was the case for 

20 years under a CCF Government. This we propose to re-establish when an NDP government is re-elected 

to office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we propose a new deal for workers as we propose a new deal for all 

the people of Saskatchewan. The NDP Government will establish an industrial relations research 

organization to study industrial relations and to advise government on a continuing basis. A new trade union 

act will be enacted guaranteeing free collective bargaining. Bill 2, The Essential Services Emergency Act 

will be repealed. Political interference will be removed. Provision will be made for industry-wide bargaining 

and conciliation and mediation will be strengthened. The Department of Labour budget will be increased 

sharply. There will be an upgrading of employees both in numbers and skills to provide improved services 

and industrial relations. There will be enforcement of labor law and research undertaken on the overall issues 

and problems that labor faces. 

 

We propose immediately to raise the minimum wage to $1.75 per hour and to legislate a 40-hour work week 

and to provide for three weeks' vacation after one year of service and four weeks after ten. The Workmen's 

Compensation legislation and administration will be changed along the lines I have already suggested. 

Protection will be given to workers affected by automation or other technological changes by requiring 

advance and adequate notice and such changes will be subject to negotiation with employers and unions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to comment on a few issues in respect to my constituency. I did hope that the Hon. 

Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) would have outlined the program of this Government in 

some meaningful way as it applies to the people of Regina. However for some reason he did not bring before 

us any kind of meaningful proposal. The Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) has not spoken, who is a Regina 

representative. But let me place before this Government some suggestions. 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

408 

These were some of the promises that were made by the Liberals during the 1964 and 1967 elections. Regina 

is in desperate need of additional nursing home facilities. The Liberals promised to build a 600-bed nursing 

home but we did not hear a word about this so far. The Throne Speech says additional funds will be provided 

for special care facilities but no Government spokesman has elaborated. I urge the Government to build 

added nursing home facilities in the city of Regina at a cost people can afford. 

 

We were promised sharp increases in grants for education purposes so as to reduce mill rates. The citizens of 

Regina are still waiting. I urge the Provincial Government to assume 75 per cent of operating costs for 

education so that municipal taxes could be sharply reduced. 

 

In Regina North East we need a high school. I repeat again there is no place in Saskatchewan with as large a 

population as Regina North East that has no high school. Sports and recreation facilities for our city are not 

quite adequate, particularly in that part of the city that I represent. May I suggest that the Province provide 

adequate funds to help the city develop the King's Park into a regional park with provision in the park for 

camping facilities. 

 

May I also urge that skiing and tobogganing facilities be built for Regina, perhaps in the Lumsden area and 

perhaps in this respect I can get the support of the Attorney General (Mr. Heald). I urge also the Government 

to provide grants to help the city build needed swimming pools, skating rinks and other facilities. 

 

Due to the economic depression and the exodus of people, the pressure on additional housing has been 

somewhat relieved. However, in my part of the city people are forced to live in substandard and unmodern 

housing. In the part of the city I represent some 60 homes still have no running water. The people who are 

forced to live in this type of dwelling are unable to build or rent better accommodation. The answer to that 

lies in low-rental housing. Here again I urge the Government to take action. 

 

Pollution continues to be a serious problem in Regina North East and I urge the Government to take action in 

this respect. We were informed today that some improvements are going to be made in welfare payments. 

May I urge the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) and the Government generally to review the 

level of payments to welfare recipients. The number of welfare recipients are increasing because of 

unemployment. May I suggest to the Minister that the clothing, shelter and food allowances need an upward 

adjustment. It is not possible to have any kind of a balanced diet on a food allowance of $29.15 a month. The 

food allowances are reduced as the family numbers rise. I urge the Government immediately to raise welfare 

allowance payments and also to make provision for at least some small allowances to enable youngsters to 

participate in sports, music, Scouts and other such activities so that they may also be able to participate in 

sports as well as cultural activities. Because their parents are forced to live on welfare, this is no reason why 

they should be victimized or penalized just because they are on welfare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the vote is to be taken at 9:00 

 



 

February 25, 1971 

 

 

409 

o’clock. It is obvious I will not be supporting the motion. I shall be voting against it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — In compliance with the rules it is now necessary to terminate this debate and put the 

question on the main motion. 

 

While we are waiting for the Members to arrive, may I draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the fact 

that if they wish to save and conserve the time of the House, it is quite possible to have a vote recorded as 

being "on division" and then you would not have a formally recorded vote. A vote recorded as being "on 

division" means this — in these circumstances it would mean that the Government side all voted for the 

motion and the Opposition all voted against it. 

 

We will finally record the vote now but I draw this to your attention for future reference. You might find this 

is a suitable practice to follow in order to conserve the time of the House. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 30 

Thatcher Howes McFarlane 

Boldt Cameron Steuart 

Heald McIsaac Guy 

Barrie Loken MacDougall 

Coderre MacDonald Estey 

MacLennan Gallagher Hooker 

Heggie Breker Leith 

Radloff Weatherald Mitchell 

Gardner Coupland Charlebois 

Forsyth McIvor Schmeiser 

 

NAYS — 22 

Blakeney Bowerman Kramer 

Messer Wood Romanow 

Davies Dewhurst Meakes 

Berezowsky Smishek Thibault 

Whelan Snyder Michayluk 

Brockelbank Baker Pepper 

Matsalla Wooff Kowalchuk 

Byers   

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. Minister of 

Education (Mr. McIsaac): 

 

That said Address be engrossed and presented to His Honour The Lieutenant-Governor by such 

Members of the Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:07 o’clock p.m. 


