




















































Hansard: March 11, 1971


859 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

18th Day 

 

Thursday, March 11, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to introduce to all Members the following 

groups of students: from the constituency of Regina North West, represented by Mr. Whelan 27 students 

from the Coronation School, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Riley; from the constituency of 

Touchwood, represented by Mr. Meakes, 34 students from the Kelliher School; from the constituency of 

Canora, represented by Mr. Matsalla, 74 students from the Canora Composite High School under the 

direction of their teacher, Mr. Kobrinsky; from the constituency of Regina South West, represented by 

Mr. McPherson, 64 students from the Lakeview School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Peter 

Eartz; from the constituency of Saskatoon May fair, represented by Mr. Brockelbank, 74 students from 

the Bedford Road Collegiate under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Swienko; from the constituency of 

Kerrobert-Kindersley, 11 students from the Major School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. 

Horner. The constituency of Kerrobert-Kindersley is represented by the Deputy Speaker, Mr. Howes. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members will wish to extend to these students and to their teachers and to their bus 

drivers an extremely warm welcome to this Legislature and express the very sincere hope that they will 

find their stay here with us educational, enjoyable and wish to each and everyone of them a safe trip 

home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

BILLS RESPECTING LABOR STANDARDS AND MINIMUM WAGE 
 

MR. W. G. DAVIES: (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

ask the Minister of Labour whether in view of the upgrading of Canadian labor standards announced two 

days ago by Federal Labour Minister Mackasey the Saskatchewan Minister of Labour intends to follow 

this good example. Also as part of the same question, when will the Government proceed to increase the 

Saskatchewan minimum wage and to what extent and if it will include the principle of a cost of living 

escalator which has brought the new Federal minimum wage of $1.75? 

 

HON. D. G. MacLENNAN: (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, later in this Session a Labor 

Standards Bill will be introduced and that Bill will answer my hon. friend's question on that, and in due 

course the minimum wage will be announced later in this Session. 



March 11, 1971 

 

 
860 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Heald that Bill 

No. 12 — An Act respecting The Election Act, 1971 be now read a second time. 

 

MR. R. HEGGIE (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to say a few words 

on the new proposed Elections Act. I want to say at this time and express publicly that the Members of 

the committee, both on the Government side and from the Opposition, co-operated to the greatest 

degree. It was a pleasant committee to work with. We began meetings in May and continued through the 

summer, into the fall and finished up between Christmas and New Year in order to get the draft bill to 

the Government in the time allotted to us. 

 

I said at that time, as Chairman of the committee and at other times, and I'll say again today, Mr. 

Speaker, that one of the overriding considerations of the committee (and this was established early in the 

committee's existence) was that the time element was important. We wanted to streamline the Act in 

order to make elections shorter and more precise and more meaningful. 

 

Now, I have to say this for the previous Act passed in 1965. There had been a good deal of basic work 

done when the Act was reviewed in 1965 so that when we were given the task by the Legislature to 

overhaul the present Elections Act, in actual fact a good deal of the ambiguity had been removed in 

1965. It allowed us to work on other aspects of the Act which had become outworn by time, which were 

still ambiguous and which were contradictory. I can say again that the review of the Act in 1965 made it 

a little easier for us because a lot of the ambiguities had been removed and we took steps to remove still 

more. 

 

The main address from the Government side, delivered by the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), in 

speaking on Second Reading showed a few places where the Government had not taken the 

recommendations of the committee. Although in a number of these aspects I had hoped that the 

committee's draft bill would have been followed, I am not complaining because there are practical 

difficulties and it's the time element that is important. Although the overriding aim of the committee was 

to cut down the time, there is only so far that you can go. You have to leave, especially in rural seats, 

sufficient time for the returning officers and the chief electoral officer physically to get out the 

publications, get the lists printed, posted, get the ballot boxes out, get the ballot boxes in and all the 

other practical day to day difficulties in running an election. 

 

So considering that the Government, in introducing the legislation in the Bill in its present form, didn't 

follow the committee in every respect, I think that in the main they accepted our recommendations but 

the conflict came only where there was simply not physical time in which to perform these various 

pre-election acts. 

 

There have been suggestions from the Opposition that re-distribution should have been part of the 

Election Act but I think that the Member who made that remark, as a member of the committee, will 

recall that very early in the committee's 



March 11, 1971 

 
861 

deliberations we agreed that redistribution was not part of our duties. We had enough to do in revising 

the Act to leave redistribution to the Government when it may see fit to create any independent 

commission, if that time should ever come. 

 

Regarding the ballot. I was disappointed that the Government could not adopt the all black reverse 

printed ballot that was recommended by the committee because apparently this type of ballot is used in 

Ontario. It is almost foolproof because there are no spaces open except the names written in white and a 

square in which the "X" is to be placed. The new ballot that is introduced in the Bill may be an 

improvement on the old one but it still leaves two white spaces, a square which is intended for the "X" 

and then there is a white space showing where the name is. It will still leave that area of doubt. I think 

the Attorney General explained that the problem was again one of the time element and that to get these 

pure black ballots printed becomes a problem where it has to be done for 60 constituencies. 

 

I should hope in the future that we shall eventually adopt the Ontario style of ballot which is in reverse 

print and is actually foolproof. 

 

The Attorney General also mentioned the matter of the apartments legislation. I recall the Opposition 

Members on the committee were quite united in their view that there should be some section in the new 

Election Act which would make campaigning in apartment blocks, especially high-rise apartments, 

available to electioneering people. Personally I wasn't too far removed from their view. This was more 

or less adopted in a cross- party vote but the Government in its wisdom has seen fit not to include this in 

the proposed Election Act just introduced and as the committee chairman I really haven't any hard and 

fast feelings so I don't in any way feel that it was a reversal of any real substance. It could well be that 

we are tinkering in a field of private rights when you make it mandatory for landlords to allow certain 

people into apartment buildings. We might be well to let this thing be explored farther before any action 

is taken. It could be that in five years or ten years hence this might be part of a new election act. 

 

There is nothing really earthshaking in the newly introduced Election Act. In one way, as I stated before, 

it tended to clear up the ambiguities that hadn't been cleared up in 1965. But I am sure that when this 

House receives the introduction of The Controverted Election Act that it will see that there have been 

earthshaking changes in that Act and the main idea being that once an election is held and if it is 

controverted, the public has a right to know, and the Member has the right to know, if he is a Member of 

this Legislative Assembly or not in the shortest possible time. With that overriding feature, when the Bill 

is introduced, I think that this House will be well pleased with the job that the committee has done there. 

That will take place in the future. 

 

With these general remarks, Mr. Speaker, regarding the Election Act I join with the Attorney General in 

expressing the view that this Act will tidy up and make more workable elections on election day and of 

course will have my wholehearted support. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. Thibault (Kinistino) . 



March 11, 1971 

 

 
862 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. G. B. GRANT (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 25 — An Act 

respecting the Integration of Hospitals in Major Urban Centres. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, by way of explanation this Bill is introduced primarily for the purpose of 

authorizing the formal basis for the integration and co-ordination of hospital facilities and services in 

Regina. 

 

For several years my department has been meeting with officials of the General Hospital and the Grey 

Nuns' Hospital in Regina to determine the most effective manner of improving the facilities and services 

of these two hospitals. A number of committees and study groups have reviewed the Regina situation 

and they have all agreed that the two hospitals require extensive reconstruction and renovation but that 

this should be done under conditions that would provide for the maximum integration of planning and 

co-ordination of services that are possible. 

 

In particular I should like to mention the Task Force on the allocation of Hospital Services in Regina 

which was a committee consisting of representatives from the three hospitals in the city, the Regina and 

District Medical Society and the Department of Health. This committee met through the year 1969 and 

part of 1970 to consider, as the committee's title indicates, the distribution of hospital services between 

the three hospitals in the city. This committee recommended the enactment of legislation to enable two 

or more hospitals to operate under single ownership and management. Therefore, when my colleagues in 

the Cabinet and I decided to authorize a capital expenditure of up to $12 million for the two hospitals 

with grants by the Province up to $8 million, we considered the recommendations of the committees and 

the study groups and concluded that this reconstruction program should be conditional upon complete 

integration of the two hospital's being arranged. 

 

When I met with representatives from the two hospitals in June of 1970 I therefore set out the following 

conditions as the basis upon which the Government's financing proposals were made: (1) the ownership 

and management of the two hospitals would be vested in one authority under one board; (2) the total 

capital budget for the building program for both facilities would not exceed $12 million; (3) if 

conditions (1) and (2) were met and suitable plans are developed, the Province is prepared to support the 

building program to a maximum of $8 million; (4) of the $8 million in provincial grants, $1 million will 

be earmarked for upgrading the Cancer Clinic and $1 million for the psychiatric facility. 

 

The two hospitals have indicated definite interest in the Government's proposals. However, it has not 

been possible for these hospitals to take any action to comply with the conditions respecting integration 

because there is presently no legal authority that could be used by the hospitals as the basis for 

amalgamation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has therefore been drafted for the purpose of providing the legal machinery for the 

two hospitals to be operated under single ownership and management. 



March 11, 1971 

 
863 

This Bill contains all the provisions contained in legislation proposed by the Task Force on the 

Allocation of Hospital Services in Regina. It will be noted that this Bill does not apply specifically to 

these two hospitals but rather to two or more hospitals within a city having a population of 25,000 

persons or more. Furthermore this city would not be included within a union hospital district. These 

provisions may, therefore, be applied in either Regina or Saskatoon. 

 

To begin the application of these provisions two or more hospitals in the city would prepare a 

description of the area being served by the hospitals in the city. This area would not include any 

municipalities or portions within a union hospital district. The description of this area would then be sent 

to the city and each municipality and portion included within the description. If the city and municipality 

supported the action taken by the hospitals, they would so advise the Minister of Health. If the Minister 

received a request for inclusion from a city and at least 25 per cent of the other municipalities and 

portions included within the description, he would arrange for an Order-in-Council establishing a 

hospital service area. This area would include only the city and those municipalities and portions 

requesting inclusion in the area. 

 

A board would then be established through municipal appointments made in accordance with the 

regulations. The board would then meet with the participating hospitals and would formulate a plan for 

acquiring the hospitals and financing their administration and operation. 

 

This plan will then be submitted to a vote of the burgesses and if the majority of those voting are in 

favor of the plan the establishment of a hospital service area will be deemed to have been confirmed. 

 

These provisions then authorize the board to continue with its plans for acquiring the participating 

hospitals. The board would prepare a budget of its anticipated expenditures for each year and each 

municipality would be responsible for its portion of these costs. The extent of the responsibility to be 

borne by each municipality would be fixed by the local government board. 

 

It should be noted that no municipality would be required to pay a larger amount in any year under this 

Act than would be the case had the hospital revenue tax been payable in that municipality in that year. 

 

The participation of a municipality in a hospital service area under this Act can therefore not represent 

any greater cost than would be the case had the municipality elected not to participate. 

 

The other provisions of this Bill contain standard clauses respecting such matters as municipal tax 

levies, and debenture issues. It is my belief, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill contains an appropriate 

legislative authority for the integration of two or more hospitals in either Regina or Saskatoon. In 

particular its provisions may be applied by the Regina Grey Nuns' and the Regina General. I am 

convinced that if arrangements can be made under this legislation for the amalgamation of these two 

hospitals there will be a resulting improvement in the physical facilities of both hospitals and in the long 

run a rise in the standards 



March 11, 1971 

 

 
864 

of service provided in both hospitals that would be beneficial not only for the city of Regina but for the 

residents of virtually all of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. G. T. SNYDER: (Moose Jaw North): — Well, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, this is a rather 

voluminous Bill. I spent some time on it and in total I don't see anything particularly wrong with it. I 

don't see it as a panacea for the problems of a number of hospitals in Saskatchewan and I am thinking 

particularly of the Providence Hospital in the constituency that I represent. I think the Minister will 

agree that in light of the fact that the city falls within the Union Hospital district this doesn't in any way 

provide for a solution to some of the problems of the hospitals such as the Providence Hospital in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

Also, I understand this is to be applied to only those cities over 25,000 in population and in light of the 

fact that one of the hospitals in the city of Moose Jaw and one hospital in Prince Albert falls within the 

Union Hospital district in these respective cities then I think we have to conclude that the Act is 

designed to meet some of the problems in the two major cities, Regina and Saskatoon only. I expect that 

by this process there are some economies that may be brought about as a result of placing two hospitals 

under one central administration. As I said, I don't see it as any panacea for the solution to some of the 

problems that are being experienced in other areas but I see no reason why we shouldn't proceed with 

the Bill and I am in favor of supporting it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. H. H. P. BAKER: (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, before this is passed today, I want to say 

that I will be asking a lot of questions in committee as to what the costs are going to be to a city like 

Regina, and whether there is going to be a fixed mill rate put on the major centres. I don't think you've 

covered that too clearly and this will not come out until we get into it clause by clause. 

 

Naturally I am keenly interested as to how it is going to affect Regina. I appreciate the grants that will be 

given to renovate the General and the Grey Nuns' Hospitals. The regulations I see will spell out those 

who will be appointed. I don't suppose you can give us any more on that today. I am very interested in 

what the regulations will say as to the appointment of people. Where will they come from? How many 

representatives will be appointed from the respective cities, and rural areas? But I am more interested in 

what the mill rate increase will be to urban centres. The city of Regina today pays a good portion of the 

Regina General capital costs now. We just finished paying about $450,000 during the past three.-years, 

as our share of renovations taken out of current estimates. I should like to know more about it and I 

think the way to find out is in committee. In general it may be a good plan. The Member for Moose Jaw 

North (Mr. Snyder) has stated that we will not hold it up. I say housekeeping amendments may be 

necessary in order to ensure that the people of my community, the residents and the constituents whom I 

represent, are not going to be saddled with a mill rate increase. 

 

MR. W. E. SMISHEK: (Regina North East)Mr. Speaker, I listened to 



March 11, 1971 

 
865 

the Minister (Mr. Grant) explain the Bill and in principle I am in agreement with the remarks of the Hon. 

Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) and Regina South East (Mr. Baker). The Bill is quite 

voluminous; it only was tabled in the House on Tuesday. I should therefore like to study it a little closer 

and also to take account of the Minister's remarks, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. A. R. GUY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 26 — An Act to 

amend The Local Improvement Districts Act. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make a few comments regarding this Local Improvement 

District Act amendments. First of all, as you are aware, the department strives to operate local 

improvement districts as nearly as possible in the same manner as rural municipalities are operated by 

their respective councils and in many respects this Act is quite similar to The Rural Municipal Act so we 

consider it desirable to enact similar amendments to maintain uniformity whenever possible. 

 

Section 2 of this Bill repeals the statutory maximum assessment per mile provision for assessing railway 

rights-of-way and pipelines and in lieu thereof provides for the schedule of rates which are prescribed by 

the Minister. This was an amendment that was brought in last year to The Rural Municipal Act but we 

missed it in The Local Improvement Districts Act. 

 

Sections 3 and 6 — these amendments maintain uniformity with The Rural Municipal Act or will 

maintain uniformity with The Rural Municipal Act, as it will be amended this year. We repeal the 

provisions for collecting membership fees for the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union since the Saskatchewan 

Farmers’ Union is no longer in existence. 

 

Section 5 of the Bill again brings it into line with The Rural Municipal Act in that it makes it necessary 

first to apply partial payments of taxes on any arrears due by the taxpayer. 

 

Section 7 — this Section relieves the purchaser of grain from any responsibility to abide by the 

provisions of the elevator list unless he has been served with a copy of the list. 

 

Section 9 — the amendment here came about as a result of a recommendation from the Regulations 

Committee. The Local Improvement Districts Act contains numerous references to “my agent” or “the 

agent of the Minister” or “the agent authorized by the Minister” and similar expressions but the term 

“agent” has never been clearly defined and this amendment identifies this officer as best we can. 

 

With those few comments, I think any other question could probably be better answered in committee. I 

move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. E. I. WOOD: (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I notice some matters of some interest in this Act, 

namely the most noticeable one is the taking from the Act the reference to collection of dues of the 

Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union . Of course we are well aware that the 



March 11, 1971 

 

 
866 

Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union is not an entity. It does not exist and I suppose that this is a logical course 

for the Government to take in this regard. I do believe that the principle of having the farmers of the 

province being able to have their dues collected in this way is a privilege that should not be taken from 

the Farmers’ Union and it is to be hoped that something may be able to be worked out in the future on 

this. But at this time I am sure that I will not oppose the Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. GUY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend 

The Municipal Water Assistance Act. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, there is just one amendment to this Bill, The Municipal Water Assistance Act. 

At the present time the regulations and the Act provide that grants may be made to a municipality. It has 

spelt it out as meaning a town, a village or a rural municipality. In this amendment we are broadening 

the concept of municipality to include a local improvement district or Northern Saskatchewan 

administration districts so that hamlets within these areas are also eligible for grants under The 

Municipal Water Assistance Act. 

 

With that brief explanation, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. A. E. BLAKENEY: (Leader of the Opposition): — Point of Order. I think the Minister was 

speaking to Bill No. 28, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. A. R. GUY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Pardon me, I was on Bill No. 28. If we could do 

that one and then we'll come back to No. 27 with permission of the House. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Just a minute — that's my mistake. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. GUY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend 

The Municipal Road Assistance Authority Act, 1966. 

 

He said: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we'll get down to No. 27. These are amendments to The Municipal Road 

Assistance Authority Act and again they are very minimal. 

 

In this Act — in 1967, I should mention — an agreement was signed between the Federal and Provincial 

Governments wherein the cost of construction of roads and bridges in Indian Reserves was to be shared 

between the two governments. It appeared that there was no specific authority in The Municipal Road 

Assistance Act to build and construct roads and bridges on Indian Reserves and this authority is now 

provided in this amendment. 

 

The second part of the amendment is to give the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council power to make 

regulations which will carry out the objects of this Act and particularly as it relates to 



March 11, 1971 

 
867 

Indian Reserves. 

 

With that brief explanation, I would move second reading. 

 

MR. A. MATSALLA: (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I accept the explanation of the Minister regarding the 

amendments to this Act. In my view the amendments as proposed will more fully provide for proper 

authority to construct roads and bridges in Indian Reserves. We on this side of the House will give 

support to this legislation. However, I do have some questions covering details of the Bill which I intend 

to ask in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o'clock p.m. 

 


