



















































Hansard: March 31, 1971


 

March 31, 1971 

 

1453 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Wednesday, March 31, 1971 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to introduce to all Members of the Legislative 

Assembly in the Province of Saskatchewan the following groups of students in the galleries of the 

Legislature: from the constituency of Saskatoon City Park-University represented by Mr. Charlebois, 67 

students from the College Park School under the direction of their teachers, Mr. D. Cross and Mr. Wright; 

from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana South represented by Dr. Forsyth, 39 students from the Aden 

Bowman School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Barnett; from the constituency of Humboldt 

represented by Mr. Breker, 85 students from the St. Augustine School under the direction of their school 

teacher, Mr. Ed. Tchorzewski; from the constituency of Lumsden represented by the Attorney General, 100 

students from the Balgonie School under the direction their school teacher, Mr. Wayne Kyle. 

 

I am sure that all Hon. Members would wish to extend to these students, to their teachers and their bus 

drivers the warmest of all possible welcomes from the Legislature to express the very sincere wish they will 

find their stay here enjoyable and educational and wish to every one of them all a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

ALLEGATIONS - PLANTING OF DRUGS 

 

HON. D. V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

make a statement. In December of 1970, the CBC Television Station, CBKRT TV put on a program in 

which an unnamed person was interviewed with his back to the camera and the person being interviewed 

made allegations that a police officer in a city in Saskatchewan had endeavored to have him plant drugs, 

supplied by the policeman, in a house in order that they would be found there when a search was made by 

the police. The person in question had had a meeting with the police officer and obtained a tape of the 

conversations which took place. Upon the matter being brought to the attention of my Department, I had the 

RCMP instructed to carry out a complete investigation of the allegations. 

 

A full investigation has now been carried out and the 



 

March 3, 1971 

 

 

1454 

report received by me from the RCMP is that the tape referred to above, together with another tape contained 

in conjunction with the RCMP shows that the police officer did not agree to give any drugs to the informant 

and that the conversations related to drugs which the informant indicated could be obtained by a person who 

frequented the house where it was alleged the drugs were to be planted. The Civil Liberties Committee were 

brought into the matter by another informant. Mr. Kujawa, QC, Director of Public Prosecutions in my 

Department, was brought into the matter at the very beginning and was kept conversant with the progress of 

the investigation by the RCM Police. The report of the RCM Police was to the effect that there was no 

evidence upon which a charge could be laid against the police officer on the basis that he counselled the 

informant to plant drugs in the house in question nor was there evidence upon which a charge of public 

mischief could be laid against the informant on the basis that he misled the police. Mr. Kujawa and my 

Deputy, Mr. Meldrum agree that there is no basis for charges of any kind. It appears that there was some 

misunderstanding between the informant and the police officer as to what was intended. 

 

Mr. Kujawa discussed the evidence fully with some of the members of the Civil Liberties Committee and 

informed them of our Department’s conclusion that no prosecutions should be commenced. In view of the 

result of the investigation, and because of the opinion of the RCMP and my officials, I do not consider that 

there are any grounds for public inquiry into the matter. 

 

The transcript of the tapes and other statements taken have been forwarded to the Chairman of the Police 

Commission of the Police Force involved for their information. The Chairman of that Police Commission 

was advised that if the Police Commission wished to investigate the matter further they could do so under 

the provisions of Section 123 of the Urban Municipality Act. It was also pointed out that if the city council in 

question passed a resolution requesting a judicial inquiry under Section 427 of the Urban Municipality Act, 

the request would be considered although at the same time it was pointed out that it was not considered that 

such an enquiry would have any beneficial result as the matter has been fully investigated by the RCMP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the statement by the Hon. 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald), he was kind enough to give us a copy of the statement before he gave it to the 

House. On the perusal of the statement it would appear that we would accept, of course, the findings of the 

Attorney General with respect to the investigations carried out by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. It 

does appear to us that the Attorney General’s Department has investigated this matter thoroughly and the 

reasons are justified as stated in the statement by the Attorney General. 



 

March 31, 1971 

 
 

 

1455 

As an aside, Mr. Speaker, but related to this matter, we should like to draw to the attention and the 

consideration of the Attorney General that this case probably pinpoints the need for some form of an 

independent human rights commission that a number of us in this Legislature have been talking about. I say 

that to the extent that it is important, the judgment about this type of an activity, in our view, ought to be 

determined, heard and determined, perhaps by an independent body or an independent committee. I think 

that there will be some questions raised about the conduct of the CBC in airing this type of program. There 

will be some questions raised about this notwithstanding the Attorney General’s very thorough report. I think 

that the answer for future cases would be, and I should commend to the consideration of the Government 

again, some form of an independent permanent human rights commission that can determine and solve 

problems of this and others of similar natures. 

 

POTASH INDUSTRY CRISIS DUE TO RAILWAY STRIKE 

 

HON. A. C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, 

I should like to inform the Hon. gentlemen of the House about the condition of the potash industry at this 

moment. They have all received word from the railway that there will be no shipment of potash out of 

Saskatchewan from today forward. All shipments to the West Coast are cancelled; all shipments to the 

Mid-west in the United States are cancelled. It comes at a most inopportune time to the potash industry. It is 

in the months of April and May in the Mid-west of the United States when the farmers are planting. This is 

the time of heavy shipment of potash, in fact, 18 or 20 per cent of all the potash which we produce and ship 

during the year is done in the months of April and May. We have been encouraging the industry to produce 

to inventory in order that the production facilities together with the inventory would be able to meet the 

demands of April and May. The survey this morning shows the companies indicate that most of their storage 

facilities are full. Some will be preparing for closing down possibly tomorrow, others can’t go on beyond the 

middle of next week and if the strike continues much longer we shall have 10 potash mines closed. We shall 

have 3,000 employees out of work and it will virtually have brought the potash industry of Saskatchewan to 

its knees. All these sales which are lost will not be recaptured because the season will be gone. Therefore the 

great efforts which we have been attempting to make to get the potash of Saskatchewan moving and to 

increase the quota will, I’m afraid, have been to no avail. The situation is going to reach a crisis proportion. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


