



















































Hansard: April 14, 1971


1795 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

42nd Day 

 

Wednesday, April 14, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Iron Ore Discovery in Kelsey Lake Area 
 

Hon. A.C. Cameron: (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 

have an announcement which I think will be of interest to the Hon. Members. 

 

I wish today to announce, together with Mr. Parres, President of Fairway Exploration Limited, a 

significant iron ore discovery in the Kelsey Lake area some 60 miles northeast of Prince Albert. This 

discovery was made using an oil drilling rig and the drill penetrated the iron formation at a depth of 

1,600 feet. A study of the gravity data released by my Department of Mineral Resources and the results 

of the core samples assayed by the Saskatchewan Research Council indicates potentially large 

commercial iron ore deposits in this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The discovery was south of the Pre-Cambrian Shield and favourably located in 

regard to roads, railroads and power. Ground and airborne geophysical surveys show a possible iron 

range in excess of a mile in width and 40 miles in length, one of the largest yet discovered. Fairway 

Exploration Limited has staked 520 claims in the area covering approximately 40 square miles. The 

Company now plans an extensive drilling program commencing immediately and continuing throughout 

the summer to determine the extent and the grade of the reserves. Hon. Members will be interested to 

know that Fairway Exploration Limited is a Canadian-based company incorporated in the Province of 

Quebec with head office in Montreal. Its President, Mr. A.L. Parres is a long time resident of 

Saskatchewan who obtained a degree in geology from the University of Saskatchewan and who has 

devoted his working life to the development of Saskatchewan’s mineral resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, let me join with the Minister of 

Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) in expressing our pleasure at this promising discovery. We are 

pleased that, as you say, Mr. Parres who has been prospecting and developing in this province for many 

years under various labels — and I recall Parres Explorations and some others in which he was involved 

— appears to have made a significant discovery. I wonder whether the Minister would be able to 

indicate whether it will prove to be one which can be worked economically and, in this regard, whether 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1796 

it is better or worse than the Choiceland deposit in the same general area which has been known for 

some 15 or so years at least but which hasn’t yet been able to get itself in a position to compete with the 

open pit sort of thing that we see in the Labrador or Atikokan or other places in Ontario. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Am I permitted to reply, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think there has to be a little bit of give and take in these things. I think this is a matter 

of some degree of importance. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I’m directing a question to the Minister if I may put it that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m sure the House will be willing to consider this as a question and the Minister can 

reply. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Yes, the discovery is some 30 miles north of what we know as the Choiceland iron 

ore discovery. It is a higher grade ore than Choiceland; it likewise is much shallower. The Choiceland 

ore is down over 2,000 feet. This they hit at 1,600 feet, so they tell me. For instance, if you are 

constructing a shaft in the two areas, what would cost $10 million to put a shaft down in Choiceland 

would cost about $6 million in this area. Thus it has an economic edge when you consider the 

economics of it. There isn’t the great Blairmore to contend with. It has advantages from a production 

point of view. It is more favorable, I should think, than the Choiceland deposit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act 

 

Hon. D.G. MacLennan (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend 

The Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, before moving second reading of this Bill I should like to made a few 

observations on Workmen’s Compensation generally and on the amendments particularly. 

 

Modern compensation laws in Canada found their origin in the recommendations of Chief Justice 

Meredith of Ontario who conducted a two and one-half year world-wide survey and made a 1,251 page 

report to the Ontario Government. Upon this report, the first Canadian Workmen’s Compensation 

system, as we know it today, was founded. Ontario was the first province to enact Workmen’s 

Compensation legislation. All parties in Canada followed Ontario and today there are Workmen’s 

Compensation Acts in all 10 provinces which are, except for a few variations, almost identical. Over the 

years the Workmen’s Compensation Boards of Canada have endeavoured to achieve a great degree of 

uniformity in order to obviate any disparity between the provinces as it affects workmen and employees 

alike. For example, the disability rating schedule that was applied uniformly across Canada is 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1797 

based on a report of the committee on Permanent Disability Evaluation of September 1, 1964 to the 

Workmen’s Compensation Boards of Canada and which is periodically updated. Through consultations 

with other Boards it has been possible to bring about uniform first aid regulations which now apply in 

Alberta, Manitoba, Nova Scotia and Saskatchewan. In the same manner, petroleum and natural gas 

safety regulations have been made uniform in Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, The Territories, The 

Yukon and Saskatchewan. Forest safety regulations are uniform across Canada as well as the general 

accident prevention regulations. Throughout the years the Canadian Workmen’s Compensation Acts 

have been amended from time to time to meet social and economic changes having regard for the basic 

philosophy of Workmen’s Compensation. In this respect, the Saskatchewan Workmen’s Compensation 

(Accident Fund) Act has continued through Canadian jurisdictions and, in several instances, to surpass 

them. 

 

The proposed amendments in this Bill are yet another step forward in providing increased benefits to 

injured workmen and their dependents. If these proposed amendments are subsequently passed by this 

Legislature, Saskatchewan’s Workmen’s Compensation benefits will compare favorably with and, in 

some instances, surpass those of other provinces. For example, by raising widow’s pensions as proposed 

from $115 to $127.50 per month, places Saskatchewan second highest in Canada in this regard. By 

increasing the minimum total permanent disability payment from $156 to $173 per month again renders 

this benefit the second highest paid by Workmen’s Compensation Boards of Canada. By increasing 

clothing allowances paid to amputees from $96 to $110 for a lower limb and from $42 to $50 for an 

upper limb, will constitute the highest benefit in Canada in this regard. 

 

The proposed amendment to Section 48 of the Act will enable a workman seeking a medical 

examination, on appeal, to choose two specialists from a list submitted by the Board of all doctors who 

are certified in the specialty related to his injury or ailment and practising in the centre chosen by him. 

 

The panel by which the workmen will be examined either in Saskatoon or in Regina will consist of the 

two specialists so chosen by him and a permanent chairman, a general practitioner designated by the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. This, without question, will be the most progressive medical appeal 

to be found in any other Workmen’s Compensation jurisdiction. 

 

Yet another forward step, in my view, is the proposal to provide for a cost of living adjustment of 

existing pensions up to December 31, 1968. Only two other provinces in Canada are providing such, 

Quebec and British Columbia. It may be contended that the proposed cost of living adjustment does not 

adequately compensate for the increased living costs and it would be a valid contention. However, to 

increase pensions for past accidents to the extent to which living costs have increased would place an 

unfair burden on industry which had already assumed the cost of those accidents and its responsibility at 

the time the accident claim was accepted. In the 1966 report of the Royal Commission in the matter of 

Workmen’s Compensation to the Government of Ontario, the Hon. Justice McGillvray of the Supreme 

Court of Ontario, who headed the Commission, sets out the opinion of Mr. Justice Roach given in the 

1950 Royal Commission report and with which he strongly 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1798 

agreed. I quote. 

 

The compensation for which the Act provides must be regarded for what it is and always has been 

intended to be, namely, a debt owed by industry to the injured workman or his dependents. It is proper 

to measure that debt at the time of the accident by whatever standards the law then specifies. When the 

debt is thus measured and evaluated and that measure is paid, industry should thereby be fully 

released. If, in the course of time due to changes in our social thinking or to change the economic 

conditions, it should be concluded that the standard of measurement should be altered, the debt should 

not be resurrected and remeasured by some new standard. There should be a finality to it. Without 

such finality industry can never know what its liabilities are. The ownership of industry is constantly 

changing. The shareholders of an industry in 1950 may be entirely different persons from the 

shareholders in 1940. In my respectful opinion it is unfair to visit on the shareholders in 1950 a debt 

created in 1940 and which by law of the land as it stood in 1940 was completely satisfied. When the 

amount of compensation in respect to accidents is increased, the assessments to provide that increased 

compensation are levied on the class in which the industry in which the workman was employed at the 

date of the accident was placed. The firm by whom the workman was employed will no longer be in 

that class. Indeed, it may have passed out of existence and in that event the industries within the class 

are called upon to pay a debt for which they were in no way responsible. Other industries, in the 

meantime, have come into existence and are in this class with the same results. 

 

The main reason advanced for increasing pensions which have been awarded in respect of past 

accidents is that due to changed economic conditions, they are found to be inadequate. If the workman 

or his dependents are thus adversely affected by changed economic conditions and require assistance, 

the burden of providing such a system should be borne by society as a whole and not by one group of 

society, in this case, industry. Industry discharged its debt by the standard which the law prescribed 

when the accident happened and the amount which was then paid was considered adequate. It is the 

lessening of the purchase value of our currency and a consequent increase in the cost of living that 

later made it inadequate. That is a condition of general application. It applies to all persons who for 

any reason are in a position of having to live on an income fixed in past years. The dependents of 

persons who in their lifetime were never associated with industry are similarly affected. These, if they 

require assistance, receive it from the state since the injured workmen or their dependents are in the 

same position and for the same cause, I see no reason why they should be treated differently. 

Specifically, I think it is discriminatory to place the burden of assisting one group under state and the 

other on industry alone. 

 

Since other matters pertaining to this Bill will be discussed in Committee, I now move second reading of 

this Bill. 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1799 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, before making my own remarks on this Bill, I 

should like to have something to say about the comments of the Minister who has just taken his seat. He 

has said that compensation legislation across the country is identical in nature and I think to some extent 

that is true. There has been uniformity and I think to some degree that uniformity may be desirable. But 

it is my contention that what has occurred in the more than one-half century since Workmen’s 

Compensation first came into being, we have had far too much uniformity because of the bureaucracies 

that have been developed in Workmen’s Compensation administrations across Canada. And what was 

more than half a century ago a pretty progressive concept is now one that lags in terms of the social need 

and is far too static for what we require among working people in industry, indeed, I think insofar as the 

interests of employers are concerned. 

 

The Minister has said that the Saskatchewan Act parallels other Acts. I want to remind the minister that 

there was a time under the former Government when the leadership in Workmen’s Compensation was 

from Saskatchewan and was far in the lead of any other province in the country. We, of course, gave the 

leadership in this province to the 75 per cent basis of compensation. It took another 10 or 12 years 

before the other jurisdictions in Canada came from behind from 60 or 66 per cent to the 75 per cent 

level. In my view there would have been a static situation had not one province, in this instance 

Saskatchewan under a CCF Government, decided to make such changes. 

 

As well, the ceiling on compensation was raised and many other excellent changes were made by the 

former CCF Government. These were, for the most part, finally taken into the other Acts across Canada. 

So I should like to suggest to the Minister, Mr. Speaker, that it is not necessary for us merely to parallel. 

We should try to give leadership. It is my contention that Workmen’s Compensation, as we know the 

principle today, requires some very basic changes in philosophy. I think that we are obsessed with an 

excessive legalism and I believe the Minister in his comments this morning probably reflected that view. 

I was interested in his remarks about the pensions that will be partly raised by this Bill and his 

comments that industry should not bear the weight of an escalation of cost caused by the cost of living 

increases. 

 

I suggest that what has taken place over the years in Workmen’s Compensation is that in any 

progressive group or section — and the Minister knows there are some 22 of them under this Act — 

where they have moved to institute better accident prevention, there have been savings effected that 

would more than take care of any cost rises such as indicated here in the very small increases mentioned 

in the Bill. I’m going to speak more about that later. 

 

I suggest that it is not an unfair burden upon industry if in the first instance those accidents have been 

occasioned by the work of the employee in industry. Certainly, I do not think that it is a good argument 

to suggest that the whole weight of a cost of living escalation should not be borne somehow by 

Workmen’s Compensation. If, of course, the Minister is arguing that society should bear all or part of 

that cost then this is not reflected in the Bill before us. 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1800 

I say that with respect to the increase of pensions, the increase for clothing allowances to amputees, 

these are not very world-shaking. More about that later. 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, what we need at this time is a new look at our whole compensation 

philosophy and structure. I should like to appeal to the Government this morning. I direct my remarks 

especially to the Minister of Labour (Mr. MacLennan) and I hope he will take them under consideration, 

that we should have a thorough review of the Act in a special way. I should suggest a body chaired by a 

justice, one of the members perhaps of the Court of Appeal who would go thoroughly into the needs of 

compensation in Saskatchewan. I say this because there have come to me — as I am sure there have 

come to many Members of this House, including the Minister of Labour, especially over the past year — 

many complaints that indicate the extent of grievance from people whose cases have been dealt with by 

the Compensation Board. 

 

I believe that apart from all else that I have suggested this morning we need to move substantially ahead 

in terms of the philosophy of compensation and its administration. We have at the moment many people 

who believe that they have been unfairly dealt with, whose cases should become subject to a thorough 

review. Their complaints should be directed immediately to some kind of a judicial body. 

 

In the alternative, Mr. Speaker, I should ask that the Minister refer this question to an intersessional 

committee of this Legislature or that — and this, of course, will depend on whatever political fortunes 

reveal in the future — there should be such a committee set up when the House again convenes after an 

election is held. I do not think, however, that it should wait until that time. I believe that this committee 

could be and should bed set up immediately, that committee should hear representations not only from 

the people who have complaints and very real complaints, in some instances, but from all bodies of 

labor, all bodies of employers and all interested people in this province. 

 

There is at present a group known as The Injured Workmen’s Association that has been set up with 

offices in Saskatoon. This group is most anxious — I have had representations to this effect and I am 

sure the Minister has — to appear before a body of the kind I suggest to lodge their point of view and 

their complaints so that they may be dealt with by a group other than the present Workmen’s 

compensation Board. 

 

I should ask the Minister, therefore, to consider an announcement along the lines that I have 

recommended. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my first remarks in dealing more pertinently with the principles of this Bill are that I 

am disappointed in the overall contents of the Bill. Arriving at this stage of the session — towards its 

last days, one presumes — we might have thought that something large and substantial was in 

preparation by the Government to overcome the great shortcomings and deficiencies in both The 

Compensation Act and its administration. But now as it has come to us, it stands revealed as what I can 

only call minimum effort legislation — something to talk about on the hustings in the face of so many 

failures of the Liberal Party and in the face of so many of its anti-labor acts and 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1801 

activities. 

 

This is not to say that there are not changes in the Bill which constitute improvements. To that extend 

I’ll be glad to support them, Mr. Speaker. But they are hesitant and they are half-way and they do not 

meet the real problems or the issues that are facing workmen or indeed, their own employers. They will 

elicit no great joy or happy response from either section. 

 

But there are also amendments proposed which in various ways take away and reduce some benefits and 

rights already enjoyed by employees and their dependents. These I will not support and I will say why, 

here in general, and more particularly in Committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My chief disappointment, however, lies in the fact that this Bill, as I have already suggested, does not 

meet the needs of a modern compensation Act, that it does not accord with the needs of our times, that it 

does not meet the criticisms that have been levelled in this House and elsewhere against both the Act 

and its administration. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, does the Act provide for major recommendations made by the Government’s own 

Committee of Review almost three years ago? This is the first matter that I think we should consider. 

For example, Mr. Speaker, there is no cost of living escalator to maintain the value of pensions as time 

goes on. Nor does this Bill provide for the compensation counsellor that was recommended by the 

Committee of Review. These are only two aspects in which the committee of Review’s report has been 

totally ignored by this Liberal Government. 

 

Some of the sections are a little difficult to understand in terms of their probable effects and these I think 

will need to be explored in Committee. One of these — and I shall mention it to the Minister (Mr. 

MacLennan) now — is the new Section 36. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill established a new procedure under Section 48 for a medical appeal of a workman. 

This has been dealt with to some extent in the Minister’s remarks. It appears to be somewhat more 

satisfactory than the procedure that was outlined in the old section. I did wonder about the appointment 

of the chairman of the panels that were mentioned in the Bill must be by the Board after consultation 

with the Saskatchewan Medical Association. Why not, I wondered, appointed after recommendation of 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association? I assume that the Government is anxious to create an unbiased 

medical tribunal and if so, Mr. Speaker, and considering that the chairmen of the panels are appointed 

for a three year period, why should not the appointment be made by the Government after receiving an 

appropriate recommendation from the Saskatchewan Association? 

 

Aside from this, of course, the question is begged by this part of the Bill. What is needed, what 

Members of this House have conceded is greatly needed, is an overall appeal procedure in this Act, one 

that would review any Board decisions. And this particular amendment in the Bill does not meet this 

crying need. 

 

Dealing with the proposal in the Bill, leaving aside other considerations such as the important one that I 

have just mentioned, I wonder why the Government has not decided to make 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1802 

the chairman of the review panel a judge of the Queen’s Bench Court? While the stage described in this 

Bill in this section is a medical review, I believe there might be some value in this kind of organization. I 

admit this is my own conjecture but I think it is one, nonetheless, that deserves consideration. 

 

I return, however, to the main difficulty. There is no overall appeal or review provided in this Bill and in 

this new section. Without it, the Act will not meet the many complaints that are and have been advanced 

by aggrieved workmen. The Minister well knows that the recent cases which have been brought to his 

attention would hardly be solved by the suggested procedure in the new section. 

 

The principle in Section 32, as it is proposed to be amended, is not new. However the protection that is 

afforded workmen would appear to be less under the new section than was obtained under the old. As at 

the present, Mr. Speaker, an injured workman could receive Saskatchewan compensation benefits if he 

happened to be engaged in duties in Saskatchewan when he was hurt. As it is proposed, he would have 

to be a regular Saskatchewan resident — as the section says — “or the usual place of his employment is 

in Saskatchewan”. Now, what defines, Mr. Speaker, “a Saskatchewan resident?” Apparently that his 

usual place of employment is in Saskatchewan. But what happens if a workman comes to Saskatchewan 

from another province, if he is employed here, if he intends to live here but after having had an accident 

is judged by the Compensation Board to be someone who is not a Saskatchewan resident? I cannot see 

that the proposed new section is as beneficial, bur rather, one which may remove to some degree at least, 

existing protection. 

 

The principle involved in the new parts to Section 64 constitute a slight improvement in that the 

widow’s pension of a former invalid husband has been increased $12.50 a month. I should doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, however, if this will take care of increased living costs since the last adjustment was made. So 

while it is helpful, the aid is not really very significant. Moreover, where in this class there are also 

dependents, these payments have not been increased. This last seems to me to be a strange approach. If 

the widow requires more money and it is very apparent that she does with this low monthly payment, 

then so do the dependents. Obviously, in all equity, the payments under this part of the section should 

have been raised accordingly. The fact that they have not been raised, is, I think, regrettable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by the changes in another section, pensions have been increased — as the Minister has told 

us — from three to nine per cent, depending on when the pension was first awarded. Now any increase 

can, of course, be classed as some gain. But again, the increases allowed here must be seen as niggardly 

and insufficient. For example, a workman pensioned in 1963 will get a three per cent increase. Now, 

surely, Mr. Speaker, this is not enough. I have not had the opportunity of making a precise assessment 

but the cost of living in the past eight years has risen about 30 per cent. So the adjustment here will take 

care of only one-tenth of the erosion in buying power of pensions that were established in the year 1963. 

This can hardly be considered as just or fair. Not only is the adjustment less than princely, it is far short 

of meeting pressing needs. 

 

A person pensioned in April of 1948 will receive a nine 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1803 

per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Once more this figure falls lamentably short of meeting the situation 

posed by advancing living costs. I find that the difference, the escalation of costs from 1948 to 1971 was 

about 55.3 points in the cost of living index. The index in 1948 was 75 points and the most recent index 

at January of 1971 was at 130.3. I believe there has been a slight rise since, by the way. That’s 55.3 

points (or percentage) as against a nine per cent increase. Again, it seems to me that this, while it is 

some gain, is hardly what should have been expected at this time. 

 

The same basic shortcomings, I suggest, are seen in the raising of minimum compensation paid for full 

disability. It will be increased from the present $36 to $40 a week. Any raise may be something but $4 a 

week is less than 75 per cent of the present impossibly inadequate minimum wage of $1.25 per hour (on 

a weekly basis) and it is further out of line because we know the present minimum wage is due to be 

increased. Therefore, the $40 weekly minimum compensation level is one that fails in justice and 

equality even on the basis of the present inadequate minimum wage. 

 

The new Section 75, Mr. Speaker, provides some relief to amputees in the way of a higher clothing 

allowance. This, of course, will be paid at the discretion of the Compensation Board. It’s an extension of 

the present principle in the Act and is to be commended as far as it goes. But once more, because of the 

increase in clothing costs made since the section was first enacted by the former Government in 1962, it 

is only really a bare reinstatement of values, if indeed, it is that. 

 

Similarly, the principle in the new Section 78 can hardly be termed a benefit. It is to reinforce the  

Board’s power and its powers of decision. The first part is a restatement of what now exists in law 

except that the Board may divert payment of compensation for dependents to someone other than the 

widow. 

 

Under the amendment before us, Mr. Speaker, the Board can exercise its own judgement without any 

appeal to anybody whatsoever. The existing section does not go quite that far. The second part of the 

amendment permits the Compensation Board to terminate a widow’s pension if she is living or 

cohabiting with a man to whom she is not legally married. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Board exercises 

complete discretion in making this determination. There is no appeal, no having to establish that a 

common-law relationship does, in fact, exist. I think this appears to be an exercise of powers which it is 

inadvisable and dangerous for this Legislature to grant. I do not believe the compensation Board should 

be able to terminate a widow’s pension just because, say on the evidence of hearsay or based on rumors, 

it may exercise sole discretion to determine if a widow is living common-law. 

 

Admitting that in the construction of the section which permits the termination of a widow’s pension 

upon her legal remarriage, the Board may find some irritating situations where a common-law 

relationship seems to exist, this can hardly provide valid reason to give the  

Board supreme authority to make arbitrary decisions of the kind the change in the Bill will now give it. 

 

The changes in the Bill which provide for the replacement of broken dentures, eye glasses, artificial eyes 

or limbs where breakage is because of an accident at work, is a good change, 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1804 

Mr. Speaker. It is not world-shaking and it will affect a relatively few workmen but it is undeniably 

beneficial. I will certainly endorse it. 

 

While I have not studied the new sections on safety very closely, they appear to be in the right direction. 

I shall not venture to go into them very deeply at this time. I welcome them if, indeed, they strengthen 

existing regulations and practices and I shall await the Minister’s explanation in more detail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that genuine progress in safety lies in law changes, so much as it lies in the 

actions of the Board and in their administrative practices and procedures. We need safety in a plant 

organized on a co-operative and co-ordinated basis with the workmen a true part of the endeavor. Safety 

in plants today in this province is far too much along the authoritarian line, dictated from the supervisory 

point of view, failing to enlist, in all cases, the energies and initiative of the working people concerned. 

However, if alterations in present safety sections of the Act will do anything to reduce hazards and 

eliminate accidents, I’ll be glad to accept them. But I want to emphasize again that it is in the Board 

organization and its approach to plant safety that we shall really make true progress. 

 

May I comment again with particular reference to the remarks of the Minister about costs which 

amounted, I thought, almost to an obsession in relation to the matter that we are discussing. I am quite 

positive in my mind that a much more active and meaningful program of accident prevention could save 

this province millions of dollars. This would not only save money for industry, but permit us to do many 

beneficial things in the way of protection for the workman and in increasing his allowances under the 

Act that are not now done without increasing costs. There has not, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, been, 

to my knowledge, an accident prevention association in any branch of industry set up during the past 50 

years that has not succeeded in achieving a very substantial lowering of costs through reduction of 

accidents. Not only, of course, should we be thinking about the money angle, the principal consideration 

is what it means to the workman. The pain and the anxiety, the disturbance to his family, often the loss 

of limbs, the psychological manifestations as well for many injured people who have been forced to take 

pensions, have been ruinous to their entire lives. This is one of the reasons why it seems to me we 

should look into the practices and the procedures of the Board not simply from the legislative aspect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said in the beginning, a number of the proposals in this Bill are acceptable, some are 

questionable, some are perhaps unacceptable. I shall give the Bill support on second reading for its 

better nature while reserving the right to question its total contents in Committee. Arising out of the 

recommendations of previous committees of review on the Compensation Act and Regulations and out 

of the numerous proposals which have come to the Government, this Bill is, as I have already said, no 

cause for any great elation. 

 

Here are a few of the things that this Bill should have contained: 

 

1. A section obliging the Board to conduct a genuine accident prevention and rehabilitation program as 

well as making it 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1805 

possible for the Legislature to debate the Board’s report and to advise the Minister of Labour of needed 

reforms. This House in that respect, Mr. Speaker, has been completely frustrated. 2. It could have 

provided for the establishment of a review committee or commissioner to whom workmen with 

grievances could address themselves. 3. It could have raised the rate of compensation for general 

purposes to at least 85 per cent as a beginning of a move to reach a 100 per cent or nearly 100 per cent 

level. 4. It could have lifted the present ceiling on annual income on which compensation is based. 

Surely, this is indicated by everything that has taken place in the way of cost of living rises, if not for 

sheer equity. 5. The Bill could have required the Board to set up a modern information and research 

apparatus. As far as I know, this Board still cannot tell us how many people are subject to workmen’s 

compensation in this province and therefore cannot tell us the accident ratio figure in industry as a 

whole. A most fantastic situation. 6. The Bill could have increased compensation pensions to conform 

with needs and advancing living costs, as well as the provisions of a cost of compensation from this 

point on. 7. It could have provided for a modest pension to the widow where a pensioned husband dies 

and that death cannot be charged completely to the industrial injury that he suffered when he was 

pensioned. 

 

Now there are only a few of some truly progressive changes that could have been made without, I 

suggest, disturbance to anyone. I am very sorry indeed that after waiting so long for this Bill it comes to 

us in the dying days of this session and provides so comparatively few changes. Mr. Speaker, one would 

have hoped that the Government with an eye, at least, to the coming provincial election and in the full 

knowledge of its delinquencies in the field of labor legislation and in its general treatment of labor, 

would have tried to achieve a partial redemption in providing a compensation Bill offering deep-going 

benefits and a decisive alteration in compensation practices. This Bill doesn’t achieve that as I have 

shown. It offers some improvements. These I will support. I shall later point out where the Bill takes 

away rather than supplements benefits. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to add a few words with 

respect to The Workmen’s Compensation Accident Fund Act, the Act to amend it, which is before us — 

Bill 68. It seems to me that there are provision with which I am not particularly happy. I am particularly 

distressed at the fact that no attempt has been made to tackle some of the real problems with respect to 

the administration of Workmen’s Compensation which I think are recognized on both sides of the House 

and were pretty vigorously articulated at the last session by Members on both sides of the House. 

 

I first want to comment on the bit of philosophy which the Minister (Mr. MacLennan) expounded when 

he was introducing this Bill and to say that I disagree heartily with the general philosophy of 

Workmen’s Compensation which he stated. More particularly, I dispute the proposition that when an 

employee is injured, then the appropriate thing to do is to calculate the entitlement of that employee to a 

pension for total or partial disability on the basis of his earning at that time and to set an amount and 

then 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1806 

to conclude that the industry has no further obligation to that employee. That is a particularly legalistic 

approach to workmen’s compensation and one which I think has been left behind by most people other 

than possibly a few judges of the Ontario courts. I should have thought it was left behind 25 years ago. 

Almost anyone who talks in terms of compensation does not now talk in the fictions of the payments to 

employees coming out of the pockets of shareholders. Does anyone believe, does anyone in this House 

believe that if we provided, let us say, that the employees of construction companies who were injured 

ten years ago, should have their pensions adjusted in accordance with increases of the cost of living? 

Does anyone believe that his would take ten cents out of the pocket of any shareholder of a construction 

company? Does anyone believe for one moment that those costs would not be passed on and would not 

become a cost of the construction industry? Does anyone believe that? In fact, what we need to 

introduce is not the idea that these compensation payments somehow come out of the pockets of 

shareholders which they obviously don’t, but that they are a cost of the activity. We live in a 

technological society, therefore, we have construction companies, therefore, we have complicated 

machinery and workmen get injured. And the cost of building buildings not only includes bricks and 

mortar but it includes the cost of looking after injured workmen because injuries are a part of a modern 

society. I see no reason whatever why the construction industry of 1970 ought not to bear the burden of 

paying fair compensation to those workmen injured in the construction industry of 1960. To anyone who 

says that the shareholders of construction companies of 1970 are different from the shareholders of 

construction companies of 1960 as the Minister just has, I say he is raising a totally irrelevant argument. 

The question is whether or not the construction industry and the consumers of construction services 

should assume this obligation, or whether it should be assumed by general society. Now you can put up 

an argument for both but I believe that we are at the stage in terms of social development that activities 

should bear the cost of their casualties. I believe that we recognize this. The whole concept of 

workmen’s compensation recognizes it. The whole concept of an automobile accident compensation 

without fault is a type of activity compensation which is recognized and I see no reason why we 

shouldn’t include in this general concept of activity costs, the idea of updating inadequate pensions from 

past decades. So I simply don’t agree with the Minister when he talks about it being unfair to hoist on 

the shareholders of 1970 the costs of 1960. I say the shareholders won’t pay a penny of it anyway. 

 

The other point I wanted to make was that which is based upon Section 36 of the Act, Section 5 of the 

Bill, which once again takes away from the employee his right of action against the employer or indeed 

against any other employer who is covered by Workmen’s Compensation. Now this is the bedrock of 

The Workmen’s Compensation Act. The bedrock is that the employee will have compensation without 

proving that anyone was negligent and as a result he shall lose his right of action against and tort-feasor, 

if I may use a legal term, anybody who was negligent whether it be his employer or a fellow employee 

or another employer who is scheduled under Schedule 1. But I want to point out to the Minister just how 

badly that is being administered and I should be interested if the Member for Hanley (Mr. Heggie) 

would just listen to this, what I call a horror story, of the administration of Workmen’s compensation. 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1807 

I noted a particular case where an employee was working on a construction project. He had been 

assigned one particular duty which involved him assisting on the ground someone who was using a 

backhoe. This employee was capable of operating a backhoe and he, in the course of proceeding to do 

the employer’s work — digging a ditch with a backhoe — went up on the machine and operated the 

backhoe in contravention of his instruction. He was not to operate the backhoe and he went up and 

operated the backhoe. In the course of operating the backhoe he was injured. It was a backhoe which did 

not have the safety equipment which, at least in my view, it should have had. It was so arranged that his 

foot could slip on a steel deck and go into the machinery and crushed his foot. The employee made 

application for compensation. The Compensation Board said, “You were not acting in the course of your 

employment, true you were on the job and it was working hours but you should not have been on that 

machine.” So the Compensation Board said, “You can’t get compensation.” I took the view that this was 

a wrong decision but I then said if the employee can’t get compensation, I will sue the employer on the 

employee’s behalf and see how I get along on the grounds that the equipment was defective. The Board 

said to the employee, “Oh you can’t sue the employer because you are an employee and he is the 

employer under the Act and you have lost your right of action.” And the employee said to the Board, 

“Now wait a minute, you’re telling me I’m not an employee for the purposes of compensation but I am 

an employee for the purpose of losing my right of action.” They said, “yes, indeed, that is the law and 

that’s the law we are going to stick with. If you don’t like it, you can sue.” Which is what was done. 

Unfortunately, the matter did not proceed, the employee left the province and didn’t want to proceed in 

the matter. This was a disappointment for me. He was one of the many who left the province, but I 

won’t go into that argument at this time. 

 

My point is that the interpretation of this section was such as to deprive the employee not only of his 

right of action but also of his right of compensation. Incidentally, I say that the Workmen’s 

Compensation officials were not making a foolish judgment based upon the law. I thought that they 

were making a marginally wrong one but the way the Act reads it was thoroughly capable of bearing the 

construction which they gave. Accordingly, my criticism is directed not primarily at the officials of the 

Board, even though I feel they should have made another judgment, but at the state of the legislation 

which, as I say, was quite capable of bearing the interpretation which they gave it. Now it seems to me 

that it was quite intolerable to place a workman in this situation. For all of the reasons which I stated in 

the debate in the 1970 session, the idea of depriving a workman of his right of action is becoming less 

acceptable. Perhaps that is not the way to phrase it. There was a time when compensation was so 

generous in relation to what a workman might be left with otherwise that the deprivation of his right of 

action was a relatively small price to pay for an insurance scheme like Workmen’s Compensation. 

Workmen’s Compensation has failed to keep pace. Any number of instances can be given where 

workmen would be better off if they could sue someone, any number, particularly because of the more 

generous provisions for the compensation of people injured in auto accidents, now without fault. The 

Workmen’s Compensation people are going to have either to make their plan more adequate for 

workmen or else stop depriving workmen of their right to sue when they could get a better deal by other 

means. Because many employers are getting a positively good deal out of this in the sense that they get 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1808 

immunity from legal action for a relatively cheap price. My point, therefore, Mr. Speaker, is that 

sections of this kind, and these are the very bedrock of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, must now be 

viewed with increasing concern because it seems to me that the employee every year is giving up a more 

valuable right, the right to sue and collect under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and other 

compensating statutes in exchange for a compensation plan which is not keeping pace with the general 

philosophy of society of compensating injured workmen. 

 

I put it to the Minister without dealing with the particular aspects of this Bill. I should ask him to ask his 

officials to review the whole Workmen’s Compensation Act with the idea that the Act ought to provide 

fair and reasonable compensation for workmen who are injured on the job without any reduction 

because of pre-existing conditions. These reductions are no longer defensible for all the reasons I tried to 

outline in 1970. They would not be defensible if an action were taken under The Automobile Insurance 

Act. He should have his officials frame a statute which provides workmen with a reasonably generous 

compensation plan in exchange for depriving them, and I think rightly depriving them, of their right of 

action against the employer or any fellow employee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — I want to add a few words to those that have already been 

expressed by two of my colleagues and I want to say that in general, we on this side of the House, 

welcome the changes which we suggest are overdue. We, on this side of the House, have taken the 

position for some time that there was a genuine need for the updating of the Workmen’s Compensation 

Act and the provisions for pensions and other benefits for injured workmen. We’ve said repeatedly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that disability pensions and pensions for the surviving spouse are in need of a general 

upgrading in light of the rapid escalation of living costs over the last number of years. I think it has to be 

admitted, first of all, that increases which are provided for are extremely minimal indeed, considering all 

of the other economic factors. 

 

For instance, Mr. Speaker, the minimum compensation provides for an increase of only $4 a week from 

$36 to $40 a week and I think this has to be regarded as merely a token adjustment which should have 

been significantly larger. 

 

The adjustment in the amount of compensation paid to injured workmen is welcome, Mr. Speaker, but I 

say again, that the percentage increases are sadly lacking when we regard the upward spiral in living 

costs over the last number of years. The chart which is shown on page 5 shows an increase of some nine 

per cent for a workman who was injured between April of 1948 but prior to January 1, 1953. I think we 

should consider the fact that these are dreadfully inadequate and to use one example only and I think 

perhaps one of the outstanding ones, a workman who is injured between January 1, 1963 and January 1, 

1969 will enjoy an increase of only three per cent over that eight year period. This eight year period, I 

think all Members in the House will recognize, represents a period in our history when we saw the most 

rapid escalation of living costs of any comparable period that any of us are able to recall. The other 

increases dating back to 1948 are equally inadequate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think another example 

is worthy of note at this time and I want 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1809 

to use this example particularly because it’s the precise example of a constituent of mine who was 

injured in May 1949 and since that time he has been receiving a partial disability pension of $32.50 per 

month as this is a partial disability pension. So to use this example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the increase 

will be $3 a month or 10 cents a day for this particular constituent of mine who was injured back in 

1949. This is a person working in industry who has because of this disability been by-passed for several 

promotions, he tells me, and he has been a loser because of a number of subsequent salary increases 

which he has lost because of the physical disability that he suffers. So this $3 a month in the way of an 

increase then has to be regarded as grossly inadequate and I think under the terms of the Act it has to be 

regarded as a disgrace because of the hardship that has been brought to this particular workman and I am 

sure many, many other workmen in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I say again that the increases are niggardly, I suggest that they should bear more of a relationship to 

the increase in living costs over the last number of years. Those of us on this side of the House are happy 

to support whatever provisions are provided for in terms of increasing clothing allowances to amputees 

and the increase for the surviving spouse. In total again, I say we will be happy to support the Bill with 

the reservations that I have noted and I hope that the Minister, for as long as he is able to fill his office, 

will perhaps bring about a reappraisal of the rate increases because, once again, they fall short of need. 

Certainly, we on this side of the House, will give support to the measures contained here. At the same 

time, we must, I believe, express our disappointment in the nature of the amendments that we are called 

upon to give approval to today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — I too want to make a few comments with respect to this 

Bill. I shall not restate the arguments already advanced by those who have spoken on this side. I think all 

of the arguments are very worthwhile and ones that the Minister ought to consider very seriously. 

 

I firmly believe that the complaints an MLA receives, certainly the complaints that I have received 

under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, probably far outnumber the type and number of complaints 

that I have received about any other department of the Government. And that’s really something when 

Members consider and might usually feel that complaints respecting the Department of Welfare would 

be the most numerous. I represent a riding that can be fairly described as a riding where a lot of working 

men reside and a lot of poor and unemployed reside. I can say that the complaints that I receive not only 

from the riding but from throughout the city with respect to Workmen’s Compensation are probably 

larger in number than another complaints that I have about any other aspect of Government. 

 

And I think this is an important fact to consider because certainly, I, as a politician, want to be 

responsive to what the constituents are concerned about. I dare say the Members on the opposite side, 

like the Member from Hanley (Mr. Heggie), the Member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) who 

spoke in last year’s debate and some others, have similar experiences and complaints. 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1810 

May I also say that I have probably never been more frustrated in my dealings with any Government 

arm or Government agency than I have been with my dealings with the Workmen’s Compensation 

Board. The decisions taken by the Board are frankly legalistic to an almost ridiculous point. I think the 

example outlined by the Leader of the Opposition was a good one this morning. At the same time the 

Board is legalistic in the sense of the medical application of the terms of the Act when it comes to 

determining what compensation should be paid a particular individual. When one appeals to the 

Workmen’s Compensation Board, very often the injured workman comes back and he just doesn’t feel 

that he has had a fair hearing or a chance to have his complaint properly aired. So I commend to the 

consideration of the Minister of Labour (Mr. MacLennan) and the Liberal Government opposite that if 

they are to be responsive to one very sensitive area of Government, this is the area, Workmen’s 

Compensation Board, with respect to matters of the working man. 

 

These amendments do not get down to the basic business of changing the principle of compensation to 

the injured worker. I think it will probably require some detailed study in order to complete that. 

 

Now, I want to make a second point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is the need to hear views of those who 

have been affected by decisions of the Board before any further substantive changes are made to the Act. 

There is an association in Saskatoon known as the Injured Workers Association. The Injured Workers 

Association started as a group of two or three injured workers initially who had these various grievances 

against the Board. As a result of a very small advertisement in one of the local newspapers in Saskatoon, 

the membership was expanded now to where, I’m told, it’s nearly 100 of these people in the Saskatoon 

area. They are, by and large, workers who are on compensation and have no other source of income. 

Therefore, the association is finding difficult times to finance itself. Nevertheless, the president of the 

association tells me that as a result of this advertisement that was run in the Commentator he received 

letters from all parts of the province, in fact, other parts of Canada, about complaints against the 

Workmen’s Compensation Board. They have tried as best as they can to process the claims of the Board 

but I think it is correct to say that their success has been very limited indeed. Nevertheless, they have 

formed the association. I have in front of me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 59 copies of a submission that they 

prepared to the Members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan for the consideration of the 

Members. I’m not going to take the time to read the provisions. They are there. I should like to take the 

provisions and have each Member of the House receive one. I may say that I hold no special brief. They 

are certainly not politically aligned to us. It was just a mere matter of them calling me up in Saskatoon 

because of the fact that they have had some communications with me in the past. I promised them, 

together with my colleague from Mayfair, that we would have these briefs tabled for Members. Now the 

brief, I think, states the basic sentiments of those who had problems with this Board. 

 

In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to emphasize three things: 1. There is a need for a cost of living 

escalator. I make no further submission. I think the arguments advanced are well taken. 2. There is a 

need, in my view, to have an independent appeal tribunal even within the present set-up, the way the 

Minister proposes the amendments. This point is made in the 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1811 

brief by the Injured Workers Association. 3. I want to stress and stress very strongly the need to hear 

public representation from trade unions, from the Injured Workers Association, from individual workers 

who are grieved by this matter before any substantive changes are made. I think that this type of an 

organization should be encouraged. I’d almost like the Minister of Labour, if he could get the Treasury 

Board to agree, to give this IWA a small grant so that it can function more effectively. Some might say, 

well you’re giving a grant to an association to work against the interests of the Government. I don’t 

agree with that. You’d find that you have an association that would begin perhaps to process these 

complaints on an orderly basis, through one sort of organization, to the Minister of Labour and the 

Workmen’s Compensation Board. So the point I want to make here, finally, is that we must hear the 

voice of those people who have some very legitimate grievances. I want to endorse wholeheartedly the 

idea of a Committee of some form to look into the concept. 

 

In closing, it is important for all of us to look at the basic principle of compensation for workers to bring 

it up to date in 1970. Compensation which makes payment more readily available to the worker that is 

not legalistic, that is fair, that compensates on an adequate basis those who are injured. 

 

I will be supporting the amendments in second reading because they do provide some small increases 

and I think some improvements in the Act, but I do so with grave concern that the Government has thus 

far not seen fit to bring in some new pioneering legislation on the principle of compensation. If the 

Minister has any time left politically before the next election to do it I would commend him to that task. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to say a few words 

on this Bill that is before us on second reading. I am surprised in the Minister’s presentation of this Bill 

for two reasons. The first reason which surprised me was that the Minister attempted to make a case for 

the companies that are involved in Workmen’s compensation. It’s unfortunate, I think, that the Minister 

used the means that he did to attempt to make that case. I don’t think it’s a legalistic case and I don’t 

think that’s the proper position of the Minister of Labour to whom the Workmen’s Compensation Board 

answers in this province. That was unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now the second thing that surprised me was the mediocre offering that the Minister had in the area of 

Workmen’s Compensation. The advances are minimal, and I stress that. The advances are minimal. It 

appears to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this legislation brought before us at this late date and this time 

in the political history of this Party and this Government amounts to penny pinching for political 

purposes. The Minister with the minimum amount of funds and little advance of conditions made in this 

legislation is going to try pinch some political profit out of this Act. Now in view of the fact that when 

the Workmen’s Compensation came before us last year, strong representations were made at that time, I 

should have thought that the present Member, who was not the Minister at that time, would have learned 

something from the representations that were made from this side of the House. 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1812 

Not only from this side of the House but representations were made from across the way in the debate. 

At that time the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) rose and he spoke quite vigorously about 

Workmen’s Compensation. In his remarks he said this: “I find myself in full agreement with the 

Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney).” This was after Mr. Blakeney’s remarks where he scored 

this Compensation Board for the type of assistance they offer to injured workers in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if this legislation is good legislation, I should expect that the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. 

MacDougall) would stand in this House and praise it. He was here when second reading was offered. I 

suspect that the Member for Souris-Estevan will not stand and praise this legislation because, as I have 

said, the advances are minimal. The whole effort is a mediocre effort as far as the working people of 

Saskatchewan are concerned. 

 

It used to be a common observation that when workers were injured on the border between 

Saskatchewan and Alberta and Manitoba, that they took care on which side of the border they fell 

because it was much more beneficial for them to fall into Saskatchewan than to fall into Manitoba or 

Alberta. Now my leader, the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) brought forward a case this 

morning where an injured worker who was crippled managed to hobble out of the province because he 

thought he didn’t stand a chance against the Workmen’s Compensation Board and that’s an unfortunate 

. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He didn’t say that. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh, I think he did, Mr. Minister. And you have an opportunity to get up and say 

what he said in this debate. But the fact of the matter is the man saw no opportunity to get judgement on 

the basis of his injury in the Province of Saskatchewan. That was possibly one of the reasons why he left 

the province. Now there may have been other reasons; maybe he was out of work or something else. It 

seems to be quite a common reason nowadays. 

 

There are a number of technological changes that are taking place in the province and I’m sure that this 

whole area, on the basis of this alone and on the basis of the type of assistance that is offered to injured 

workers, should be reviewed. And I’m surprised, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, that the present Minister 

of Labour (Mr. MacLennan) brought in this Bill with such a small offering for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I receive a number of complaints about Workmen’s Compensation every year and while I can’t say that 

I receive the most complaints, I believe it is the second highest number of complaints that I receive in 

my constituency and I live in a lower middle income constituency with a lot of working people. They 

have a number of grievances against the Board about, I think primarily, the level of assistance that is 

offered from the Board. In addition to this, I receive representations from people in the other parts of the 

city of Saskatoon who find that allowances that they are receiving are almost totally inadequate to meet 

their needs. 

 

I’m talking about people who are flat on their back, partially or permanently disabled. They find that the 

pensions 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1813 

they are getting are totally inadequate. I find the offering that the Government has made here in this Bill 

to be totally inadequate and it is a shame that after the representations are made from both sides of the 

House, the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) and others, in this House last year, that the 

Minister would come in with this offering at this time. While there are some small areas where the 

changes are beneficial, I think overall the changes are hardly worth debating in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. MacLennan (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, listening to the debates this morning, 

there are a number of areas in the Bill that the Members opposite said that they agree with. They have 

also spent some time — indicating that what we are doing is perhaps too little. There were some 

questions raised by some of the Members opposite and some of their comments on specific items in the 

Bill — I’ll make reference to those that may be some explanation was requested and we’ll deal with it 

fully, of course, in Committee. I do want to comment on the comments made by the Member for Moose 

Jaw on Section 36 of the Bill referring to Section 32 of the Act. 

 

I should like to point out now that we have reciprocal arrangements under Section 57 with Alberta, 

Manitoba and Ontario providing that Saskatchewan residents whose work is performed here and in other 

provinces and who are injured in the other province may claim compensation there or in Saskatchewan. 

If a claim is made on Saskatchewan, the other board reimburses us. I think that should satisfy the 

opposite Members’ concern. 

 

On Section 36 there were many queries raises by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) — we 

will go into it — but I just want to make this one additional comment. Having the cost of such accident 

transferred to the employer’s record may assist us in making the negligent employer more conscious of 

the need to practise safety and that was the big single reason for that particular clause. 

 

Now I should like just briefly to mention on Section 12 of the Bill. The Member for Moose Jaw (Mr. 

Snyder) was dealing with women and those people that might be living common-law. Well, I want to 

assure the Member and all Members in this House that the Board is not concerned with the moral aspect 

but the Act presently discriminates against the widow who remarries. We do not intend to investigate all 

the widows but only such cases that are severe and brought to our attention and are not obvious. We do 

receive many complaints on just possibly two or three quite, what we consider, valid cases. 

 

The other sections of the Bill we shall deal, of course, with in Committee. I do not want to comment on 

the last speaker’s remarks. He was talking about which side of the province various employees would 

like to hobble out of. Well they certainly are not going to hobble into Manitoba. If you look at some of 

the comparative figures, in Saskatchewan the proposed widow’s pension would be $127.50 or just a 

little better than that. Manitoba is $120. If you look at the total minimum payment — disability payment 

— in Manitoba it is $150 a month, while the proposed would be $170 and some odd cents — here in this 

province. 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1814 

There is no doubt that the person would hobble into Saskatchewan and out of Manitoba if he had the 

chance. In Alberta, in a couple of cases, they are higher, but in most cases we are higher than they. So I 

think those remarks were misleading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act, 1969 

 

Hon. D.G. MacLennan (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend 

The Labour Standards Act, 1969. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. As I got this Bill at noon or 

afterwards, yesterday, and I suggest that this Bill has not been before us for the 24-hour period, I think 

that the second reading should be deferred in accordance with the rules. 

 

If I may speak further to the point of order I raised, I certainly have no objection to going on with it later 

this day. But we have been very busy during the session, as you know. At this time, in particular, we 

have had no opportunity of looking at some of the rather involved sections of this Bill. 

 

Mr. F. Larochelle (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, it would be quite agreeable later this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of all Hon. Members to Rule No. 51: “No Bills should be 

read a second time unless they have been printed”. I distributed it to the Members at least one day 

previous and it has been subsequently marked “Printed” on the Orders of the Day. Now it is marked 

“Printed” on the Orders of the Day. The question arises whether it has been distributed at least one day 

previously and that depends upon the time that it entered the House. To me a day is 24 hours. Oh yes, I 

am informed by the staff that it was distributed in the House at noon, therefore, it can’t be discussed for 

half an hour. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Before we commence the business of this afternoon, I should like, on behalf 

of the Committee and the Assembly, to welcome two groups of students to the Chamber. We have a 

group from the Westmount Public School under the direction of Mrs. Sutherland from the constituency 

of Saskatoon Mayfair represented by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank. They are in the Speaker’s gallery, I 

believe. We have a group from the Tisdale School, a grade eight class, under the direction of Mrs. Cline 

as a supervisor and they are from the constituency of Tisdale represented by Mr. Messer. 

 

I should like on behalf of all Members of this Assembly to welcome these students to this Chamber. I 

hope the knowledge they gain here will be helpful in the years ahead and we trust they enjoy 

themselves. We wish them a safe trip home and thank you for being here. 

 

Hon. Members — Hear, hear! 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1815 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Labour Standards 

Act, 1969. 

 

Hon. D.G. MacLennan (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, you will recall that The Labour 

Standards Act, 1969 was passed at that session of this Legislature. The Act represents a consolidation of 

eight different and separate Labour Standards Acts governing holidays, hours of work, minimum wages 

and equal pay. 

 

The aims of Government policy in the labour standards field, as embodied in this piece of legislation, 

are to provide for fair and reasonable minimum standards of employment. To this end, the Government 

keeps labor legislation under constant review to ensure its continued effectiveness in achieving the 

stated objectives. This is the rationale for the amendment currently introduced. In the two years since the 

Labour Standards Act in which the purposes of our labor standards policy were not being completely or 

properly met. At the present time the Labour Standards Act includes a reference to wages at the rate of 

time and one-half after certain daily and weekly hours of work. Unfortunately, the basis for the 

calculation of this rate has not been defined causing my Department considerable difficulty in 

administering the law according to its true intent. 

 

The new Bill will define wages as remuneration for a period of regular hours of employment exclusive 

of any over time earnings. This will permit the calculation of overtime to be made on the basis of the 

regular rate of pay only. 

 

Another important advancement in this Bill is reflected in a clause which will extend to managers the 

same advantages enjoyed by other employees. Managers are currently entitled under law only to annual 

holidays with pay. The new provisions will extend to managers such additional benefits as one week’s 

written notice of termination, or one week’s pay in lieu of notice, payment of wages in full six days after 

payroll cut off, and payment of all wages within five working days after termination of employment. 

 

Provision is also made for a female manageress to be paid the same rate of pay as that of a male 

manager in the same establishment provided that the duties are of comparable character. 

 

Contrary to the common belief, Mr. Speaker, a wage earner does not have a priority claim over all other 

creditors with respect to unpaid wages. Recently the courts have ruled that an assignment of book debts 

held by the bank from a company had a priority over the wage earners. As a result, monies paid into 

court were awarded to the bank leaving over 100 employees of the company with no opportunity to 

collect their unpaid wages. I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that this amendment provides for an 

absolute priority for employees with respect to unpaid wages over the claim of all creditors including 

assignees under assignments of real or personal property. This amendment represents one of the few 

legislative enactments in the Canadian labor legislation which extends to wage earners clear cut priority 

over all other debts. 

 

The experiences of my Department with respect to defaults of the corporate bodies in paying wages to 

their employee have been on the increase. A company may be incorporated without 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1816 

establishing sound financial backing and no bond is required to assure the payment of debts to creditors 

including employees of the company. 

 

On many occasions members of my department have pursued unpaid wage claims against a limited 

company only to find that the company had ceased operation and is in a completely insolvent state with 

no assets. It has been the practice of the Department in these cases to seek a conviction against such 

companies through the courts in order that a conviction order may be filed in district court as a 

judgement against the company. 

 

However, the employees have no opportunity to recover their unpaid wages unless the company named, 

at a later date, recommences operations and is able to accumulate assets. 

 

It is now deemed in the public interest to place an obligation on the directors of all limited companies 

with respect to unpaid wages. The present Bill provides for the filing in district court of a certificate 

showing the amount of outstanding judgement against the named company and unless appealed within 

30 days, the amount of outstanding wages claimed become payable. Upon default, the directors of the 

company are notified of the outstanding unpaid wage claims and become severally and jointly liable 

upon the expiry of another 30-day appeal period. 

 

This provision, too, Mr. Speaker, is among the first of its kind to be included in labor legislation in this 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government has been concerned about the employment problems of the fairer sex long 

in advance of the pressures being generated by the women’s liberation movement. In recognition of the 

significant and increasing role of women in employment a Women’s Bureau was created in the 

Department of Labour in November of 1964. Moreover, the Labour Standards Act requires that females 

receive pay equal to that of males for of a comparable nature performed in the same establishment. 

However, this provision is not effective unless there is an appropriate means of bringing violations to 

light. 

 

At the present time a working woman who feels that she has not been receiving equal pay must file with 

the Director of Labour Standards a formal detailed complaint in writing. The existence of this formal 

procedure may well have tended to inhibit women from bringing legitimate grievances to the attention 

of the Department. Accordingly, it is proposed that The Labour Standards Act be amended to permit any 

district office of the Department of Labour to receive complaints in written or oral form. This change 

will make it easier for a female employee to register a grievance and it will also bring about uniformity 

in the reporting of alleged violations with respect to any provision of The Labour Standards Act. 

 

The Labour Standards Act provides for the closing of shops in cities with a population of 7,000 or over 

at 12 noon local time on Wednesday of each week during the months of April and August each year. 

 

Where the council of a city has passed a bylaw requiring shops to close after 12 noon on a day other 

than Wednesday, the provisions of that bylaw take precedence. 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1817 

It is now considered appropriate to repeal the Wednesday closing legislation, thereby permitting city 

councils to regulate the closing periods of shops in their city without reference to The Labour Standards 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the provisions of this amendment will streamline the operation of The Labour Standards 

Act and will make it more effective in facilitating the smooth functioning of the employer-employee 

working relationship. 

 

The paramount principle reflected in this Bill is the protection of the rights of the individual wage 

earner. Since assuming office, this Government has consistently demonstrated, in a material way, its 

determination to uphold this principle, in the face of the feeble attempts of certain individuals to 

persuade the people of Saskatchewan that we have an anti-labor bias. 

 

In 1965 the Government provided, for the first time ever, statutory holiday pay for hourly-paid 

construction employees in the province. In 1967 legislation was introduced to give the Department of 

Labour the authority to invoke a third party demand which requires persons to turn over, to the 

Department, monies they owe to an employee who has failed, or is likely to fail, to pay an employee his 

wages. 

 

In 1969 an amendment to The Labour Standards Act was passed which further protected employees who 

were not paid their wages in cases in which creditors had taken over a defunct company to liquidate its 

assets. 

 

The present amendment makes another positive step in the Government’s continued attempts to ensure 

that our working people receive the remuneration to which they are rightfully entitled. 

 

I am proud to be able to say, Mr. Speaker, without fear of contradiction, that the Saskatchewan program 

relating to the wages of employees is widely considered to be the most progressive in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, accordingly I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, my initial comments on this Bill must re-echo 

what I had to say not so long ago about another piece of legislation introduced by this Government in 

the field of labor and that is, namely, that this Bill fails by a considerable margin to meet larger 

questions affecting and the needs of the employed section of Saskatchewan’s population. 

 

It is particularly illustrative of the Liberal failure to help working people in this province, that we should 

be considering 43 days after the Government promised to provide a higher minimum wage, the meagre 

amendments in this Bill before us. Apparently the Government cannot act on moving decisively to effect 

even a moderate increase in the minimum wage which, of course, is covered within The Labour 

Standards legislation. 

 

This Bill which covers the legislation governing minimum wage and like conditions in Saskatchewan, 

could and should have moved to supply protection to the part-time worker in this province, as was 

spoken about not too long ago in this House, as 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1818 

it could have moved to effect overdue reforms in other areas. But it has not. I listened, Mr. Speaker, this 

afternoon to the Minister (Mr. MacLennan) talking about the progressive nature of The Labour 

Standards Act and I want to remind him that except for some limited amendments that have been made 

since 1964. The Labour Standards Act is the expression of legislation that was passed prior to 1964 by a 

CCF government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill could and should have moved to lower the legal work week in 

Saskatchewan so as to provide employment for many more workmen. And heaven only knows that 

alleviating unemployment in this province today should be a priority of any government. But the 

Government has not moved even although this kind of a change would have materially assisted, not only 

workmen, but the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Similarly, the bill might well have done something to improve vacation schedules in Saskatchewan. It 

could have substantially benefited employees not covered by trade union protection. But as seen, it has 

not. Surely, Mr. Speaker, a Labour Standards Bill at this Session should have recognized the fact that the 

wage disparity between wages here and elsewhere on the Prairies, and on the national average, has 

grown substantially under this Government. Amendments to this Bill could have recognized this 

extremely important factor. But there is not one single thing in the Bill which will increase the basic 

earnings of employees so that our position with respect to, and in relation to other areas of Canada, 

would have been improved. 

 

This Bill has proceeded in a minimal way to make some changes which can be supported. But most of 

them ignore the most important requirements for workers in 1971. What we have before us, Mr. 

Speaker, are grudging pre-election labor changes, to serve as a flimsy and insubstantial labor platform 

for the Liberals in the next provincial election. And if this is the law, at a time just before an election, 

then the employees of this province can be very sure of what they would get from a Liberal Government 

if it were again to be re-elected; nil or in the vernacular “zilch”. 

 

The main part of the Bill, which can be commended, deals with an improved way to give priority to an 

employee’s wage claim against an employer and to assist in wage collections. The three months’ 

limitation of wage collections in one Section will not provide, of course, complete protection by any 

means. But the change does mean that there would be a more effective, a better procedure, in these 

cases. 

 

While the method described in the Bill is a forward step, it will not overcome the basic trouble, Mr. 

Speaker. That problem is how does the employee collect if there are no assets of the employer to convert 

or to secure? What needs to be accomplished is the introduction of some kind of insurance scheme by 

which employers, especially those in businesses that are prone to bankruptcy, or which have a bad 

record of fleecing workers of their wages, provide for instances where wage claims are not paid or 

refused. I should remind the Minister that in Alberta, or so I am informed, such legislation does obtain in 

the field of construction. 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1819 

I note also, Mr. Speaker, that the legal steps taken under the better wage protection and collection 

sections must be paid for the employee concerned and any monies that are collected by the Minister 

have these charges levied against them as a first charge. The requirement could very well be an 

expensive one for the workman affected. I should propose to the Minister that the Minister revise this 

clause. At the most, the employee should be charged a nominal fee or some limitation might be imposed 

on how much he had to pay at maximum in court costs. Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 

wages collected might be largely eaten up and the main benefit of the legislation obstructed, for those 

that the legislation seeks to benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I observe that the Bill by Section 17, strives to devise a formula for calculating the wages 

of an hourly-paid worker for the purpose of ascertaining overtime payable. I have looked at this Section. 

I am dubious and I fear that the change may contain a loophole; but I shall be glad to discuss this with 

the Minister in Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I am on this question, may I say that this business of this House would be facilitated 

if we were to had secured the explanatory notes for this Bill ahead of the time that we received them. 

The explanatory notes were not placed on our desks until noon today. However, my reading of the 

somewhat extensive Section that proposes to improve the way of calculating the wages of an 

hourly-paid worker for the purpose of determining overtime, is that it does not appear, in some 

instances, to guarantee the benefits that it says it will. 

 

Now, as the Minister said, Mr. Speaker, it is proposed to eliminate part 6 of the Act and this deals with 

the matter of weekly half holidays, usually on Wednesdays. And I wonder what it is proposed to achieve 

by this deletion. Because conceding that the province’s communities are tending to other half-holiday 

periods or whole days for holidays, such as the Monday closing in Regina, will not, I ask the Minister, 

the deletion of part 6, possibly remove some protection and some benefits? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we need in this Bill, what this Bill should provide is effective legislation to prevent 

infractions of local closing bylaws by entrepreneurs who thumb their noses at the local authorities. What 

we need more is effective legislation which would provide for the 40-hour week in all centres, thus 

offering the means of implementing an essential two days off per week schedule for all workers in this 

province. This legislation does not even make a pretence of solving these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Act presently provides and requires that an employer must maintain records which, among other 

things, as in Section 60, contain information on the regular rate of wages of an employee, particulars of 

changes in the rates of pay and about other monetary benefits to which the employees affected are 

entitled. As I see it, the new clause that is proposed in this Bill may remove the overall meaning that is 

conveyed in the present clause and simply refer to an explicit requirement for records, only in terms of 

wages and hours. I ask the Minister: why should this not have been in addition to the Bill rather than a 

substitution which I believe removes from protection? 

 

Similarly, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned that the change proposed dealing with coverage or otherwise of 

managerial capacities, does not add but takes away existing benefits; that it 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1820 

takes away rather than reinforces. Specifically, the changes would remove anyone in the so-called 

managerial capacity from Part 2 and Part 3 Sections of the Act which provide coverage and protection in 

terms of hours of work and the minimum wage. I want also to point out that the term “managerial 

capacity” is subject to a widespread difference of opinion and construction. Someone can become a 

“manager” who is a “manager” in a department building or in any other small building. As the Minister 

well knows, managerial capacity is capable of a very wide interpretation. 

 

These are matters, and there are others, that require some explanation. Perhaps the Minister (Mr. 

MacLennan) might want to comment on them in closing the debate this afternoon. If there is no 

satisfactory explanation, I can, of course, still pursue them in Committee. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do regret very much the narrow and meagre areas that are covered by this Bill in the 

face of the changes which we should properly have before us in a Bill of this type. 

 

We will support the Bill, however, on second reading and reserve our further comments for the 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Mr. Speaker, once again where definite positive action, the major criticism that we 

are receiving from the Members opposite is simply that we just haven’t gone far enough. This is an old 

political gimmick that is used when simply Members opposite run out of very constructive criticism to a 

place of legislation introduced by the Government on this side. 

 

The other comments he has can be best dealt with, because they are of a technical nature regarding 

various clauses of the Bill, and I shall be pleased to discuss them when the Bill goes into Committee. 

Consequently, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting the Regulation, Control and Prevention of Litter 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 66 — An Act 

respecting the Regulation, Control and Prevention of Litter. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in order to facilitate the work of the House, it is desirable that this Bill be given 

second reading and put into the Committee stage. On behalf of the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), I 

should like to provide a few comments on second readings. 

 

I believe this Bill, like the Bill that was introduced the other day for The Clean Authority Act, will 

receive unanimous support. It appears that this is another form of environmental pollution which has 

been of growing concern and hopefully this legislation will tackle this problem in a positive and definite 

way. The principle involved and sought to be incorporated into this Bill is the control of the containers 

used for the sale of various beverages, such as soft drinks, carbonated and non-carbonated beverages, 

non-alcoholic and alcoholic fluids, fruit 

 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1821 

and vegetable juices, beer, malt and hard liquor containers, all sold to the consumer in containers made 

of glass, tin or other metal, and other types of containers now in use or that hereafter may be put into use 

in the trade. The problem of the disposition or other destruction of containers of beverages that have 

come into the hands of the consumers is one that has been growing steadily during the last few years. It 

is hardly necessary for me to state that almost everywhere one looks empty containers of glass or metal 

or substances may be seen on our highways, ditches, in our streets, lanes and parks and even on our 

lawns. Until a few years ago, the metal container for the sale of soft drinks in particular, was almost 

unknown. Those drinks were sold in glass bottles. The vendor, at the time of sale to the consumer, made 

a small charge for each bottle and when the bottle was returned to him he paid a small fee for the return. 

Empty beer bottles were, of course, a common sight in the ditches of our highways and were also thrown 

on to lawns and in parks in urban centres, but many of these, too, were gathered or collected and sold to 

an organization established by the brewing industry and payment was made for the return of such empty 

bottles. Empty hard liquor bottles also found their way into ditches along highways and other places, but 

it appeared, again, that most of the bottles were simply put in garbage cans and were hauled away by the 

collectors of garbage. Then the soft drink trade developed several new types of container, one of metal 

and the other of very fragile glass. The practice of accepting the return of these containers and of paying 

for the return of the container was discontinued by the trade. These new containers acquired, or were 

given the name of a non-returnable container or one-way container, and over the years an industry of 

considerable proportion had grown up in Saskatchewan whereby local bottling firms manufactured soft 

drinks in their own plant, presumably under a license for franchise from the owner or manufacturer and 

sold such beverage in bottles supplied by the bottlers. For instance, Coca-Cola would grant a local 

bottling firm the right to use its formula and the bottler would manufacture the drink and sell it in bottles 

supplied by the bottler. The majority of these bottles, when empty, found their way back to the bottler 

and were used again and again if conditions permitted. When the manufacturer of the soft drinks 

changed to these non-returnable containers, the bottling was done by the manufacturer either in metal 

cans or the fragile glass already mentioned and sold directly to the retailer. The obvious purpose and 

intention of using these types of container was, of course, that the retailer would be relieved of making a 

small charge for each bottle and also he would be relieved from the duty of accepting the return of these 

containers or of paying for each container returned. 

 

The situation which has resulted from this change of policy, on the part of the soft drink and other 

related industries, is that these empty metal cans or bottles have become, not only a nuisance, but a form 

of pollution of the environment. 

 

That the public generally and governmental bodies in particular in the United States and Canada have 

become concerned about the problems arising from the use of these non-returnable containers is clearly 

indicated from the literature that we have is the Department files. In several large cities in the eastern 

States, municipal councils have passed by-laws prohibiting the sale of beverages in these so-called 

non-returnable containers, under heavy penalties. Other States are giving close study to the problem and 

are seeking appropriate remedies. The Ontario Government, about a year ago, appointed a special 

committee to 

 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1822 

investigate the problem but so far that committee has not made its report. The Legislature of British 

Columbia in 1970 passed a special Act dealing with the problem. This Act has received careful study but 

we are not convinced again that it meets the entire situation. 

 

The Bill now before the House represents the results of an intensive study, over many months, of all the 

literature and other documents and information that have been obtained from various sources in Canada 

and also in the United States. This Legislature, when it passes this Bill into law, must realize that an 

entirely new field of legislation is being entered upon. The common law rights of an individual or 

corporation to sell goods in Saskatchewan in whatever type of container the manufacturer or vendor sees 

fit to use are being interfered with in the interest of peace, order and good government in the province. 

The basic principle upon which the Bill is based is contained in Section 3 which proceeds pointedly to 

the whole problem by the simple statement that no beverage shall be sold in containers of less than 40 

ounce volume in Saskatchewan unless the container has been approved by a person to be designated by 

the Government. The effect of this Section is that all containers that are being presently used or that may 

be used in the future will have to be approved by the person so appointed before the beverage in 

containers may be sold. It will involve application by the industry to the person appointed for the 

approval of each type of container presently used as well as any new container that may be intended to 

be used. It will, of course, be necessary to permit ample opportunity to make the applications for such 

approval and the powers conferred upon the person appointed are of necessity very wide. To permit the 

industry to obtain such necessary approvals it is intended that the Act, when passed, is to come into 

force on proclamation and that some time will have to be allowed to elapse before it is finally brought 

into force. 

 

Provision is also made that the approval of a container by the person appointed may not be transferred or 

assigned to any other person without approval. The purpose of this is to retain control of the approvals 

and to know who is entitled to use such approved containers. Severe penalties are provided for failure to 

comply with the several provisions mentioned and they vary as between an individual offender and a 

corporate offender. Provision is also made that directors or officers of a corporation that knowingly 

acquiesce in or assent to the corporation breaching the Act, are also liable to severe penalties. Provision 

is then made in the Act requiring a vendor of a beverage in an approved container to pay a small fee 

based on an individual container, or quantities of a dozen or cases, to the person who returns such 

approved containers. This provision is applicable to any person who returns it whether he bought the 

beverage from a given store or elsewhere or whether he just found it on a street or ditch. Provision is 

made that if one or more vendors of beverages prefer not to receive the return of approved containers, 

two or more may agree to establish a depot where the returned containers will be received and payment 

of the proper fee made. Such depot must be approved by the Minister. Further it will be required that a 

retailer of beverages, in approved containers, will be required to post up a notice in his premises stating 

that approved containers will be accepted and that payment will be made. If a depot has been established 

as already indicated, a notice must be posted in each retailer’s premises giving the address where 

containers may be returned and payment will be made. Special provision is made with respect to 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1823 

bottlers who sell mostly at wholesale to merchants and others who in turn sell to consumers. In such 

cases the retailer who purchases at wholesale from a bottler is the agent of the bottler and he must, as 

such agent, accept the return of containers offered and pay the required sum. The returned container will 

then be returned to the bottler who may use those that are fit to be used again. Those that are not fit must 

be destroyed according to regulations made. 

 

Special provisions are made for penalties for offences less severe than in the cases of offences with 

regard to dealing with methods of proof of certain documents are contained in the Bill which will be of 

assistance in case prosecutions arise. An express provision is also made that in a prosecution for an 

offence of selling a beverage in a container, the onus of proof that the defendant has obtained approval, 

rests upon the defendant. The person charged with the offence must know if the container used has or 

has not been approved and if he runs the risk of using a container that has not bee approved and is 

prosecuted he should have no reason to complain if he is to prove that the container used complies with 

the provision of this Bill. 

 

Then there are cases in which mere prosecution and conviction is not sufficient to prevent the same 

person again offending against the Act. There may be extreme instances where it may be felt that not 

only past breaches of the Act should be penalized, but that future breaches should be stopped before they 

are committed. While such cases may be few in number it is felt that the Act should contain provisions 

whereby the Attorney General might apply to the Court of Queen’s Bench, for an injunction restraining 

future breaches. If the Attorney General can satisfy the court that there is reason to believe that such 

future breaches may occur, then an injunction may be granted. The offender, of course, is entitled to 

notice of the application and to be heard. 

 

My comments so far have dealt with the general provisions related to the approved container and related 

matters. It is felt that the Bill should also be applicable to The Liquor Act and The Liquor Licensing Act 

and bring the authorities of administering those Acts within the provisions of the Bill so far as containers 

are concerned. Since the liquor business is already under the control of the Government under the two 

Acts mentioned, it will be necessary to try to bring the regulations under those Acts into some harmony 

or working order with this Bill. This will be accomplished through regulations. It is fully appreciated 

that the authority to make regulations is quite wide but the numerous difficulties that may arise in 

attempting to make the two Acts and this Bill work in harmony, will have to be faced as they arise and 

this will best be done by regulations. The regulations made will have to be published in the 

Saskatchewan Gazette so that the public will have knowledge of them. 

 

Another important provision in the Bill, which is of a general nature, provides that no person shall 

discard or otherwise dispose of any container or litter on a highway, street, lane, road, public or private 

land or fresh water. The purpose of this provision is to try to put a stop to the discarding of empty 

containers or other litter on the highways or other public or private lands. It will make it possible for the 

law enforcement officer to prosecute the offender in a proper case. 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1824 

As has already been mentioned it is intended to have the Act come into force on proclamation. There are 

many things that will have to be done before it may be proclaimed. The situation with respect to empty 

containers such as liquor bottles, arrangement with respect to redemption of beer bottles now in force by 

voluntary arrangements, will have to be reviewed. Vendors or retailers will have to obtain approval of 

containers to be used after the Act comes into force. These problems will have to be solved before 

effective regulations may be passed. However, it is the intention of the Government to lose no time to 

resolve these problems so that the Act may be proclaimed at the earliest possible date. 

 

With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that further comments could be better handled in 

Committee when the Attorney General has returned, and therefore, I would move second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion for second 

reading of this Bill. I approve of the Bill and of the general tenor of the Bill. I believe that the problem 

of litter is a growing problem. I believe that the method by which we package our goods for retail sale 

and then dispose of the packages is a large and growing problem. Certainly one aspect of the problem is 

the containers in which beverages are sold. I know the Government does not hold forth this Bill as a 

solution to the litter problem but rather a solution to one aspect of the litter problem. And I am certainly 

not critical of the Bill because it doesn’t cover the water front. We clearly have to start somewhere and 

this is, it seems to me, a worthwhile start. 

 

I look at the Bill and find myself disturbed by a number of the provisions in the Bill which I think are 

quite restrictive of civil liberties, if I may so phrase it. I believe that the Bill places excessive (and I will 

qualify that in a moment) powers in the hands of the Minister to make regulations. I should like to see us 

review this Bill in three or four years and place on the statute books some more precise provisions so 

that the wide sweeping regulations under the Bill will not be necessary. However, I fully appreciate the 

problem at this time of drafting a Bill which meets the problem which is sought to be dealt with. I don’t 

know what it should say, I can hardly be critical of the Government because they have not solved all of 

these problems in advance. I think the problems are not capable of being solved in advance. Accordingly 

I am not critical of the practice adopted by the Government of giving fairly wide powers in the 

regulations which will be able to be varied and worked out as experience develops. I look, for example, 

at Section 10, which appears to prohibit me from taking any type of a container and dumping it at my 

village nuisance grounds if I live in rural Saskatchewan. If indeed it means that, it may well need some 

qualification. I read other parts of the Bill and it appears to say that anybody who sells soft drinks must 

buy beer bottles. And that may in fact be intended. I think that that could be looked at. We may well 

have to classify containers into soft drink containers, beer containers, spirit containers and require only 

the vendor of soft drink containers to take back soft drink containers and so on. However, I am now 

raising what are essentially picayune objections to a Bill which I think is a forward step in dealing with 

the problem. Some of the objections which I am raising can be dealt with in Committee, some of them, 

as I have indicated, will be dealt with by experience as 

 



 

April 14, 1971 

 

 

1825 

that is gained. 

 

The only other comment I wanted to make is that experience elsewhere has indicated that depots which 

are widely dispersed or are not convenient to the citizen do not do the job of reclaiming containers. We 

have the experience of beer bottles. For many years beer bottles have been sold in returnable containers 

and for many years depots have been available to return beer bottles. Nonetheless, all of us are very well 

aware of the problem of beer bottles being thrown more or less indiscriminately on private land and on 

roadsides. Part of the problem certainly is that the depots are not really convenient. I think that this 

matter of making the place where containers can be returned as convenient to the public as the places 

where the beverage can be purchased, is one which is going to have to receive attention. If, in fact, we 

have only a single depot or a couple of depots for a city like Regina, the Bill will not prove to be 

effective and will not do the job which it is intended to do. 

 

With those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, and with understanding that there will be further comments in 

Committee I am pleased to support the Bill. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, we are happy of course that this Bill is going to receive the unanimous 

support of the Legislature in principle. Certainly the Leader of the Opposition has raised many points 

which we admit are difficult to arrive at a solution until we have an opportunity to try out some of the 

suggestions and some of the features of the Bill. 

 

As far as his specific comments I think that these can be discussed in Committee and we shall leave it 

until that stage. I move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 

 

Mr. Guy (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The 

Statute Law. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I believe that a similar Bill to this is introduced each year to rectify certain 

typographical errors or printing errors in the existing statutes. In addition, certain amendments are made 

which are consequential to legislation that is being passed and these are usually incorporated into a 

statue law amendment Bill. 

 

Again, I am sure if there are any questions from our learned lawyers on the other side that our Attorney 

General will be back tomorrow in order to answer those. 

 

I, therefore, move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


