



















































Hansard: April 01, 1971


1456 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

33rd Day 

 

Thursday, April 1, 1971 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to introduce to all Members of the Legislature the 

following groups of students situated in the galleries: from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana South 

represented by Dr. Forsyth, 73 students from the Lorne Hazelton School under the direction of their teacher, 

Mr. Taylor; from the constituency of Regina North West represented by Mr. Whelan, 61 students from the 

R.J. Davidson School under the direction of their school teacher, Mr. Wilson; from the constituency of 

Saskatoon Mayfair represented by Mr. Brockelbank, 37 students from the Westmount School under the 

direction of their school teacher, Mr. Cupid; from the constituency of Prince Albert East-Cumberland 

represented by Mr. Berezowsky, 70 students from the John Diefenbaker School under the direction of their 

teacher, Mr. Berg and from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana South, represented by Dr. Forsyth, 38 

students from the Hugh Cairns School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. E. Francis. 

 

I am sure that all Hon. Members would wish to extend to the students, to their teachers and to their bus 

drivers the warmest of all possible welcomes to the Legislature Assembly in the Province of Saskatchewan 

to express the very sincere wish that they will find their stay here educational and pleasant and that they will 

all have a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

LLOYDMINSTER BORDER KINGS WIN IN SEMI-FINALS 

 

MR. M. KWASNICA (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like all Members 

to join with me in extending hearty congratulations to the Lloydminster Border Kings for winning the 

semi-finals in the Western Canada Intermediate "A" hockey finals. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KWASNICA: — The Border Kings under playing coach, Vic Smith won an impressive victory over 

the Prince George Mohawks defeating them three games to one in the best of five. The Border Kings will 

now advance to the Western Canada finals 



 

April 1, 1971 

 

 

1457 

against Rosetown Redwings, the first game to be played tomorrow night. I throw out a challenge to the Hon. 

Member for Rosetown constituency - may the best team win! 

 

I should like all Hon. Members of this Assembly to join with me today in wishing the Lloydminster Border 

Kings and their manager, Dave Boyer, the best of luck in their next round of play-offs. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

TEXT OF TELEGRAMS - RAILWAY STRIKE 

 

HON. D. T. McFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all Members of the 

Legislature would be interested in the text of two telegrams that I sent on March 29, one to the Hon. Bryce 

Mackasey, Minister of Labour; the other to the Hon. Otto Lang, Minister in Charge of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. I should like to read the contents of both of these telegrams to the Members of the Legislature and the 

reply to the one that I have here: 

 

The Hon. Bryce Mackasey, Minister of Labour, Ottawa, Ontario. 

 

Low grain deliveries causing acute hardship in many farm families with not enough cash in many 

homes to provide living necessities and operating expenses will also have serious repercussions on 

the whole economy of the province if allowed to continue. Serious resentment to apparently 

unnecessary delays in grain movement is increasing. Request all urgencies in efforts to end dispute. 

 

I’ll read the reply that I received yesterday morning from the Hon. Bryce Mackasey, Minister of Labour. 

Addressed to myself, Minister of Agriculture, Regina, Saskatchewan: 

 

I have your telegram of March 29. Mr. Ray Perrault, MP, my Parliamentary Secretary, has gone to 

Vancouver to urge a return to work pending the negotiations that will take place in Montreal today 

between the Negotiating Committee and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and the Canadian 

National and the Canadian Pacific Railways. Bryce Mackasey, Minister of Labour. 

 

Text of the telegram to the Hon. Otto Lang, Minister-in-Charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, Ottawa, 

Ontario: 

 

Appreciate that you are aware of problems resulting from low grain deliveries but would emphasize 

growing resentment rising from an apparently unnecessary delay caused by labor problems. Farmers 

of Western Canada have enough problems without such delays and we request urgent action to end 

dispute. Signed by myself, the Minister of Agriculture. 



 

April 1, 1971 

 

 

1458 

Subsequently to that I was in contact with the Minister-in-Charge of the Canadian Wheat Board yesterday 

again in regard to the complete slowdown in the movement of grain from Western Canada and was informed 

again that they are trying to decide what action could be taken to get this grain moving again. Further to that, 

Mr. Speaker, I contacted the packing houses in Saskatchewan yesterday afternoon and asked for an 

up-to-date report on the effects building up back to the farms due to the stoppage of rail movements, first on 

cattle, second, on hogs. It could result in practically no kill on either one of these classes of livestock. 

Thirdly, because there is no rail movement out of Saskatchewan it is impeding the movement of cured 

meats, pork especially, to areas in Eastern Canada, to the Maritimes and to other provinces. 

 

I thought the Members of the Legislature would want to be kept up-to-date in these actions and this is the 

report I have to offer this afternoon. 

 

MR. A. E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think much needs to be said 

except to say that we commend the Minister of Agriculture for sending the wires; we share with him the 

sentiments that he expressed in the wires; we agree that there is deep concern being felt by the interruption in 

rail traffic. I know that we were all encouraged this morning at the news that a settlement had been reached 

between the railway companies and non-operating unions which covers something over 50,000 employees. I 

know that people on both sides of the House share with me the hope that this will set a pattern so that there 

will be a very speedy, and I emphasize, a very speedy settlement of the current dispute between the railways 

and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers involving perhaps 7,500 employees. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

EFFECT ON POTASH MINES DUE TO RAILWAY STRIKE 

 

MR. P. SCHMEISER (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I’d like to ask the Minister 

of Mineral Resources, with the interruption of railway traffic, how serious is this affecting the potash mines 

in my constituency? 

 

HON. A. C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources): — All I can tell you is that we have been 

canvassing the mines to see what storage they might produce to. Storage is extremely limited and if Monday 

a strike is announced we shall know then. If it is then I understand that most companies will be giving the 

seven days’ notice which the law requires to employees so that they can close their plants within a week to 

ten days. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


