



















































Hansard: March 04, 1971


630 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Thursday, March 4, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to introduce to all Members of the Legislature 

the following groups of students situated in the galleries. From the constituency of Arm River 

represented by Mr. McIvor, 45 students from the Davidson High School, under the direction of their 

teacher, Mr. Janzen; from the constituency of Regina South East represented by Mr. Baker, 24 students 

from the Peart School, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. W. J. Fawley; from the constituency of 

Rosthern represented by the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), 44 students from the Waldheim High 

School, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Harder; from the constituency of Rosthern also 

represented by the Minister, 42 students from Langham School, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. 

Mechasiw; from the constituency of Humboldt represented by Mr. Breker, 26 students from the Leroy 

High School, under the direction of their school teacher, Mr. Schugman; from the constituency of 

Redberry represented by Mr. Michayluk, 32 students from the Vawn High School under the direction of 

Sister Jeanne Fortier; from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana South represented by Mr. Forsyth, 32 

students from the Alvin Buckwold School, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Neufeldt; from the 

constituency of Regina North West represented by Mr. Whelan, 29 students from St. Patrick's School 

under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Z.A. Snycniuk. I am sure all Hon. Members will want to join 

with me in extending a warm welcome to these students in our galleries and express the very sincere 

wish that they will enjoy their stay here and find it educational and pleasant. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

HON. D. G. STEUART: (Provincial Treasurer): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, it is 

with deep regret that I must inform the House of the death of a senior member of the Treasury 

Department, Mr. William Stan, who died Wednesday, March 3rd. 

 

Mr. Stan was born in Dysart December, 1914, and entered the service of the Government of 

Saskatchewan in the Treasury Department on May 7, 1935. His service with the Treasury Department 

continued up until the time of his death, broken only by a period of some two and one-half years during 

which he served in the Royal Canadian Navy. Having been retired from the Navy with the rank of 

Lieutenant he retained his connection with the Royal Canadian Naval Reserve and rose to the rank of 

Commander. In 1961 he was appointed as Director of Revenue in the Treasury Department, a position 

which he held until the time of his passing. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
631 

He was Aide-de-camp to the Lieutenant-Governor and senior honorary Aide-de-camp to the 

Governor-General. His passing brings to an end a life time of outstanding service to the people of 

Saskatchewan in peace and in war. Bill Stan was a fine, warm, friendly man who will be missed by the 

Government and his many, many friends throughout the province. I should like to convey to Mrs. Stan 

and members of the family on behalf of the Members of this Assembly our sympathy on the loss of her 

husband. I should further announce that the funeral services will be 1:30 p.m. this Saturday at the Trinity 

Lutheran Church here in Regina. 

 

MR. A. E. BLAKENEY: (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself and 

the Members on this side of the House with the regret expressed by the Provincial Treasurer at the death 

of Mr. Stan. As the Provincial Treasurer has indicated, Mr. Stan had a lengthy career in the public 

service of Saskatchewan. It was when I served as Provincial Treasurer that he was appointed as Director 

of Revenue. We were indeed fortunate, at that time, to have a person of his qualifications to assume that 

senior post. He was an able administrator. He had the very happy faculty of maintaining excellent 

relations with the taxpaying public. He was in many ways a model public servant. He will be known to 

many Members of this House because he attended a good number of openings of this Legislature in his 

capacity as Aide-de-camp to the Lieutenant-Governor and attended many other public functions in that 

capacity. 

 

In addition, if I may add a personal note, he and Erna were friends of my wife and me; they were 

neighbors at the beach. Their cottage is next door but one to ours. He was not only an able and efficient 

public servant but a warm friend. I join with the Provincial Treasurer and I am sure with all Members of 

the House in extending our sympathy to Mrs. Stan and the family of, the bereaved. 

 

MR. F. MEAKES: (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add words of my feelings for the loss 

of Bill Stan. I have known Bill Stan for many years, in fact I have known the whole family. As the 

Provincial Treasurer has said he grew up in Dysart. The Stan family including Bill, is a family that has 

been known and respected in the community. I know that I agree with the Provincial Treasurer and the 

Leader of the Opposition that we have lost a good civil servant, a good citizen and a good friend. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

HUSKY OIL REFINERY 
 

MR. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Saskatoon-Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 

should like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Estey). It has come to my attention from 

an usually reliable source that in addition to the shut down of the Husky Oil Refinery in Moose Jaw this 

coming October, the Husky Oil Refinery in Lloydminster will cut back its operations by one-half after 

the mid point in 1971 with the resulting substantial layoff in staff. I wonder if the Minister would care to 

comment on that statement? 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
632 

HON. C. L. B. ESTEY: (Minister of Industry): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to that question I have no 

information of a cutback at Lloydminster. It seems very odd to me that there would be a cutback after 

the very large amount of money that this Company has spent in the Lloydminster field annually. As the 

Hon. Member may know just a year ago they established a head office building there. 

 

CREIGHTON - STRIKE AT FLIN FLON MINE 
 

MR. W. J. BEREZOWSKY: (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of 

the Day I should like to direct a question to the Hon. Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald). I have 

received a communication and information that there is quite a serious problem in Creighton because 

you know there is a strike at the Flin Flon mine which may be quite prolonged. Apparently people, 

through no fault of their own, on strike are receiving the necessary help from the Manitoba Government 

but the complaint is that they are not able to get the same kind of consideration from the Saskatchewan 

Government. I should like to know what the policy is, Mr. Minister and will you look into it? 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — I will make the policy very clear and very brief, 

the Saskatchewan Government or the Department of Welfare does not pay welfare benefits to strikers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 
 

NEW APPOINTMENTS TO CANADIAN WHEAT BOARD 
 

HON. D. T. McFARLANE: (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day 

are proceeded with I am sure that all Members will be interested to learn, as I was, of the new 

appointments to the Canadian Wheat Board. The new Chief Commissioner will be Mr. Jerry Vogel who 

formerly was the Assistant Chief Commissioner. The new Assistant Chief Commissioner will be Doug 

Treleaven who was one of the Commissioners, and the new Commissioner now will be Mr. Bob Essdak. 

I understand that these appointments have been discussed with farm organizations and they were quite 

appreciative of the manner in which it was done and voice their support of the people who were 

appointed. I am sure all Members will join with me in wishing these people every success in the 

tremendous responsibilities that they face in the future. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MISQUOTED IN LEADER-POST 
 

MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK: (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

turn the attention of the Hon. Members to a release in the March 3rd issue of the Leader-Post quoting me 

as saying that the net debt of the province in the period 1944 to 1964 was 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
633 

slightly under $6 million. This is in error. I think that during the course of my remarks I mentioned it 

was under $600 million. I should like to turn your attention to this error in the release. 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART: (Provincial Treasurer): — What are you apologizing for? Was it your error? 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart 

(Provincial Treasurer) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee of Finance; and the 

proposed amendment thereto, moved by Mr. Romanow: 

 

MR. I. H. MacDOUGALL: (Souris-Estevan): — The Budget which was just brought down by the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) should be welcomed by all in the province. The very fact that more 

money has been allocated to the various departments without raising taxes, should prove to our people 

the soundness of our fiscal policies, as they are now, and as they have been since we came to office in 

1964. A balanced budget - one where revenue meets expenses - is a sound budget. It is a responsible 

budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is being attacked by irresponsible Members opposite. Without a businessman in 

their ranks, the NDP call for a deficit budget because times are tough. What will happen if we have 

successive tough years? If we budget for a deficit, we are actually borrowing on the future. We shall be 

committing taxpayers of a future era to pay for today's bills. Your children and my children will be 

burdened with our debts. This suggestion from the NDP does not surprise me. They would like to see 

our finances so muddled that state ownership of everything would be the only answer. This would please 

the Waffle element and bring them back into the fold, and who knows, Mr. Speaker, they may even 

remain happy for one or two months under those conditions. 

 

Personally, Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) would like to see the 

business community and the farmers accept his leadership, and no doubt he has tried hard to create an 

image which would indicate he was their friend. But that old bogey of nationalization, state control, 

plain, good old fashioned Socialism, continues to dog him. Deficit budgets at this time could have 

disastrous effects on our provincial economy. A few years ago, economists, Mr. Speaker, not politicians, 

but economists said the number one problem facing Canada and the United States was inflation. 

 

For the past 18 months, Canada has been fighting inflation, and of all the provinces, Saskatchewan has 

been the most vigorous in this fight. Premier Thatcher and the rest of the Liberal party want to curb 

inflation because Saskatchewan residents, particularly farmers, pensioners, and those on fixed incomes 

would suffer most if inflation were to continue unchecked. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
634 

Many Opposition Members criticize us for using profits from Crown corporations to balance our 

budgets. Well, what is wrong with that, I ask again? Crown corporation profits such as SPC and 

Sask-Tel and the Transit System were always used, that is if and when any profits accrued. When the 

NDP were the government, and when Cass-Beggs and Russ Brown were in charge of the SPC, the 

profits were so small that the Government of the day could not really count on these profits to bolster 

their budgets. If you go back to 1960 when the profits for the SPC were in the neighbourhood of $1 

million, then look at it today when the profits for SPC are in the neighbourhood of $20 million. I further 

want to point out to our people that the profits of the SPC were produced by our Government by greater 

efficiency of operation. Remember too, that was done without raising rates. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, seems to go against the NDP grain, it galls them to think it could be done and now 

the Opposition Members create bogus and I mean really bogus criticism. 

 

Efficiencies were effected because we unloaded the old CCF Socialists, we unloaded Cass-Beggs and 

replaced them with people who produced a business-like administration and as they say on Laugh In, 

"And that's the truth." 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party is committed to creating all the jobs possible. We cannot be expected to, 

nor will we as a party create a mass of useless jobs just for the sake of having jobs. As the Member for 

Kelvington (Mr. Byers) suggested we'd be chasing tumble weeds over the Prairies, creating jobs like 

this. We are not in favor of this. Of course our friends opposite will argue against this because they think 

that the bigger the Civil Service is, the better it is for them to become elected. This theory worked for 

them until 1964, but since then, residents of Saskatchewan have voted for sound, business-like 

government to protect the public purse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members opposite would have you believe that the Liberal Party in Ottawa and the Liberal 

Party in Saskatchewan have primarily caused the wide-spread unemployment in Canada. This is not 

true, and they know it. Economic conditions in most of the free-world are sagging and there are more 

persons out of work now in almost every free country. Mr. Speaker, unfortunately it matters little what 

Saskatchewan or even what Canada does in creating work. If the world economic picture is not bright, 

goods produced by the newly created jobs will not be sold. 

 

In some areas we have, led by the Provincial Treasurer, made major strides in providing a vast number 

of jobs. But the Opposition rears its ugly head of Socialism in an effort to discredit honest efforts by the 

Government to provide work. Again I ask why? With all their talk about jobs one would think the 

so-called friends of the poor, the little people, the unemployed, would be happy to support us in finding 

ways and means to provide these jobs. 

 

Pulp mills talked about for 20 years by the former CCF were brought into this province in five years 

under the Liberals and, Mr. Speaker, the first mill was located approximately in the same area as the 

CCF had promised to build theirs. But because the Liberals had it built, it's all wrong today. They say 

we are raping the forests. They holler ‗pollution‘. Mr. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
635 

Speaker, they holler and they holler, mainly to gain power but if they did get power then the rest of 

Saskatchewan would be entitled to holler. I suspect the two labor lawyers and their followers will also 

criticize the proposed Meadow Lake pulp mill, but I think these same Members will have the wisdom to 

vote in favor of it. 

 

Industry is being created in the province to broaden the tax base and to make the economy more 

buoyant. The Liberal Government does not want to force taxpayers to be left holding the bag with 

industries like box factories, tanneries and woolen mills. This is the sad record of the Socialists. Their 

record, Mr. Speaker, was so bad that the people of Saskatchewan finally threw them out of office. They 

could not conduct the affairs of this province in a business like manner when they were the Government, 

but now that they are in the Opposition they pretend to know what to do. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to Mr. 

Blakeney and Mr. Romanow that if they wish to drop their so-called 'pearls of wisdom' of Socialist 

doctrine, that they get a suitable vehicle to do so like a manure spreader. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — I can recall the former CCF administration playing fast and loose with the tax 

rates, particularly before an election. I remind the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, how former Finance Ministers lowered Medicare premiums just before each 

election solely for election bait, then right after the election, they drastically increased these premiums in 

order to meet hospitalization costs and deficits Does the Liberal Government do this? No it does not! 

 

The CCF used to adjust automobile premiums downwards before elections, up they would go after 

elections. I could go on, but I do want to get across to our people that we act in a responsible manner. 

We tell the Saskatchewan people, any time - the government gives things to people, they must first be 

taxed in one way or another, in order to provide these same goods and services. In line with this, many 

people have told me they wish governments would quit promising them new benefits and leave them 

some of their own money to spend as they see fit. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — No matter what programs this government has instituted, no matter what 

services, Mr. Speaker, we have provided, according to the NDP they are never enough. We instituted 

purple gas for farm trucks. They talked against the measure, and some of them even voted against it. We 

put in homeowner grants. They talked against that too, but they didn't have the courage to vote against it. 

I understand that in their coming up election platform that these measures will be abolished. 

 

We passed Bill 2, the Essential Services Act, which was enacted to prevent union organizers from 

paralyzing our economy. We feel the ordinary citizen is sick to death of strikes in this country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
636 

MR. Mac DOUGALL: — Every year we see some segment of our economy bound up with strikes. I 

think most working people dread the thought of strikes. I think nobody wins when a strike takes place. 

Their financial losses take years to recover. Wives of workers, I'm sure would want this Government to 

find some other method of solving labor disputes rather than having their husbands walk off the job, lose 

pay, and walk picket lines. It seems the organizers don't care about that aspect of work stoppages. They 

have their jobs, and they get their pay anyway. I want to remind the citizens of Estevan that we have 

faced several strikes over the past four years. But the one that made even NDP supporters amazed was 

when Walter Smishek (Regina North East) and his gang of high priced organizers struck the co-op in 

Estevan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Oh, oh, shame: 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — Even some good loyal NDP supporters could not under- stand the union 

resorting to this drastic measure which only serves to weaken and undermine the co-op movement down 

there. Why did you do that, Walter? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — Labor leaders have pledged themselves to destroy this Government. They did 

this in Moose Jaw in 1964 even before we got started. They committed themselves to a political party, 

the NDP party and only recently they set about to raise $70,000 from trade unionists on a so-called 

voluntary basis. If I don't miss my guess, Mr. Speaker, it will be voluntary like a bank robbery. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — Trade unionists will be high pressured, threatened and coerced into a $2.50 

donation. Mark my words, it's been done before and it will be done again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the labor unions are doing to Great Britain is almost unbelievable. They have forced 

the government and the economy of that once great country to the wall. Their severe demands on 

corporations have bankrupted many of the large companies. But, Mr. Speaker, labor over there doesn't 

seem to realize what they've done or worse, they don't care. The Socialists over in Britain are 

responsible for the chaotic conditions that exist there. • See the headlines in the daily papers, "Desperate 

Mood Gripping Britain", "Continuing Strikes Cause Gloom in the UK", and on and on. 

 

I see another column in the Leader-Post of March 3rd in which the Member for Regina North East (Mr. 

Smishek) claims, "work programs not planned". Now this Member as well as other Regina Members 

said the Base Hospital wouldn't be built, but Mr. Speaker, it's going ahead. It couldn't have proceeded 

any faster for two reasons (1) lack of advance planning by the former CCF administration, (2) strikes by 

the building trades last year which caused considerable delay. The latter could have been prevented by 

the union bosses who sit opposite. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
637 

To get back to this excellent budget, Mr. Speaker, I see an amount of $15,000 for pollution control for 

our city of Estevan This amount will be used for secondary pollution treatment at the sewage lagoon 

which is anticipated by the city of Estevan. This is part of the $750.000 set aside in the budget towards 

the capital cost of pollution control works for various cities throughout the province. 

 

I note, with pleasure, that an all out effort will be made to provide summer jobs for students. The plans 

call for at least 2,000 jobs and I'm sure students will welcome this program. Summer jobs for students 

have always been a problem, but seldom do you see such a major effort made by a government to help 

students find jobs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — Naturally, the Government would find it impossible by itself to provide 

student jobs for every student looking for work this year. We would have to find 7,000 or 8,000 jobs in 

April and double or triple that number in June. However, by enlisting the co-operation of the private 

sector - farmers and so on – I think the minimum target of 2,000 jobs seems realistic. 

 

I feel optimistic and confident that our overall economic picture this year will be buoyant. People 

everywhere seemed to sense an upswing as early as last December. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — I. for one, feel we are on the road back to fuller employment. This is not a 

time to listen to the Socialist prophets of doom and gloom; this is a time for positive thought, and this 

Government is thinking and acting for a bright future. – 

 

I predict Homecoming 71 will be a great success. Our tourist trade is shaping up for a great year. As we 

open up the north with better roads we shall not take a back seat to any province in Canada in competing 

for the tourist dollar. Estevan's Winter Festival this year was a real success. The weather man 

co-operated with beautiful warm days and the crowds turned out in record numbers. This Winter 

Festival features our own Lignite Louie and the spirit surrounding the event is catching on. The 

Chamber of Commerce is very active as the sponsors of the Winter Festival, and they have started off 

what we in Estevan felt will be a record year for tourism and related activities for Home- coming 71. 

 

In the area of protest, I must say, here today, how unhappy the people of Bienfait and the town council 

are, also the mines and so on, over the CPR decision to remove the resident station agent. We formally 

protested this to the Board of Transport Commissioners because the Bienfait CPR station is one of the 

busiest stations along the south east railroad system. With the much welcomed renewed interest in 

lignite coal and with the dollar value of shipments more than doubled over the past year, it does not 

make much sense for the CPR to try to run the operation from Brandon. Yet, Mr. Speaker, this is what 

the CPR proposes to do. Last month the Attorney General asked for a special hearing covering these 

problems which we face in Saskatchewan 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
638 

regarding railroads and I hope the Board can see the inconvenience which will be caused by further 

reducing our services. The railroads have gone far enough already. 

 

Now we have had similar problems with post offices closing in rural areas. It was not until Mr. John 

Pierre Cote took charge of the postal system again that the closing or threat of closing of local post 

offices was halted. We had Mr. Cote" in the Estevan area and it was pointed out to him what post office 

closure in the rural areas means. Subsequently, at a luncheon, Mr. Cote announced that there would be 

no further closings unless the village or hamlet itself closes down. And that's the way it should be. And I 

am sure all areas where small post offices are located were delighted with this announcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is about up. I will support the Budget and I will vote against the 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F. K. RADLOFF: (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, today as I enter the debate, I enter with the idea of 

leaving thoughts for beneficial consideration. Last year Opposition Members laughed at some of the 

ideas that I had expounded but they were true, and of course, to their dismay they found out that they 

were true. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — The insidious Mafia of the United States and Canada did have some influence on 

their thinking. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You cleaned the nation. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, the sunshine Budget presented to this Legislature by the Hon. Dave 

Steuart spreads rays of opportunity for all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — The 1971 Budget as presented by our honest and dependable Provincial Treasurer, 

Mr. Dave Steuart, is an accomplishment of great magnitude. He is somewhat short in stature, but he 

stands tall. He stands very tall. He is a pillar of strength to this Government and the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — True, true. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — This sunshine Budget was a budget without tax increases, yet a budget providing 

money for many increased services. For health, education, welfare, agriculture, for increased 

employment highway construction, money for a program in environmental and pollution control, 

assistance for students, assistance for municipalities, towns and cities. This 1971 Budget is a budget of 

glowing promise. It is an indication of the magnificent job being done by Premier Ross Thatcher and his 

Cabinet. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
639 

The people of the north eastern Saskatchewan area know, Mr. Speaker, of the progressive attitude and 

forward programs of this present Government. This Government has made a stupendous effort to 

recover from the lost years of CCF (NDP) control and to bring back sound management and sound 

administration. Mr. Speaker, tremendous efforts by this Liberal Government to meet the needs of the 

people have brought many benefits. Never before has the area encompassed by the boundaries of the 

Nipawin constituency had so much consideration as that given by this Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, our area has new grid roads, new market roads, new highways, new 

bridges, and are maintained at the highest standards! Of course, of special mention, is the completion 

this year of Highway 163 linking the community of Carrot River to The Pas, Manitoba. This highway 

will encourage inter-provincial trade with new markets for agricultural products to the mining areas of 

the north. Highway 163 opens new frontiers to tourists and sportsmen. The Hon. Dave Steuart is without 

a doubt the most forward thinking highway builder of his time. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Well done, Davie. Ha, ha. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — My apologies, the Hon. Dave Boldt is the Minister. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — True, true. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — We have only words of praise and thanks for the Hon. Dave Boldt, words of praise 

for his recognition of traffic problems, needs and hazards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, industrial development has been encouraged by- the Thatcher Government. All 

Saskatchewan has benefited. Fantastic growth has taken place in this province. New or expanding 

industrial developments are under construction in north eastern Saskatchewan. I can say that the people 

of my constituency have benefited to a vast degree. We have four new alfalfa dehydrating plants under 

way or finished. The Agra industrial plant for rape seed oil production is being doubled. The live stock 

marketing and processing facilities are being expanded. There is expansion of seed processing and 

marketing agencies^ Not only do I have these to mention, but also the development of a peat moss 

marketing agency and plant over in Carrot River which is going to bring tremendous revenue to that 

area. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — True, true. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — This is indeed a record for a Liberal Government. Mr. Speaker, I have a friend 

who was a Member of the CCF and saw the error of his ways. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — He writes you every year too. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — He's just an ordinary person, but he has some very interesting opinions about 

today's political events. I think Members 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
640 

on the opposite side would like to give consideration to some of his ideas. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Give them to us, Frank. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — The comments he had, I'm going to give to you somewhat along the lines as he has 

expounded them to me. 

 

He said he had heard the NDP leader from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) raving over the radio and 

television that Liberals did nothing. How he thinks us people are so ignorant. Liberals have done more 

in six years than the NDP did in 20 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — He says, "I hope the poor NDP souls will be enlightened or turned out to wander 

in the wilderness". He also stated that it was a very good thing this Liberal Government had made a 

move to get labor people back to work. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Groovy idea. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Strikes serve no useful purpose and will wreck the economy. He thinks that 

government and labor people could work out a more intelligent way to settle complaints and problems. 

My thoughtful friend claims that only one to five per cent of workers are Communists. Yet with their 

control they can tie up all of Canada. He says it is time for honest workers to tell the big United States 

union bosses to go home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — He says, we don't need those people. They are just trouble makers and 

"moochers". 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh yes. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, my CCF friend wants everybody to work harder than ever to keep 

the Liberal Government in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — True, true. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — He feels that if we could get Ross Thatcher to Ottawa it would be the salvation of 

Canada also. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — He says that Ross Thatcher is a dynamic individual who could do a great deal for 

this nation. Mr. Speaker, my friend wants Conservatives and Social Credit supporters to wake up and to 

help and do their best to defeat the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
641 

MR. RADLOFF: — Once and for all. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Yes, once and for all. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Put them out to pasture and lock the gate. My friend says Saskatchewan cannot 

afford an NDP Government. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Good friend; 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — He feels that the Government has had enough problems without having a bunch of 

ranting raving, long haired, venomous, Wafflers making a mess… 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: —   making a mess of a "darn" good country. He says pioneer people sacrificed much 

to build this land, worked to make Saskatchewan a marvelous land and does not want it sacrificed to 

undiscerning people. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You can have only one friend like that. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, my friends says the people will surely cry if the NDP ever form 

another government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — He thinks that hard working, honest people will have, to leave Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Oh yes. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — If ever such a disaster should befall. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It will never happen, Frank, tell your friend. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — People do not understand the intent of the NDP to control their lives. My ex-CCF 

friend says that it's the thorough, hard working people in plain working clothes who can win the next 

election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Real thinkers will see that the Liberals win and keep winning. Mr. Speaker, he 

says he knows what it was like before the utilization fees. He feels that they are a good thing. The best 

thing that ever happened for the sick and the ill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
642 

MR. RADLOFF: — Before utilization fees it was hard to get into a hospital or to see a doctor or when 

you did the doctor gave you a bunch of pills and hoped that you survived. The doctors' offices and the 

hospitals were packed all the time by people who did not need much attention. Sick people had to wait 

for hours and days to get into the hospital. Now, with utilization fees, you can get a bed in the hospital 

and see a doctor. Now they really look after you with all the care in the world and it does not cost you 

very much more, at the very most it can cost a family about $183 a year. 

 

My CCF friend says that the radicals in the NDP just holler and holler. If not kicking, then they are 

plotting and scheming. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Those nasty fellows. 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — These people really don't care about people but want control so that they can fill 

their pockets without working. The only time they care about people is on election day. My friend says 

he begs people not to be crazy and vote NDP but get off their butts and work hard to keep good old Ross 

Thatcher and his crew in office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — They are fighting for the best things for the people of this beautiful and glorious 

land. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, my ex-CCF friend is sincerely worried about labor's attitude. He says 

fanners would be in a lot better cash position if labor people would have more consideration for their 

fellow Canadians. This man feels that farmers have lost sales in markets resulting from indiscriminate 

strikes by workers employed in grain-shipping facilities. The biggest Problems farmers have are these 

grain tie-ups at critical times. Millions of dollars of revenue have gone down the drain. 

 

My friend is really concerned about Socialists. He says he could feel that he was wrong a few years ago. 

He claims he has read a lot and talked to many people. It appears that every attempt at Socialism has 

failed. In fact the rivers of Asia and Europe have run red with blood from governments trying to force 

people to work for the state. 

 

My friend is disgusted about the apparent approval of drugs by some segments of our society. He thinks 

that all society should take a firm stand against drug peddling. He wants to put drug pushers in jail for 

life. Isn't it a dirty crime the way our innocent young people are being trapped and led astray. He says he 

is right behind Mr. Heald and his work to control this scurrilous trade. Helping the young people blow 

their minds is a work of evil minds perpetrated on their fellow Canadians. He asked me to present each 

Member of the Legislature with a copy of an article from MacLeans magazine, March issue, stating that 

Canadians want stiffer drug penalties. I have the copies here and I'll ask the pages to pass these copies 

around after my speech 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
643 

I ask each Member of this Legislature to give serious consideration to the contents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say without contradiction that Liberal years under the leadership of Premier Ross 

Thatcher have been good years for the communities that I represent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — The Indian and Métis people of three communities - Cumberland, Red Earth and 

Shoal Lake - have been recognized by this Provincial Government with electric power and connecting 

highways. Telephones are to be installed this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only have our Indian people been provided with new services, but opportunities for 

farm ownership, increased employment and specialized training have been provided. 

 

The Hon. J. C. McIsaac, Minister of Education, officially opened the newly completed L.P. Miller 

Comprehensive School in Nipawin. This school makes available many new avenues of educational 

opportunities for the many young people of that area. The school also provides new opportunities for the 

training and retraining of adults with technical courses. It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that on the 

horizon still hangs that black ominous and threatening cloud of state control, regimentation and 

expropriation . 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is little use for the people of Saskatchewan to kid themselves about the policies, 

desires and ambitions of our Socialist-minded friends opposite. Many are extremely radical and hold 

dangerous views, views that could demoralize our efforts and our plans. 

 

Mr. Blakeney, leader of the NDP Party, and Mr. Don Mitchell, leader of the Waffling Wing of the Party, 

have made their party's position very clear. They stand for the nationalization of all resources, both 

natural and human. Mr. Speaker, it is to be hoped that the people of Saskatchewan have not forgotten 

about the unfortunate 20 years of Socialistic experiment when Saskatchewan regressed and not 

progressed. Twenty years of Socialist experimentation when, during the best years of Canadian history, 

Saskatchewan fell to the bottom in recognition by the people of Canada for economic development and 

industrial growth. Then Saskatchewan was wrecked by stagnation, dismay and patronage. How 

unfortunate, that young men of the calibre of the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) and the Member of 

Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) should fall into the clutches of these conniving Wafflers and 

squafflers. 

 

The Member for Regina South East' (Mr. Baker) is also astray sitting amidst the representatives of 

continued defeat. It is an unfortunate paradox in our society when rich young men and for that matter 

young women, organize to destroy a society that has provided benefits that no other society can provide. 

The best of the world is at their feet for their use and their enjoyment. A responsible and free enterprise 

system has provided more opportunities, more advancement, more enjoyment, for responsible people 

than any other political system ever devised and adopted. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
644 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, it would be well for people to consider the many irresponsible 

political movements that are being organized for the enslavement of their abilities and their production. 

 

Immorality, permissiveness, sexploitation, violence, revolution, is being encouraged by subversive 

elements. Peril and disaster can be the lot of innocent careless people. Mr. Speaker, the bird world has 

its vultures, and so does our world of human endeavor. Our society has its radical lefts, communal folk, 

society dropouts, the criminal underground, clandestine organizations and people of warped intellect. 

We have groups or individuals who will use any means to exploit others. Well constructed lies and 

clever brainwashing do much of the scurrilous work of undermining social progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is fortunate to have a strong, fearless leader in these days of peril and unrest. 

Premier Ross Thatcher is a good man for the people of Saskatchewan. He is a leader who does not fall 

for these fallacies spread by the enemies of our society. He is a man of colossal stature recognized for 

his ability wherever he goes. Premier Thatcher is an honest, forthright man, a man who works long 

tedious hours to build a solid foundation of advancement for all Saskatchewan citizens. Premier 

Thatcher wants Saskatchewan to enjoy a rewarding, pleasant, beneficial life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in particular, Premier Thatcher has recognized the plight of Saskatchewan's native people. 

This is a clear indication of Premier Thatcher's understanding, sympathy and determination to help all 

the unfortunate people of our society. There is perhaps one issue and development that I should say a 

few brief words about - the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

Do not let anyone fool you, Mr. Speaker, about the value of the Prince Albert pulp mill to the people of 

Northern Saskatchewan. I know many men and their families who could not make a decent living before 

the construction of the pulp mill. Today these same people are enjoying a comfortable living with 

money in the bank. Millions of dollars of wages are being paid to employees at the mill. I have seen 

cheques for over $700 net earnings for two weeks, for two weeks' work in the mill. Not bad pay for a 

man who wants to work, and I might add, work under almost luxurious conditions and luxurious 

accommodations. I ask New Democratic Party Members to consider this high wage return earned by 

bush workers in our day. Restrictive measures against lumbermen allowed only a pittance of return. Mr. 

Speaker, in fact if I recall correctly, the old CCF Government took over the timber business putting 

hundreds of operators out of business. Workers and lumbermen had to migrate to Manitoba, Alberta, 

British Columbia to find work and timber to saw. Our loss, of course, was in particular a gain for Prince 

George of British Columbia. They say that most of the people who brought prosperity to that city were 

refugees from the CCF hierarchy in Saskatchewan. 

 

Many people should not swallow the many insinuations spouted by power hungry politicians but 

consider the assets and liabilities of this great achievement at Prince Albert. The successful completion 

and operation of the Prince Albert pulp mill is an achievement of immense magnitude. One must 

consider the 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
645 

employment provided, the utilization of natural resources and the revenue provided, the employment 

provided and the future of continued employment for our youth. 

 

I ask all people to consider that possible pollution is being eliminated, to consider all the forests that 

have been burned, rotted, and gone to waste. Forest control eliminates fire hazards. Clean cutting of 

forests provides an even regeneration. If one is in doubt as to the value of forest management, he should 

visit the area and see for himself what is being done. Last summer a tour was arranged for all MLAs and 

only a couple of Members opposite took the tour and not for a look at the truth, but to be able to come 

back and spread the gospel of uncertainty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert pulp mill is bringing opportunity, revenue, progress and development to 

Saskatchewan. The Athabasca mill and timber complex can do the same thing for the Meadow Lake 

area. 

 

The Members opposite keep crying sour apples, now that the Liberals have accomplished a seemingly 

impossible task. Need- less harassment and criticism can only hinder this beneficial enterprise. The 

timber crop of the north is being turned into a permanent cash crop with efficient management practices. 

The forest will be protected and utilized for us and our children's benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP platform reveals that present day Socialist thinking is no different from that of the 

old CCF policies. It is incredible that they should continue to spout the same old archaic, doleful 

balderdash. 

 

Nationalization of land is first and foremost. Buy up the farms and leave the land to party faithfuls. Mr. 

Speaker, they want a nationalized industry to provide high salaried jobs for more party faithfuls, to 

regiment people to provide plums for their faithful followers because they are a covetous people. People 

of my constituency will easily recall the lease land fiasco of the CCF Party. Farm people who wanted to 

progress could not buy their leased land. If an ardent CCF Member wanted the land, their lease was 

cancelled and transferred to the party heeler. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the old CCF ruling executive was Socialist minded but sincere in their beliefs and 

responsible to their own party members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mystery question today is, who plans the policies and programs? Who cracks the whip 

for the successors of the CCF - our NDP Members across the way? I remind all that labor union bosses 

have a heavy hand. Their rules are hard and unbending. Their ambitions are unlimited, to the detriment 

of the rest of society. Their plans would be much more bearable if their policies were of truly Canadian 

origin. The day is long overdue for Canadian labor people to break away from United States labor 

unions and United States labor control. 

 

Canadian union people would work for their own interest not pour millions of union funds into the 

United States union coffers and pay exorbitant salaries to union officials living in Canada. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
646 

Mr. Speaker, there is one thing for sure, the people of Saskatchewan know where Premier Thatcher 

stands on the issues of the day. He is a strong man needed to guide a government during this confused 

and uncertain era. Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people are his first consideration. Saskatchewan 

people can be proud of Premier Thatcher and his Government. Obnoxious controls and political 

manipulation have no place in our society and are detrimental to our well being and advancement. Free 

enterprise motivated people must work together to provide a solid front against irresponsible political 

elements. 

 

As I close my remarks I extend an invitation to all friends and former residents of northeastern 

Saskatchewan to return for a visit during Homecoming '71 celebrations. Come and enjoy our northern 

hospitality and friendliness in a happy atmosphere, beautiful scenery and a most attractive landscape. 

 

It goes without saying that I will vote against the amendment and support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H. H. P. BAKER: (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, the remarks of the Member for Nipawin 

(Mr. Radloff) as referring to his ex-CCF friend or his new CCF friend sounded more like those of an 

ex-Liberal friend. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — My first remarks in this debate are words of congratulations to those who have 

assumed greater positions of trust in this Legislature and within their own political parties. 

 

In rising to take part in this debate, each year I find there is a greater destruction of a great province, 

eradication of our fine humane programs, with people slipping further and further into debt, the 

disappearance of our smaller urban communities and services such as the closing of post offices, railway 

stations, and I think our greatest champion in this House for their retention is the Member for 

Melfort-Kinistino, Art Thibault. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — And also we have seen the great exodus of all time of our good Saskatchewan people. 

The Government has said it has brought in a balanced budget. Do you realize, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

the largest deficit budget brought into this House since the Liberals have been in office these past seven 

years. Actually it is a balanced budget with borrowed money. Let me show you why. 

 

The $16 million taken from the Power and Telephones really belongs to those public enterprises for 

further expansion and development. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Where will it get this extra 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
647 

$16 million. It will borrow it and call it a self liquidating debt. 

 

In 1964 this self liquidating debt was $595 million when the CCF left office. In 1970 it was $852 

million, an increase of $267 million. Year after year, we have asked to increase the amount for 

borrowing to expand the Power and Telephone systems. Your inflated figures listed on revenues in this 

Budget indicate they are really padded. Several more millions will not come into the coffers of the 

Treasury because there will not be the resurgence in the economy you anticipate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — These deficits will start to show up in early summer and fall, therefore we can expect 

an election this spring before it will be known to the public. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — In my remarks today I shall show that the Budget does not contain the answers to 

solve Saskatchewan's economic and unemployment problems now or in the future. It has been obvious 

that the Government across the way is doing everything it can to dodge the two main issues, namely, 

agriculture and unemployment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — It tossed in the pulp mill early in this session to becloud the issues, to cover up its 

misdeeds in doing nothing over the past two or three years to solve its agriculture and labor problems, 

and in driving our farmers off the land and driving our workers out of the urban centres. It is calculated 

that over 100,000 people left Saskatchewan since this Liberal Government took office. 

 

In 1964 there were 943,000 people in Saskatchewan when we left office. Add the 103,000; 

Saskatchewan today would have a population of 1,046,000 at least. Had the CCF NDP remained in 

office this would have been the case. 

 

You can't blame the losses on Regina because we are the only city that showed an increase while 

Saskatoon has dropped and is still dropping in population. Perhaps it is because Regina had a good 

mayor for 12 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — The only reason why we had a measure of prosperity during its first three and one 

half years after 1964 was because you had the CCF savings to spend which amounted to millions of 

dollars in reserve funds, cash and liquidating capital. So when all these savings were gone you then had 

to embark upon recession and depression policies. First, by putting $39 million of new taxes on the good 

people of Saskatchewan in 1968, and in subsequent years you put on a gross total of $231.5 million in 

taxes with a net increase of $134,500,000. Your policies not only caused high increases in taxes but put 

us into a borrowing 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
648 

position. So what else could this Government do after the CCF savings were gone? It immediately 

started preaching austerity don't spend, restraint, as the Deputy Leader said, "We are broke . Developers 

quit spending, people tightened up on the little they had left. The Government directed the Local 

Government Board to stop approving projects such as schools, and other work programs in our cities, 

towns and villages. It wouldn't allow anyone to spend to create employment. "There is no money," the 

Government says. So what happened? Unemployment went up very rapidly in our province, so serious 

that 100,000 moved away. 

 

When the Government saw things were really desperate, late this fall, it interjected $17 million into a 

crash program, or again announced programs which don't seem to come to fruition. Things are serious, it 

said. Now it has announced a few more programs in this election budget. Heaven knows when and if 

they will ever begin. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Mr. Speaker, what should have been done was to put sufficient capital monies into the 

budget each year so that we could keep our people here instead of having them move to British 

Columbia, Ontario, Manitoba and Alberta. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Yes, many of our new Canadians who came in the 1950's have moved back to 

Europe. Yes, Liberal times are recession an. depression times, we now have less jobs and less people. 

The Budget brought down this year and I hope it is the election budget, will not solve unemployment 

and agricultural conditions now or in the future. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear 

 

MR. BAKER: — So much said across the way is geared to degrade the worker and to take away his 

rights. Their policies are to destroy the family farm. The Task Force has said they will reduce the 

number of farms from 65,000 to 20,000 or 25,000. They want large corporate and cartel farms, and no 

doubt, most will be owned and operated by people outside of this province. 

 

Turning back to our working people, the shameful way in which our civil servants of Saskatchewan are 

being treated by taking their merit increases is typical of this Government not living up to the collective 

bargaining rights and agreements. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — By this Government continually interfering with signed union agreements, or about to 

be signed agreements, it has affected the income of our workers, and has affected the financial position 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Farmer, there is nothing for you in this Budget either. All that is being done, Mr. Farmer, today in 

this Legislature is to use you as they did in years gone by, is to divide you 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
649 

from the working people. This was their custom before 1944 when the CCF took office. They are trying 

to keep you divided from the working masses now. 

 

In 1944, in Saskatchewan, the farmer, the worker, the businessman and the professional man, rallied 

together and we swept the Liberal Government out of office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Again we must go arm in arm in this great crusade to do the same at the next election, 

and we hope it will be in a matter of weeks. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Mr. Speaker, just as we believe the worker deserves a guaranteed income, so should 

the farmer have a guaranteed income. As I said before our family farms are being destroyed by this 

Government and the one in Ottawa. They have put the farmer into debt. They have caused the price of 

wheat to drop and other farm products, such as was mentioned, 21 cents a pound for hogs - someone 

told me he got 14 cents a pound this morning. The backbone of our number one industry, namely, 

farming is the family farm which we must try to preserve. 40 per cent of our wealth in Saskatchewan is 

created by agriculture. It is looked upon as our billion dollar industry. Agriculture is the back- bone of 

Saskatchewan, the West and is the wealth and strength of the whole economy for Canada. When the 

western farmer is broke, the whole of Canada seems to be put into a depression. 

 

Look at Canada today, the worst unemployment we have seen in more than a decade. What is the 

answer? First let us get rid of the Task Force and its report. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Next get rid of Otto Lang. Let's lift him out of office, because of his chicken-feed 

agricultural policy LIFT. Last year several hundreds of millions of dollars were lost to the farmers. We 

must fight to keep the Wheat Board and orderly marketing. We must give support to doubling the 

capacity for handling grain over the Hudson Bay Route. We must build large inland terminals to store 

more grain. We must press for a guaranteed income for farmers with floor prices, not for one year, but 

for five and ten year periods depending whether it is wheat farming or diversification into livestock. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — This will keep the farmer on the land or in livestock. This will encourage the young 

men to stay on the farm and many will go back to farming. 

 

What are some of the other ways we can serve the family farm and work towards a guaranteed income? 

I recommend interest free loans be made available to those interested in farming, particularly the young 

people who live on the farms now. My 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
650 

two price system for the sale of wheat would give a good measure for a guaranteed income. I have said 

here each year the first 2,000 bushels of wheat should be sold at $2.95 or $3.00 per bushel, even if it 

means subsidization. Wheat over the 2,000 bushels could be sold at prevailing rates, with larger 

productions on a decreasing price scale. This would give the farmer a chance to survive and very few 

would need to use the advance wheat payment system. Farmers growing grain must know at least five 

years ahead what they can expect in average income. Those in livestock, 10-year plans must be worked 

out. 

 

To help industry, I advocated the flour mill at Moose Jaw be opened. This would create work for at least 

150 to 200 people and I still say the distribution of flour to our people is a good one. What would be 

wrong if even free flour was distributed today to those on welfare, on pensions and those on 

unemployment insurance. And free flour to our Indian and Métis. Why let the grain rot in the field while 

many of our Saskatchewan citizens are going hungry. Ottawa should buy up at least an extra 200 million 

bushels of wheat this year to ship to the hungry people of the world or sell it to them on long term credit, 

without interest, as our contribution toward promoting good world relations. 

 

Only a New Democratic Government will pull us out of this terrible slump. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Why do I say this? Let's look at what security the CCF gave during those glorious 

years of government from 1944 to 1964. What programs did they bring in that we in Saskatchewan and 

in Canada see today? We saw the Homestead Act brought in which protected the farmer and the people 

living in the cities, towns and villages from losing their homes. This is gradually — being eroded. We 

gave hospitalization and then full Medicare, now enjoyed by all Canadians. We brought in the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance now copied by all provinces across Canada and other countries. 

We brought in the Air Ambulance known as flights of mercy, now copied by other countries. For the 

first time in history, we developed and constructed a great highway system. When we took over, I 

believe there were 10 miles of Liberal black topped roads, and those were impossible to drive on. We 

did more highway building with the $25 million in the budget than you are doing with $65 million 

today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Yesterday, the Minister of Highways castigated some Members on this side of the 

House for criticizing the Highways Department. If it weren't for this criticism and work by such people 

as the Member for Redberry, Mr. Michayluk, no work would be done to improve the roads in their 

ridings. We brought in an Act for Regional Parks and developed most of the recreational centres and 

resort areas we have today. Hundreds of new schools were built. Many new hospitals were built or 

extended. So were geriatric centres, nursing homes, hostel accommodation and low rental housing 

projects. We started the water and sewer programs for towns and villages and farm homes. The 

Saskatchewan Transportation bus system was established. We built the 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
651 

successful sodium sulphate plant at Chaplin which encouraged others to start. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Yes, we built the brick plant at Estevan and we are proud that we did it. We opened 

the North with Sask Air Lines, practically given away by this Government. What about IPSCO? It was 

backed and financed by a CCF Government and condemned ruthlessly by the Liberal Members in this 

House. This steel plant made Regina the steel centre of the province and beyond its borders. Now the 

Government is continually boasting about it across the nation. We're happy they have seen the light in 

developing and supporting public enterprises. The cement plant near Regina was financially backed by 

the CCF. Our great potash industry belongs to the great work of the CCF party. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Several plants were constructed and opened by the CCF while in office. All plants in 

Saskatchewan except one were either constructed, planned or on the drawing board while the CCF-NDP 

were the Government. When we were in office we had 5,800 oil and gas wells able to produce. Mineral 

revenues in 1944 were only $233,000 under the present Government. In 1963, they were $30 million 

under the CCF. We carried out the natural gas distribution for the majority of people in our province. 

This Government gave away many of our resource rights in Saskatchewan. Our heritage in this respect 

is being depleted or destroyed. 

 

What about the Power Corporation? This giant hydro project was built entirely under the CCF. From 

1928 to 1944 under the Liberal Government which called it the Commission, it only had 129 customers. 

When we left it to you in 1964 practically the whole of Saskatchewan was electrified. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — $10.6 million was put into the Treasury office for this year's Budget. You would 

almost think by the ads on television and radio that they built the power corporation system. 

 

We expanded and rebuilt the telephone system which gave you over $5 million for your Budget this 

year. I could go on and on telling of our CCF programs from 1944 to 1964. The building of a great, and 

yes, a just and humane society. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — With this Government and at Ottawa, our financial budget positions will always be hit 

and miss and jeopardized at any time. 

 

This year the Budget contains $70 for the Homeowner Grant, an increase of $10. Last year instead of 

paying $60, I felt it should have been put up to $100 or $110. With a Homeowner Grant of $70 it doesn't 

come near what is needed to alleviate 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
652 

The homeowners in urban centres and the farmer from the property tax burden particularly for the cost 

of education. I advocated in the 1970 Budget Speech that $150 per year be paid to our pensioners 65 

years and over to cover part of the education costs on property. The program the New Democrats have 

advocated through our capable Leader, of assuming 75 per cent of education cost is a good plan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — In Regina, only 31 per cent of education costs are borne by the Provincial 

Government. Think of what it will mean to the taxpayers of this city of Regina when the grants to 

education in our city will be increased by 44 per cent. This will mean a cut in our education mill rate in 

Regina of between 25 and 30 mills. The Homeowner Grant should also be made available to those 

renting homes, suites, and apartments as they pay taxes indirectly too. It is most fitting that because I 

was the first to advocate homeowner grants in my maiden speech here seven years ago that I have a right 

to advise the Government and guide it on its proper course. 

 

I was most disappointed to see that the Budget did not contain funds to provide chiropractic services 

covering at least 75 per cent of the cost. Treatments taken anywhere in Canada should be recognized in 

Medicare and paid for. This House passed my resolution six years ago by a unanimous vote. I can see 

now it will never be approved by this Government. I can assure you that I will continue to press for this 

necessary and vital pro- gram until there is full cost coverage under our Medicare Plan. We need a plan 

now to cover our boys and girls under the age of 16 with a free dental program. This year's Budget 

should have provided for that. I notice the Health and Welfare Department at Ottawa is talking about a 

dental plan for children. This can only get underway when provincial governments have taken the first 

steps. A New Democratic Government would have taken the lead in this several years ago. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — Optical services should not only include eye testing but should cover the cost of 

glasses too. The Budget gives no indication of this extended and needed service. I also looked for 

monies to be provided for a drug plan covering our children and pensioners at least. 

 

I thought for sure, Mr. Speaker, the Government would have taken off the cursed deterrent fees for the 

sick in hospitals. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — For doctors' office visits and doctors' home calls. With the millions of dollars you 

received from Ottawa you should also have taken off the $72 per family Medicare premiums. This is 

what our Government in Saskatchewan must work toward if we really want to call our Medicare Plan 

free. I will work toward eventually doing away with deterrent fees and Medicare premiums. I will 

continue to advocate that full old age pensions today should be paid to all pensioners without a means 

test, not a 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
653 

measly $80 per month, oh yes, a 42 cent increase. The $135 per month or whatever figure they are 

talking about in Ottawa should be paid to all pensioners. I want to say most emphatically that we as a 

Legislature should be pressing to reduce the age to 60 from 65 for pensions under the Canada Pension 

Plan. Many are saying we should pension men off at 60 and women at 55. I would certainly support this 

step. This would alleviate the unemployment situation across this country and give many of our young 

people an opportunity to get jobs for the first time. This would certainly be better than putting hundreds 

of thousands of our people on welfare. 

 

What about welfare assistance? Last year I asked this House to provide a $30 per month increase for 

food, clothing and shelter for those on social assistance. The modest increases to be given this year are 

much too low. More must be provided to meet the higher cost of living these people have been faced 

with and forced on them these past five years. 

 

Increases in the 1971-72 Budget show that modest amounts were provided for our two major cities. 

Police 50 cents, persons on snow removal 50 cents, library 10 cents, health 15 cents, making a total 

grant this year of only $181,000 for the year, or $1.18 per person. Calgary, last year, got from the 

Edmonton Government $23 per person or $10 million as an unconditional grant to that city. I have been 

asking for a $10 or $12 per capita grant for years for our community. SUMA requested it. Regina at $10 

would get $1,450,000. All the present Government have given is $451,000, $3.15 per person, so again, 

you are $1 million short on unconditional grants we've been asking for the past seven years. 

 

More should have been put in the Budget if we are to achieve and complete construction of the buildings 

at the University planned and to be completed by 1974. We are now $30 million behind in construction 

on our University site in Regina. We must work toward assuming costs of tuition fees for students 

attending university and living in Saskatchewan. At least the first three years should be looked at for free 

tuition. 

 

I had hoped the Government would have provided the means to set up a university board and senate for 

Regina Campus. Complete autonomy here is the only answer for a well run university. Our faculty 

members and students must have the independence they deserve and it is the only way to community 

participation. 

 

The grant of $500 toward homes for winter construction is not sufficient. This plan should be broadened 

so that those who build apartment blocks or other dwellings be given a grant toward each suite or related 

living quarters. 

 

What about the power house? J -had hoped the Budget would have provided capital funds to build a new 

power house for our city and locate it perhaps near our oxidation pond area. The agreement calls for the 

removal of this plant to another location. The people living in the area of the power plant deserve that 

something be done immediately to be relieved of noise and air pollution. You got our city plant for a 

song, your profits this year were high, of which you took $10.6 million into revenue. I would say that $4 

million of that was made from our former city light and power system. I call on the Government to build 

a $30 million new plant now adjacent to our city. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
654 

The Budget should also contain an amount of money to pay back the $400 for each farmer who put in 

electricity. You promised this in 1964 as one of your main platform planks. 

 

To sum up, we need more funds in this Budget to promote industry for public, private and co-operative 

enterprises. Less monies have been put in for capital programs. There is no guaranteed income for the 

farmers and you have done nothing to help seek markets for farm products. There is no guaranteed 

income for the wage earner. You have done nothing in this Budget to raise pensions above the $80 per 

month and you have done nothing to get Ottawa to do something either. You should have given greater 

increases per month for those on welfare. Unemployment will continue to grow and the farm economy 

will continue to drop thus killing our business in smaller communities. 

 

This Budget will not solve the problems facing our economy in Saskatchewan but is generating another 

1930 depression. Yes, the coined phrase, "Liberal times are hard times", has come true again. The 

people of Saskatchewan now believe us in what we say. An election will bring a change in government 

to the New Democrats. Let's hope that it will be real soon. People of Saskatchewan are waiting, oh so 

patiently, to defeat this Government. 

 

I support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. I. WOOD: (Swift Current): — In entering this debate, Mr. Speaker, I too should first like to 

compliment the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) on his election to Leadership of the 

Opposition in this House. 

 

Mr. Woodrow Lloyd held this position with dignity and ability and his will be hard shoes to fill. 

However, I believe- that the Hon. Member from Regina Centre is qualified to do just that if any Member 

in this House is. 

 

I should like to congratulate the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) on his 

appointment as Deputy Leader. I am sure that he will fill that position with distinction, Mr. Speaker, 

bringing to it both his great ability and his personal charm. I should also like to congratulate the Hon. 

Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) on his appointment as Minister of Labour. 

 

One thing, Mr. Speaker, that I should like to commend in this Budget is that it promises the 

establishment of the Chinook Regional Library. This will be greeted with a good deal of satisfaction by 

the people of the Swift Current area. 

 

A dedicated group of men and women have worked to line up the necessary support in the 

municipalities in that part of the province to make such a library possible. It is hoped that the support so 

arranged has not been lost while we waited for the Government to provide the necessary funds to start 

the project. But they are made available in this Budget and we wish the very best for the Chinook 

Regional Library. 

 

Like some other Members in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say something about taxes. Taxes 

used to be a 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
655 

favorite topic of the Premier when he was leader of the Opposition. I recall a speech he made in the 

1964 session and I should like to quote a bit from that speech. 

 

"Mr. Speaker, I assure the House and the people of Saskatchewan that if the Liberals form a 

Government next June, one of our primary, consistent, and determined purposes will be major 

tax reductions." 

 

No one likes paying taxes. At that time provincial taxes were 6.9 per cent of income. This sounds like, 

and it was, a lot of money. I should like you to mark that figure because I may have something more to 

say about it later - 6.9 per cent of the provincial income. 

 

In the 1964 election, the Liberals promised to reduce taxes, provincial and municipal as well as school 

taxes. During their first term of office, they claimed to have kept that promise. In a speech made in the 

Budget Debate of 1967, I endeavored to show, and I think conclusively, that while it had reduced some 

taxes, others had increased with the net result that taxes had increased considerably under the Liberals to 

that point in three years under Liberal rule, the people of the Province had paid some $32 million more 

than they would have if tax rates had remained as they were under the CCF. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — But the Liberal Party went to the people of Saskatchewan in the fall of 1967, Mr. 

Speaker, saying that it had reduced taxes and all was well in Saskatchewan. It bragged about the new 

Saskatchewan. Well, there is no doubt that property taxes in those years increased from $104 million in 

1964 to $137 million in 1967 - an increase of $33 million. Even subtracting the $8.5 million which was 

received in Homeowner Grants in 1966 there was an increase of some $24.5 million in property taxes. 

Provincial taxes increased from 6.9 per cent - and I should like you to mark this, Mr. Speaker - of 

personal income in 1963 to 8.8 per cent of personal income in 1967 - an increase of nearly 2 per cent of 

the total personal income in the province. As I said at that time the province just couldn't afford much 

more of this kind of Liberal tax cuts. While it was talking about tax reductions it was actually increasing 

the taxes in the province by an increase from 6.9 per cent of personal income to 8.8 per cent. We said 

that we couldn't afford many more tax cuts of this kind. We got them, Mr. Speaker. The ink was scarcely 

dry on the election returns in 1967, before the Liberals changed their tune on all being well in 

Saskatchewan and began admitting part of the truth and actually talked about raising taxes. In the 1968 

session it raised all taxes in the book except income and corporation taxes and last year it even raised 

income taxes. It even put a tax on the sick, Mr. Speaker, with the result that in 1970 provincial taxes 

were 11.6 per cent of personal income. Out of every dollar that the people of Saskatchewan earned in 

1970, the Provincial Government took 11.6 cents, over 4 1/2 cents and 65 per cent higher than the 

percentage taken in 1963 by the former CCF Government. A 65 per cent rise in the amount of the 

provincial income taken by the Government. 

 

Now please don't get me wrong, Mr. Speaker. I am well aware 

 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
656 

that taxes are a necessary evil. If we are to have services and worthwhile programs we have to pay for 

them. What I have objected to is the Liberals promising to reduce taxes and saying that it had, while all 

the time it was raising taxes. I believe in calling a spade a spade and not a tax reduction. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — 1,400 new taxes; 

 

MR. WOOD: — That's right, Mr. Deputy Leader. Since the Liberals came to office in Saskatchewan 

there has not only been a drastic increase in provincial taxes, but also in property taxation. They talked 

about how high property taxation was under the CCF and promised that they would reduce it. In the last 

five years under the CCF, Mr. Speaker, property taxes in Saskatchewan had increased by four mills or 

eight tenths of a mill a year. In the first five years under the Liberals, property tax increased by 16 mills 

or 3.2 mills per year, just exactly four times the rate of increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the political speech that passed for a Budget address, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) said that in this Budget, the Government had taken positive action to take the local tax load off 

property and place it on the broader provincial tax base. This is a commendable project which has 

needed doing for a long time. But I doubt if this Budget will actually accomplish much along this line. 

 

In the 1967 election program, the Liberals' second promise was to continue local tax relief by increasing 

the Homeowner Grant with a minimum objective of $100 annually. As a political gambit, where every 

homeowner got a personal cheque from the Premier, the Homeowner Grant program may have been 

highly successful, but so far as being an effective tax relief, the $50 Homeowner Grant has failed 

dismally. 

 

In 1966, the first year that the Homeowner Grants were given they amounted to some $8 million in total. 

The amount of the raise in property taxes in that year amounted to $10.5 million, a short fall of some 

$2.5 million by the Homeowner Grants in keeping abreast of rising property taxation. But aside from its 

political overtones and its failure to help renters it was a step in the direction of alleviating the property 

tax load. 

 

The next year there was another increase of $13.5 million in taxes to a total increase of some $24 million 

since the Homeowner Grant was started. There was an increase of only somewhat less than $400,000 in 

the Homeowner Grant. It failed entirely to keep up with the increase in taxes. 

 

In 1968 there was another increase of $12.5 million in property taxation making a total tax increase of 

$36,700,000 since the starting of the Homeowner Grants. But there was only another increase of less 

than $120,000 in Homeowner Grants this year. In 1969 an increase of $13 million in property taxation. 

Local taxpayers were now paying $50 million per annum, more than they were when Homeowner 

Grants started, but Homeowner Grants were still only $8,800,000. You can't really call this holding the 

line. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
657 

Since the inception of the Homeowner Grant program, Mr. Speaker, property owners had paid by 1969 

in increased property taxes a total of over $87 million more than they had received in Homeowner 

Grants. You can't call this holding the line at all on taxation. 

 

We do not have any figures on taxation increases in 1970. We won't have for another year, but if they 

are of the nature of these we have had in the last few years, the extra $10 given in Homeowner Grants 

given last year amounting to some $2 million in total, will have little effect in stemming the inexorable 

march of property taxation in this province. 

 

Coming to the statements in this Budget address regarding action to take the load off property taxation, I 

note that the Homeowner Grant has been raised another $10. The Liberals had promised a minimum of 

$100 in this term of office and it would have taken at least that much to have had any effect on the 

growth of property taxation. Property taxation has been increasing at an average rate of over $13 million 

per year. Another $1.9 million in Homeowner Grants will certainly be inadequate to hold down the 

increase in taxation. 

 

There are however, several ways in which this Budget proposes to lift the tax burden off property 

owners, one of the largest of these is the increase of $8,300,000 in grants to schools. Listening to the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) tell it, this sounds like real assistance to the taxpayers of the province. 

One, however, must realize that during the years that I have just discussed in showing how Homeowner 

Grants have failed to hold down tax increases, school grants had risen by an average of $7 million a 

year, but the average property tax increase during these years is some $12.5 million even after the 

increased aid to education was applied. Increases in the aid to education in 1967 were over $11 million. 

But in spite of this, property, taxes rose that year by over $13.5 million. If there was an increase of $13.5 

million in 1967 in spite of an increase of $11 million in school grants, I fear an increase of $8.3 million 

in this year's Budget will not be adequate to hold them. 

 

There are other items of increased assistance to municipalities in the Budget, also some decreases. 

Counting the increase in school grants which is $900,000 more than the average for the last five years, 

the $1.9 million increase in Homeowner Grants, increased aid for police protection, urban snow 

removal, municipal equalization, health and library services, I see increased aid to municipalities of 

some $4 million. This is all very good, Mr. Speaker. I am certainly not criticizing the Government for 

this increase in assistance, but in view of the inexorable march of increases in property taxes in the last 

few years of $12.5 million per year, I am afraid that the pious hope by the Provincial Treasurer that this 

Budget will help municipalities to cut- back their mill rates is just that, a pious hope, with no 

justification in fact. 

 

The Provincial Government has indeed taken steps to endeavor to hold down the increase in education 

costs but it seems to me that it has gone about it the wrong way. Instead of doing away with guidance 

counsellors and librarians in the schools, they should have a hard look at the building of so many 

expensive comprehensive schools which when all is said, do not fit any technical student to take a job. 

He must still go to a technical 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
658 

school and as nearly as I have been able to ascertain what he has learned in the composite school will 

not go far toward helping him to get a journeyman's certificate. 

 

In a television broadcast a few evenings ago, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) upheld the practice 

of taking Sask Tel and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation earnings into revenue, saying that this had 

also been done by the former CCF Government. Insofar as Sask Tel is concerned this is true. For years, 

trans-Canada tolls, that is long distance charges crossing provincial boundaries, were divided on a basis 

of cost for each telephone system. The formula for cost included cost of capital in which was included 

not only interest but also dividends paid. Thus if Saskatchewan Government Telephones as it was then 

called, paid dividends to the Saskatchewan Government it thereby increased the cost of its money and 

got a larger share of the long distance charges. If it did not pay dividends to the Government it would be 

making a contribution to the private enterprise companies in other provinces which paid dividends to 

their private shareholders.] 

 

It was good management, Mr. Speaker, good business management in looking after the best interests of 

the people of the province for the former CCF Government to have the Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones pay dividends to the Government. However, I under- stand that the formula for sharing 

trans-Canada tolls has now been changed and the payment of dividends to the Government no longer 

increases Saskatchewan's share. They are now simply a tax upon the telephone users without any 

redeeming features and should be discontinued. 

 

There never has been any excuse for having the Saskatchewan Power Corporation pay dividends to the 

Government and the CCF Government never did collect any such dividends. Instead of running up big 

profit figures and taxing the users of power, we periodically reduced rates so that power users were 

getting the power as nearly as possible at cost. 

 

I believe the only reduction in power rates since the Liberals came to office was in regard to cheaper 

power for curling rinks. This was much appreciated by curlers who had artificial ice, but it could 

scarcely be called an across the board power reduction. 

 

This Government, instead of reducing power rates, has in its last five Budgets, budgeted for a total of 

$30.2 million from the Power Corporation alone which is nothing more or less than a tax on the power 

users of the province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — In looking at Power Corporation reports, the amount taken in the first three years of 

such dividend taking was not the $10 million authorized in the Budgets, but actually it shows that the 

Government took $14,600,000. So we don't really know what the final takings by the Government may 

be. It may be considerably more than the $30.2 million authorized by the Legislature. 

 

I should also like to say something about the farm situation, Mr. Speaker. The Government, for years, 

has persistently looked on the bright side of the farm picture, putting the best face 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
659 

on a bad situation and hoping for better things around the corner. There is some merit in this, Mr. 

Speaker. It is not good to be a calamity howler. This is a next year man's country and Saskatchewan has 

not become the province that it is by its people being faint hearted. But there is also such a thing as 

facing up to the facts as they are. If Saskatchewan farmers are going through a difficult time, nothing is 

gained by shutting our eyes to that fact but instead we should publish the facts and force the powers that 

be, in this case the Federal Government, to recognize them too. 

 

Not long ago a Member of Parliament asked me what the situation was back on the farm. I found it 

rather difficult to answer. Farmers are not too prone to talk about their affairs. But I have in the last few 

months, Mr. Speaker, taken a hard look at things and decided that they are not all well down on the 

farm. For example, in my own case, my own farm income is down in 1970 by a third and that third was 

the profit. 

 

If you take a look at the White Paper which the Government put out in January of this year, it has some 

things to say about agriculture which I should like to read into the record; 

 

Total farm cash receipts should reach $726 million in 1970, approximately the same level as 

1969. The number of bushels of grain delivered in 1970 was almost 40 per cent greater than in 

1969. Receipts from the sale of grain were only up 22.6 per cent, however, because of the lower 

final payments and lower unit prices. Cattle marketings are down substantially from 1969 due to 

herd buildup. However, because of higher prices, cash receipts will be up about 6.7 per cent. Hog 

marketings were up over 57 per cent. 

 

They didn't say anything about the price. 

 

Thus total receipts from the sale of livestock and products should increase approximately 13 per 

cent in 1970. Actual cash receipts have not increased even though receipts from the sale of grains 

and livestock are up substantially. This is due to repayment of Canadian Wheat Board cash 

advances borrowed in previous years. In 1970 Saskatchewan farmers paid back about $55 

million more than they borrowed but as of December 31st they still had some $75 million 

outstanding. 

 

During 1970 total operating and depreciation charges will increase about $9 million. Realized net 

incomes will thus be $192 million as compared to $195 million in 1969. 

 

This doesn't sound like such a bad picture except it says that we're down $3 million in net income from 

last year. But when you turn back to the financial and economic picture in a Paper put out by the 

Saskatchewan Government in July of 1969 you find it reads as follows: 

 

Although the wheat crop harvested in 1968 was almost 10 per cent larger than that of 1967, the 

value of wheat harvested was down 7.5 per cent because of the poorer quality of the grain. This 

was the main determinant in the decline in net agriculture production. Farm cash income was 

down 6.9 per cent from 1967 to $905 million 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
660 

primarily because of poor wheat sales. Because of these two factors plus increased operating and 

depreciation charges, realized farm net income was also down to $415 million, a decline of 16.3 

per cent from 1967. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were at that time bemoaning the fact that farm net income was down by 16.3 per cent 

to $415 million. Well, you make a comparison of the two. They were complaining that it was down to 

$415 million but in the last two years it has been less than half of that. And it was less than half of that 

in 1969 and it was down lower again in 1970. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this shows what the actual situation in the province is. This is surely understandable 

when quotas are cut from eight bushels per specified acre - as they were in 1966-67 - plus a special 

quota of five bushels per seeded acre of wheat - was cut from that to four bushels per specified acre as it 

was in 1969-70. Prices for No. 2 in the elevator were cut from $1.77 per bushel to $1.27 per bushel with 

not much hope of any further final payment. You can see how this drastic cut in farm income came 

about. 

 

Speaking of the farmers' position, I should like to read part of a newspaper clipping that was passed on 

to me by a reeve of one of our municipalities. It was taken from the Leader-Post of January 12, 1971. 

The headline is "Farmer Tied Up With Debt" by Mr. George Smellie, Leader-Post Ottawa editor, 

Ottawa: 

 

It is virtually impossible for the average prairie grain farmer to clear himself of debts with the 

expected increase in grain sales this year. 

 

In fact, the best Mr. Average Farmer might hope for is to get back into a position where he can 

go further into debt. 

 

Things have been so bad for the Canadian farmer generally and Prairie farmers in particular, in 

the last couple of years, that the rate at which they were piling up debts earlier in the sixties 

slowed down drastically. 

 

They are getting so poor they can't even borrow. 

 

Farm figures for 1970 are far from complete yet but those that are available indicate decreased 

borrowings by farmers under a variety of government involved programs and even a drop in total 

indebtedness in some of them. But inability to pay off old debts probably more than offset lower 

borrowings in the opinion of Dr. Ron S. Rust one of the best informed men in Canada on the 

subject of farm credit. He is an economist with the Farm Management Division of the 

Department of Agriculture 

 

This being from Ottawa, I would assume that was the Federal Department of Agriculture. 

 

   and emphasized that statistics just aren't available… 

 

Some individual farmers may be able to get themselves out of debt, he suggested in an interview, 

but mostly he expected this to be a year of recovering from the 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
661 

difficulties of the last couple of years. This would mean paying off some debts, those where 

pressure to pay is greatest, and looking after operational needs for the coming season  

 

The experience of the last couple of years has given many farmers a scare, he said, and he would 

expect them to be more cautious about future expansion 

 

If total farm indebtedness increased in 1970, Dr. Rust felt it would be due to difficulty in 

repaying debts that came due then. He said there would likely have been a reduction in new 

borrowings. 

 

Repayment of debts due then and coming due now would likely be amongst the first demands 

made on the increased income farmers can expect from boosted grain exports in the current crop 

year. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, I think is a very good picture of what the farm situation is, that the farm debt 

situation is such that they find that they cannot even face up to borrowing more money for much needed 

expansion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though the last annual report of the Department of Agriculture shows that marketings 

of cattle in Saskatchewan continue to drop off as compared to those when the CCF was the Government, 

I think that the picture for agriculture in Saskatchewan would be worse were it not for the diversification 

that we have. I am in favor of diversification but I think the Government should look ahead in fostering 

diversification, give fair market prognostications and take more responsibility in finding markets and 

fair prices for those who follow their advice. 

 

What about the future for farming in Saskatchewan? In a hungry world that needs our products the 

future should be bright for agriculture. But need is not effective demand. However, I do believe that an 

aggressive and enlightened sales policy with proper credit arrangements could help out our market 

situation in regard to wheat and other grains. 

 

A Wheat Board report which I have here, Mr. Speaker, for January 25, 1971 shows grain sales in the 

crop year 1970 were 640 million bushels as compared to 340 million in 1969. This looks rather hopeful 

so far as grain sales were concerned in this last year. It shows the wheat exports of 423 million 

compared to 273 million in 1969. These are hopeful signs. 

 

Forecasts by the Federal Government indicate that in this current crop year, deliveries will total some 

710 million bushels down from the 731 million bushels delivered in the 1969-70 crop year. This is more 

than either this present year or last year by a few million bushels. 

 

In general this is not much of a change from what had taken place in the 1970 calendar year. In fact it's a 

reduction in regard to the wheat and flax deliveries. 

 

The Federal Task Force on agriculture expects wheat exports of some 380 million bushels in 1980 which 

is down from the average of 415 million bushels in the last ten years. They are 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
662 

expecting in 1980 that there will be 380 million bushels of wheat exported. This may be a realistic 

outlook, Mr. Speaker, but it is not exceptionally bright. 

 

This Federal Task Force has also recommended some policies for Canadian agriculture to which our 

Deputy Leader (Mr. Romanow) has referred gently from time to time in this debate. I have heard him 

say things about it. 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW: (Saskatoon-Riversdale): — Yes, it's the Liberal farm policy document, Everett. 

 

MR. WOOD: — One is that they are proposing to make Canadian agriculture independent of 

government help. They also talk about increasing the farmers' efficiency. With this I can see nothing 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. But I do want to say that if other industries in Canada were as efficient as the 

farming industry they might not need all that tariff protection 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: —   that costs the people of Canada many, many millions of dollars a year in added costs 

to what they have to buy while farm products are sold on the international market not only in 

competition with producers in other countries but with the treasuries of those countries. 

 

The report recommends larger, probably corporate farms with emphasis on better management and more 

hired labor. It envisages the reduction of the farm population in Canada from 9.8 per cent of the total 

population in 1966 to 3 or 4 per cent of total population in 10 or 15 years. I believe that's a reduction of 

taking two out of three off the farms. I believe I have heard that said here. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — The report, Mr. Speaker, recommends seeding huge acreages in Western Canada down 

to grass and shipping feeder cattle to the United States for finishing. I think it would make much better 

sense to finish our cattle here thus providing employment and markets for our own feed grains. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — This report, Mr. Speaker, is written by economists and accountants. There wasn't a 

farmer or sociologist in the group. I didn't say Socialist, I said sociologist. It purports to be good for 

Canada economically but even this I doubt. Taking people off the farms and bringing them into cities 

may not be good even economically. And what about the social results? The denuding of our 

countryside of population would mean the end of our small towns, schools, churches, curling clubs and 

like institutions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
663 

MR. WOOD: — Also the end of the family farm and a very acceptable way of life as we have known it. 

If present trends continue and the policies of the Task Force are implemented, we shall see many 

farmers who have made a good living and have been well respected members of the community for 

decades, forced to quit and leave the farm. 

 

And what perturbs me is that the Federal Government seems to be taking steps to fall in line with the 

Task Force recommendations. The policy of doing away with assistance for grain storage is one such 

instance. In the long run it might be as well for the farmer to deliver his grain as needed instead of 

paying storage charges but in the short run it is just one more blow to his present plight by forcing him 

to cutback on deliveries while the grain marketing pipeline is being cleaned out. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — The income stabilization plan based on 80 per cent of past income and supported by 3 

per cent levy on grain deliveries is another. In the first place, Mr. Speaker, it is based on a reduction of 

income and making the farmer pay this 3 per cent levy is paying his own way with a vengeance. Three 

per cent is bad enough but this is of the gross and in many years this could amount to as much as 

one-tenth or a quarter of the farmer's net income. And while the Federal Government is playing along 

with the Task Force recommendations that would effectively abolish the family farm, the Government 

opposite is playing along with the Federal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — True, Mr. Speaker, grain marketings are a Federal concern but in times when the 

shadow of extinction is hanging over the farming industry as we know it, the Government opposite 

should be giving leadership and fighting for the farmer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — This it is not doing, Mr. Speaker. I will support the amendment and vote against the 

motion. 

 

MR. W. A. FORSYTH: (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the 

opportunity of taking part in this rather wide ranging Budget Debate because there are several topics that 

I should like to discuss and all of them are related in some way to finance. 

 

I want to talk about the philosophy of the Budget itself and about its impact on life in Saskatchewan. 

Then I want to say a few words about local government and a bit about the Federal proposal for a 

Canada Development Corporation. And then, Mr. Speaker, if any are left to listen, I should like to point 

out to some of the Members who sit on your left, the folly of their ways. 

 

Let us turn now to the Epistle of St. David - St. David 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
664 

Steuart, that is. The Epistle of St. David (Steuart) to the Philistines as it is recorded in the Budget Speech 

for 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FORSYTH: — And if we turn to page 4 we shall find the words that can be taken as a text for any 

discourse on Liberalism in Saskatchewan. The words of the text are: ―We promised common sense 

business-like approach to government and we delivered.‖ 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FORSYTH: — Just as the words of the Holy Writ do not always fall on ears that wish to hear, 

neither do the words of our modem saint David always receive the welcome they deserve. Let us repeat 

that text, "We promised a common sense business-like approach to government and we delivered". 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FORSYTH: — This is a common sense Budget. Thinking in terms of the past performances of his 

own party, the financial critic of the NDP (Mr. Romanow) expected it to be full of promises to spend 

money which we don't have. I don't really know why his mind works the way it does but the Member 

from Riversdale, the financial critic was so surprised by the continuation of our common sense approach 

that he couldn't find a plausible phrase to describe it so in desperation he labelled it a "bogus budget". 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FORSYTH: — Can you imagine the leader of a wholly dedicated party, a wholly dedicated 

Socialist party, labelling as "bogus" a Budget which devotes 57.5 per cent of its expenditures to 

education, to health and to welfare? Can you imagine him having the nerve to try to tell farmers and 

travellers, and proprietors of tourist related business operations, that expenditures on good roads and 

highways are bogus expenditures? 

 

Imagine him quoting - I am really amazed at this – imagine him quoting out of date statistics to run 

down his own home town. He bad mouths it into a feeling of depression. He says that there is a 20 per 

cent vacancy rate in the housing in Saskatoon. Now the 20 per cent vacancy rate to which he so proudly 

refers applied to all housing in Saskatoon, while actually it was the apartment vacancy rate at the end of 

the 1969 construction season. On January 8, 1971 Central Mortgage and Housing made a count of 4,250 

apartment units in Saskatoon and found a vacancy rate of just under 10 per cent. This is not unusual in a 

situation following a period of great expansion. 

 

Imagine belonging to a party which advocates public owner- ship of almost everything and then 

decrying as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition did, the payment of dividends from the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation and Sask Tel to the people of Saskatchewan who own them. And incidentally, have 

considerable more equity in them than they did in the days of the NDP administration. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
665 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FORSYTH: — You'll pardon us, Roy, if we don't hold our breath waiting for the explanation of 

the financial magic that can deliver such things as 100 per cent government grants for education without 

drawing dividends from Crown corporations, and these are the types of corporations in which you 

propose to invest hundreds of millions of dollars of people's money as you expand them to include 

things like the potash industry. I'm afraid I might have over taxed the imagination of Members of this 

House by asking them to believe that any man in a responsible position can say the things that the 

number two man in the NDP has said. Nevertheless, the records show that he has said them. 

Unfortunately, I find myself becoming rather hardened to this type of insincerity, but I hope it will not 

cause other Members to be- come cynical. Above all, I hope that the people who look at this Legislature 

for leadership will not be disillusioned by such a display of intellectual dishonesty as has been put on by 

the financial critic, and it has been echoed on so many occasions by his colleagues. Perhaps we should 

pause now and seek re- assurance in the truth of the text which I quoted at the beginning, "We Liberals 

promised a businesslike approach to government and we have delivered it". 

 

Now, the Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker) who is an expert on borrowing complains that the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation has been borrowing. Now I might point out that it has been borrowing 

at very favorable rates. Now we find that he is complaining also, in the next breath, that local 

governments have been discouraged from borrowing and they have been discouraged from borrowing 

because the rates at which they could borrow were absolutely prohibitive. And it is the type of 

borrowing that he is advocating from municipal governments which will be a part of a legacy of the next 

two or three generations of citizens of the city of Regina. I'm afraid this is what they will remember, the 

financial wizardry of the Member of Regina South East (Mr. Baker) - they will remember him for the 

wizardry that he showed in handling the finances of this city. 

 

Part of the interesting thing about the party to your left, Mr. Speaker, is the absolute dichotomy which it 

shows. Following the speech of the Member from Regina South East, the Member for Swift Current 

(Mr. Wood) arose and after the Member for Regina South East had advocated spending to an amount 

which would almost double our present Budget, obviously increasing their taxation by the same amount, 

the Member for Swift Current represented rather a more common sense point of view when he got up 

and decried any increases in taxation. Now I don't know whether these two people get together or not 

but I sometimes hope that they don't because as long as there is that type of division in the party 

opposite, there is no opportunity for them to occupy the treasury benches. 

 

Increased grants to both rural and urban municipalities are represented in this Budget and they will be 

most welcome, insofar as they help to bring the property tax under control. The $8 million increase in 

grants to school districts when added to the record $11 million increase of last year, should enable most 

school boards to maintain or reduce their mill rates. This along with the increase in the Homeowner 

Grants is a most acceptable and practical short term answer to a problem that 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
666 

must eventually receive a long term solution. It the trend keeps moving towards higher and more 

specific contributions from Provincial to local governments, regardless of political party in power, the 

eventual outcome will be the loss of local autonomy. 

 

Our cities -and this is what you Members opposite are advocating more and more, don't forget you 

advocated 100 per cent control of the expenses of education by the Provincial Government -are being 

placed in a position of having to grow ever larger to keep up the industrial portion of their mill rates. 

Thus, instead of spreading our industries around, they are being urged to concentrate in three or four 

cities. This process has caused complicated pollution problems in other parts of the world and we should 

take a very good look at our neighbors in Eastern Canada and in the United States before we go about 

encouraging uncontrolled growth in Regina and in Saskatoon. We still have time to study the situation 

dispassionately but eventually our time will run out. 

 

In the Budget Debate of a year ago, I devoted considerable time to taking a look at the need for an 

examination of the basic organization of local government in Saskatchewan. In other words, the need to 

consider some form of regional authority. At that time I created about as much enthusiasm on both sides 

of the House as a power tobogganist on a ski run. Outside the House there was a bit more interest but 

since across Canada at least four Provincial administrations of all political stripes have gone down to 

defeat, in part at least, because of their attempts to rationalize their local governments, I am certainly not 

suggesting to our Premier that he embark headlong on any such program. Rather, I am asking the people 

involved, the people who are involved in local government to rethink their positions. From what I have 

observed, it is a foregone conclusion that no administration will act in this area unless it has a virtual 

mandate from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, Saskatchewan Urban Municipal 

Association, Saskatchewan Trustees' Association and the Saskatchewan Hospital Association. I am 

convinced, Mr. Speaker, that there is no conscious empire building by the Provincial Government, but 

rather there is an exercise of power by default. It is my feeling that this will increase in direct proportion 

to the truth of the saying that ―he who pays the piper calls the tune‖. It is also my firm belief that a 

monolithic central government is not in the best interest of good administration for this Province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FORSYTH: — Insofar as the cities are concerned, we shall look forward with interest to their 

participation with the Federal and Provincial Governments in attempting to define a constitutional basis 

for municipal government at a conference which I understand will be held later this year. 

 

Speaking of the Federal Government, I should think that both sides of the House might be a bit 

concerned about the proposal by the Federal Government to create a Canada Development Corporation. 

Not being an economist or financier, I expect that my ideas on the subject are overly simplistic. 

However, it is my understanding that the Federal Government is about to 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
667 

create a ―conglomerate‖ using several existing Federal companies such as Polymer Corporation as a 

base. The Board of Directors will be men of substance and acumen well insulated from the Government. 

At a suitable time, with monies furnished by the Federal Government, the company will expand, and 

will "go public", offering shares to the people of Canada. Always its investments would be in Canada, 

by Canadians and for Canadians, a beautiful slogan for any company, but will it work? 

 

Our friends, the Socialists across the way will say that this does not go far enough. In their minds the 

company should be completely in the hands of the Government. With this objection of course, I cannot 

agree. My own objection is that we shall be creating a situation in which faithful businessmen shall be 

asked to operate with the equivalent of having one hand tied behind their backs. For instance, what if the 

prudent business move happens to be to expand by going into foreign markets with plants and 

investment capital? Will the directors of the Canada Development Corporation go as diplomats or will 

they go as businessmen? And what if the market value of the common stock in Canada Development 

Corporation goes down just before an election? Will any Government, regardless of its politics, resist 

the temptation of buying in to support the price? Will businessmen avoid the temptation of ―selling 

short‖ under some circumstances which can be imagined? There are certainly some theoretical 

attractions to this scheme, but if we want so desperately to keep Canadian money at home, might it not 

be better to offer greater incentives to Canadians to invest in Canadian enterprises, while at the same 

time offering relief to developers of such enterprises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget is obviously built around the type of development of our resources which we 

see in the Prince Albert pulp mill, and to which we look forward in the Athabasca mill, and the 

Wollaston Lake development. It is also predicated upon the normalization of our agricultural industry. It 

is a Budget which anticipates the future growth of Saskatchewan in a spiritual as well as in a physical 

sense for it offers much in the fields of education and personal services as well as in highways and 

industries. In other words, the environment of the mind as well as that of the body receives due 

attention. Frankly, it is beyond me how a man like the Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) 

can stand in his place and suggest that there may well be more jobs lost by the pulp mills than there are 

created by them. If he will take a look at the average family income of the residents of our northern 

reserves and our broad northern areas and compare it to that which he expects to obtain for his fellow 

unionists at the bargaining table, I am sure that the implication of his statement will be shocking even to 

him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may repeat the text once more, "We promised a common sense businesslike approach 

to Government and we delivered". I will support the motion and oppose the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F. MEAKES: (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this Budget Debate, may I say 

to the Member who just sat down, although I don't agree with much of what he said, I congratulate him 

for at least thinking about some of the problems of social change that may have to come about in years 

to come. I give him credit for it. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
668 

I had hoped the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) might be in his seat - he was sitting here and I regret 

very much he walked out - because I wanted to comment on a few of his remarks yesterday when he 

entered the debate. I could not help but think of the Biblical term ―Take the mote out of thine own eye‖. 

He talked of the hate that he heard in the voices of the Members of the Opposition. I was amazed 

because it seemed to me that I heard that same tone of hatred and venom and sarcasm in his voice. I can 

assure him that I do not hate him nor any other Member over there. When one hates he destroys himself. 

And I can assure him that his sarcastic answer yesterday to a civil question that I asked him when he sat 

down doesn't hurt me, it only hurts himself. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MEAKES: — I want to say to the Minister that we on this side hear from the other side about our 

lawyer leaders. I say again that we on this side are proud of our lawyer leader and deputy leader. What 

we want in our party, what we want for our leadership, is that whoever leads them is humane, honest and 

able. This we have in our leaders and we are proud of them. 

 

Before I get into the criticism of the Department of Highways, I want to thank the Minister on behalf of 

the Standing Buffalo Indians that the Government is at long last fulfilling an old promise to these people 

in that of the oiling of Highway No. 235 from the Junction of Highway No. 35 to the Sioux Bridge. This 

may save a lot of lives. I said in a previous debate that conditions at times had been terrible. There are 

many pedestrians on this road and at times when the traffic was heavy in the summer time it was dusty 

and dangerous. 

 

The highway program outlined by the Minister (Mr. Boldt) yesterday in my opinion is the most political 

highway program " that I've seen brought into this House and I've been around a long time. You know I 

spent some time yesterday evening transferring his program onto a highway map. When one looks at it, 

Mr. Speaker, one can readily pick out those seats that the Government is trying to save. It is in trouble. 

Secondly, it was looking at a few seats it hoped to win. It is not going to do them any good. I was 

amused when the Minister said the high- way program would elect the Member for Estevan. It will take 

a lot more than that to elect the Member for Estevan especially after his ramblings today in the House. 

 

Turning to highways in particular, I shall be having much more to say in the Estimates. The Government 

boasts of all the millions of dollars they have spent on highways - the Minister did it yesterday. I think 

all in this House will agree that modern up to date roads are necessary in this age of the motor on 

wheels. Trucks are getting bigger and bigger. I see it every day in my own home town. We have trucks 

owned by two railway companies travelling up and down our highways tearing up the roads. Yet there 

right beside that highway is a rail- road owned by the rail companies. At least to me this is the height of 

stupidity. 

 

Because good roads are needed and because they are costly it becomes ever so much more important 

that the taxpayer dollar is spent carefully and wisely. As I said in a previous debate, 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
669 

we in the New Democratic Party are convinced that millions of dollars can be saved in highway 

construction programs. 

 

Wherever one travels one sees signs of waste. Whoever I talk to, in all parts of this province, they tell of 

the incidence of waste. Whenever one gets an answer from a question in this House, one finds signs of 

waste. I shall not deal with those questions today, I'll do it in Estimates. But what we do say is here is a 

place where the fat can be trimmed off the Budget. –We also say that the same quality and quantity of 

highways can be built for millions of dollars less. 

 

I want to refer to a couple of instances of what I call waste. On No. 15 between Ituna and Melville, and I 

believe that road was built before the present Minister assumed responsibility, it was not built properly, 

it was oiled the same year, and to anybody who drives that road at any time of the year, it is an absolute 

provincial disgrace. Travellers and everybody talk about it. You can't get over 40 miles per hour on it 

and then you are lucky if you don't break springs. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MEAKES: — It is really not- what you would call a good road for even a horse and buggy. 

 

MR. J. J. CHARLEBOIS: (Saskatoon City Park University): —  Rosthern. 

 

MR. MEAKES: — You know the Hon. Member for City Park University (Mr. Charlebois) is a much 

better talker when he is sitting down than when he is standing up. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MEAKES: — I note that the Department of Highways are going to oil that famous or infamous 

road from Watson to Wadena. I think they are only going as far as Quill Lake if I'm not mistaken. You 

know this is the famous road or the infamous road that the original tender was $414,000 and they finally 

spent $1,162,144 - $414,000 was the original estimate and they finished by spending $1,162,144, an 

over expenditure of $748,836 or percentage wise $180.5 per cent of an over expenditure in relation to 

the original estimate. And I hope sincerely that they won't take another five years to oil it as it took them 

to build it. After you fellows quit interrupting, I'll go on; I've got lots of time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MEAKES: — As I said at the beginning, that's all I'm going to say on highways at this time. We'll 

have a lot more to say in Estimates. 

 

I'd like to turn for a minute or two to another item which has been long overdue in Touchwood 

constituency, and that is natural gas from Melville through to Watrous. All I hope is that it's in this year's 

program. I asked the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to remedy the 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
670 

injustice that has been practised on the residents of Touchwood in that area (Fenwood through to 

Semans). A Liberal Cabinet Minister promised natural gas to this area in 1964 and again in 1967. 

George Trapp stood on the platform and said it was in the plans. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Where's George Trapp? 

 

MR. MEAKES: — Yes, well he went some other place. But George Trapp stood on the platform and 

promised natural gas for that year. It was in the plans for 1965 prior to the CCF Government being 

defeated. That promise hasn't been kept and I accuse this Government of political discrimination. I don't 

mind them attacking me. This doesn't worry me in the slightest bit, but I do object to making all of these 

people of Touchwood suffer because they voted for me. And I say that only a New Democratic 

 Government will bring power and gas to this area. I hope I'm wrong, I hope the Minister will prove me 

wrong and bring it in this year. I'll give him credit for it if he does. 

 

Now to the question of taxes - this question was ably handled by the Member for Swift Current (Mr. 

Wood) this after- noon. 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW: (Saskatoon Riversdale): — 1,477 new taxes. 

 

MR. MEAKES: — I won't spend very much time reading, but I have in my hand the Debates and 

Proceedings of the session of 1964. I'd like to make three or four quotations from them. Page 39, the 

then Leader of the Opposition and the now Premier (Mr. Thatcher), and I quote in part: 

 

While there has been a shifting all right, Mr. Speaker, " a shifting of more and more taxes on the 

farmers and the property owners, today rural and urban taxation on the average is four times 

higher than it was in 1944. I repeat today what I have said on previous occasions that if taxes on 

land go much higher in Saskatchewan, our farmers won't have any land left. 

 

I should now like to turn to page 245 and quote from the now Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), and 

again I quote in part: 

 

The Government's refusal to give local governments the funds that they need is the major reason 

why municipal taxes are going up and up. And many of the essential services are slipping and 

slipping badly. Taxes on our farms, on our homes, on our towns, and our cities have increased 40 

per cent since the Government took power. Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, this hits everybody. 

The wage earner and small farmer are finding municipal taxes a real hardship. We say something 

must be done to give our municipalities the funds they need to carry out their responsibilities in a 

proper way without breaking their ratepayers. 

 

I'd like to turn to one more quotation by the present Senator MacDonald who was then the Member for 

Moosomin. This is just 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
671 

a very short one. He had been talking about the taxes in this province, and I now quote: 

 

But there is a new definition for a dime in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is that part of a dollar 

that is left after you pay your provincial taxes. 

 

Well, I think the new definition of a dime must mean that it means nothing, it represents nothing. But 

property taxes since that time have gone up and up and up and I'm not going to belabor you with a lot of 

figures. I have in my hand two tax notices, one of 1962 and that is for the R.M. of Garry and one tax 

notice for the year 1970. Municipal general taxes in 1962 in Garry Municipality were 35 mills and they 

continued to be that way until 1964. Municipal taxes in 1970 - 45 mills, ten mills up. For Melville North 

School Unit in 1962 it was 32 mills, today 45 mills. In the urban school unit in 1962 it was 37 mills, 

today 45 mills. In 1964 the levies were the same as in 1962, exactly the same with not one of the items 

that I'm going to read out changed. Now we go to the Yorkton School Unit. Yorkton School Unit was 35 

mills, now 53 mills, an absolute 

 

HON. C. L. B. ESTEY: (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — What about... 

 

MR. MEAKES: — Yes, and what good has it done them? Taxes have still gone up even though the 

unconditional grants have increased. They gave us very little. It wasn't enough to meet the needs in those 

municipalities and the Hon. Member knows that what I'm saying is right. I will admit that I'm not a big, 

corporation lawyer but I do know a few facts. Take on my own house in my home town; the taxes have 

risen terribly since 1967. I paid at that time $310; this year I paid $389 more than what any Homeowner 

Grant was going to pay for.\ 

 

My colleague, the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood-) dealt with school rates, but I just want to say 

one more thing about Garry Municipality and it's not different than many others. Prior to this year there 

were 30 parcels of land that were under tax enforcement. As at the end of 1970, this year, in the one 

year, there were 118 parcels of land under tax enforcement, and the blame lies on this Government. 

 

You know, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) stood up and said the other day that this Budget will 

ease taxation and the following day the Star-Phoenix had a statement in which it said the Mayor of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Buckwold, said that they were going to be forced to increase taxes. The Leader-Post the 

following day says that 

 

MR. J. J. CHARLEBOIS: (Saskatoon City Park University): — A Waffler. 

 

MR. MEAKES: — He's not a Waffler, either, one of your boys, one of your boys, you know. The new 

Mayor of Regina, and I'm sure that my Hon. friends think he's all right, and I'm not going to be critical 

of him, quoted in the Leader-Post the day before yesterday, said that there wasn't enough money for the 

Police Commission, that they might have to cut down some services. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
672 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — What about the 14 per cent? 

 

MR. MEAKES: — Oh that's a terrible thing. You want the policemen to work for starvation wages, is 

that it? Well, then don't blame the policemen. It was an impartial arbitration board. If what I have said 

isn't increased taxation, what is it? The people of this province know that in the last seven years the 

taxes have gone up and up and up. They know that the Liberals in 1964 and 1967 promised less taxes 

and it's just one more reason that when- ever you get the courage to go, and the sooner the better, you're 

going to be defeated. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What happened in Manitoba? 

 

MR. MEAKES: — We won an election in Manitoba. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What happened after that? 

 

MR. MEAKES: — Taxes went down to the property owner or are going to. Let us look at this Budget. 

You know the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) did a good job yesterday of analyzing just 

what has been going on and I just want to repeat a little bit of it to the House. You know the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) says there are no increased taxes. Well, I look at the revenue from education and 

health tax in 1964 - $37,500,000; 1970 estimate - $68,750,000. If that isn't an increase in taxes. All the 

same tax, but the taxpayers paid a great deal more money. Now let's take the gasoline tax - $27.500,000 

in 1964. It is $51,450,000 estimated for 1972. These are the gentlemen who are saying that income tax 

was too high. Income tax in 1964 - $14,692,000; this year estimated at $69,337,000. Another $6 million 

in tobacco tax of which there was none in 1964. All together when you add those up it's about an 

increase of $115 million in seven years. And then the Hon. Minister says there is no increase in taxation. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and on. There are so many things that one might talk about but 

I know that there are others of my colleagues who want to get in on this debate as it winds up tomorrow 

at 5:00 o'clock. I'm sure from what I've said you all know I am going to support the amendment and I'm 

going to oppose the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G. F. LOKEN: (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, it once again gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise 

and speak in this Budget Debate. Here again, we find that under the direction of the responsible 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and a free enterprise Government the Province has a balanced Budget. This I 

suggest is a commendable achievement under extenuating circumstances at a time when the economic 

conditions have been depressed. Mr. Speaker, a free enterprise system managed by a responsible, sincere 

person is undoubtedly far superior to a socialistic system which is advocated by the Members of this 

Assembly who sit opposite. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — True, true. 

 

MR. LOKEN: — At this time I want to 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
673 

congratulate the Hon. Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) on his appointment to the 

Cabinet, also the Member from Saskatoon City Park (Mr. Charlebois) on the outstanding job he did in 

managing the 1971 Canada Games. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LOKEN: — Also the Hon. Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) for his election to the 

leadership of the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LOKEN: — I regret it very much that the Member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) is retiring from 

politics but I do want to say that there will always be a Gallagher in the Liberal Government in Regina. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LOKEN: — Mr. Speaker, when I rose in this House to speak on the Budget Debate during the 

Second Session of the Sixteenth Legislature I stated then that the Leader of the Opposition was on his 

way out due to the fact that he was riding two horses going in different directions and that he would fall 

flat on his back. It would appear, Mr. Speaker, my observation (which was based on information given 

to me by the rank and file majority of the electorate of this province) was correct. Now, these same 

people prompt me to forecast that the new Leader of the Opposition will fall in the same manner as his 

predecessor only sooner as he is not satisfied to ride two horses but three, namely, the NDP horse, the 

labor bosses horse, and the added new horse called Waffle. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What are the odds on that horse, George? 

 

MR. LOKEN: — Mr. Speaker, at the same time that I referred to the ex- Leader of the Opposition I 

referred to the then dynamic Mayor of Regina who was making noises and was contemplating taking 

over from the big, little Tommy as National Leader of the splintered NDP. Alas, Mr. Speaker, it would 

appear that not only the rural population of Saskatchewan like the good people in Rosetown 

constituency but the urban citizens of Regina have seen the folly of the Socialists and it would appear 

that the ex-mayor, MLA from Regina (Mr. Baker) will be fortunate if he even gets a chance to be around 

after the nominations are complete. It's sad but it would appear that the ex-mayor has been ostracized. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — He's only got three seats left to go. 

 

MR. LOKEN: — Mr. Speaker, the Budget which has been brought down indicates that we can look 

forward to an upswing in 1971 despite the doom and gloom which those opposite spread in their travels 

throughout this province. They have brought forth their program of Socialism for the next election 

which confirms that the NDP is a party that believes that our citizens are not capable of 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
674 

handling their own affairs, that all incentive of the free enterprise system should be abolished and that 

we should be like puppets on a string. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need all the capital we can obtain for expansion in this great province and I am 

concerned when they say that we should shun our neighbors to the south. In fact, to me, it's a bit of 

hypocrisy for a party such as the NDP to state that we should not accept capital from outside this 

province and this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite know very well that they receive the majority of their campaign 

funds from the international unions whose headquarters are based in the United States of America. Not 

only do they receive their funds from these unions but they also receive their instructions from the labor 

bosses and goons who control these unions. It's a known fact, Mr. Speaker, that during regular elections 

and bye-elections in our province these paid union organizers are quite evident. In fact, many are not 

even citizens of this province or even this country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LOKEN: — The National Secretary- Treasurer of the Canadian Union of Public Employees, Mrs. 

Grace Hartman, basing her remarks on government figures, told a recent teach-in at the University of 

Toronto that a U.S. based international union took about $35 million out of Canada in 1967 and sent 

back only about half of it in wages and other benefits. The disclosures that the international unions are 

operating at a profit of about $17 million a year on their Canadian operations should effectively 

demolish the argument that Canadian labor cannot be financially self-supporting. She concluded that the 

major international unions have put money into Canada during the development of the labor movement, 

but said that today all information points to the fact that Chore is a net outflow of unionist money to the 

United States. Mrs. Hartman added that this made Canada a unique example for it is the only solvent 

country in the world whose major labor base resides in a foreign country. While the workers of General 

Motors of Canada belong to the United Auto Workers based in the United States, those in England 

belong to the British Trade Union Congress, those in Germany to the German unions and those in 

France to the French unions. Mr. Speaker, I contend that if these monies which are milked out by the 

international unions for political reasons were left in our province, they could be spent and invested by 

the people who earn them and that much would be added to our economy. I am also convinced that the 

rank and file of the Canadian labor force would not be unhappy if we as a Government were to take 

steps to eradicate the hierarchy in these unions whose sole purpose is to line their own pockets and 

create havoc and unrest among the labor forces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of our citizens in this province who are members of unions, do not wish to be 

unreasonable in their demands but in many instances they are not left free to run their own affairs and as 

a result we find when strikes occur many persons on strike unanimously approach those in Government 

urging action to be taken such as has been taken by the passing of Bill 2. Many workers do not wish to 

strike in order to obtain changes, they want to negotiate but the labor bosses and the 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
675 

labor goons rule by means of creating doubt and fear on the old theory of might is right. I am confident 

that the majority of those in our Saskatchewan unions are now more convinced that the NDP have been 

using them to try to achieve their goal which is complete Socialism, state control. Our people, in order to 

enjoy their full freedom and have personal incentives of pride cannot support nationalization of industry, 

commerce and agriculture. Make no mistake, these fat cat labor bosses, their hired goons and their 

political affiliates couldn't care less about whether the goods we manufacture or the products of our 

farms or resources are competitive in the world markets. Their sole object is to destroy a way of life 

which has been enjoyed for many generations and I hope for generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all persons as well as management and labor to be reasonable in their demands thus 

creating a desirable society. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LOKEN: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP platform released recently shows that the die has been cast for 

complete Socialism in this great province of ours. In their program they foresee a province where all 

persons will be indebted to the state and line up weekly to receive their dole and instructions as to how 

they should act for the next week. 

 

They would rename the Parliament Buildings the Kremlin and would site satellite Kremlins throughout 

the province similar to the cell system which they have in their party organization now. Of course, the 

main Kremlin would be controlled by the Leader and the cells by his strong arms under him who dictate 

the policies at local levels. Mr. Speaker, there would be no Speech from the Throne, there would be no 

Budget brought down and there would be no debate. 

 

Let us keep our freedoms, let us keep our personal incentives to better our lot in life, let us continue to 

go forward in this great province situated in the middle of this great nation. Let us completely reject 

Socialism once and for all. Mr. Speaker, I want to go on record as agreeing with this Budget and repeat 

the well known fact which is expressed frequently by our Hon. Premier: 

 

There is only one thing wrong with Socialism, it won't work. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LOKEN: — At this time I want to congratulate our Provincial Treasurer on this Budget brought in 

for the 1971-72 session. Homeowner Grants increased", increased grants for education, the largest ever 

given to education in our province, increased grants for police protection, in fact doubled, increased 

utilization grants for the rural municipalities, increased snow removal grants, library grants, also money 

available for assisting students to find jobs. I know that the people of my constituency will really be 

happy about this Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is needless to say that I will be supporting 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
676 

the Budget and not the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F. A. DEWHURST: (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate on the Budget, 

I should first like to extend congratulations to my Leader, the Member for Regina Centre, Allan 

Blakeney on taking over the leadership of this party. Allan Blakeney is a man who has sat in this 

Legislature for 10 years and proven his ability at all times under all conditions. He proved his ability 

back during the days of ―kick on the door‖. He proved his ability on many other occasions in his clear 

thinking way of being able to bring reason to bear on several chaotic occasions. 

 

I should like to congratulate our Deputy Leader, the Member for Riversdale. Roy Romanow is a young 

lawyer referred to by my friends opposite as a labor lawyer. Roy Romanow is a man born and raised in 

this country, knows the problems of this country and is determined to do what he can to help to improve 

the living conditions and the standards of the people of this country. I am sure that with a Leader like 

Allan Blakeney and a Deputy Leader like Roy Romanow great things will come to this province in the 

future under their leadership and guidance. 

 

I should however, not like to pass up this opportunity of saying a few words of congratulations to my 

former Leader, the Member for Biggar, the Hon. Woodrow Lloyd. Woodrow Lloyd is a man who has 

now given over 26 years of service to this province. In 1944 he became the Minister of Education and 

brought in and pioneered many of the new ideas for education. Sure they were not all 100 per cent, they 

weren't all perfect, but he blazed trails. There was no trail to follow, he had to lay the new trail. He had 

the courage of his own convictions and he had the co-operation of the Trustees' Association and the 

Teachers' Federation and the public and he blazed new trails and new- things were done. Thousands of 

boys and girls in this province in our rural schools previously never had the opportunity to get a high 

school education. Due to the policies that were brought in by Woodrow Lloyd as Minister of Education, 

they were able to get a high school education and go on to greater learning. This in itself will put 

Woodrow Lloyd down in the books of Canadian history and especially Saskatchewan history as being 

one of our great men. 

 

In 1961 he took over the Premiership of this province. He guided this province in the early 1960s 

through our Medicare program in spite of all the opposition that my friends opposite could muster, in 

spite of them kicking in the doors, in spite of them trying to create dissension and revolution by their 

actions and by talk. Woodrow Lloyd was a quiet spoken man who went on to bring Medicare to this 

province and today to the whole of Canada. No wonder MacLeans in one of their issues said that he was 

one of the top ten statesmen of Canada, one of Canada's top ten men. This province owes a lot to 

Woodrow Lloyd and history will record a lot of the things he did during his quarter of a century stay in 

this Legislature. 

 

I should also at this time like to congratulate all those who were involved and responsible for the Winter 

Games we had in Saskatoon at the beginning of this past month. I think it was a credit to our province to 

be able to have the Winter 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
677 

Games here. I think it is a thing that should be done more often to be able to get more national activities 

within our province. If people will learn to play together, we can teach them to work together. But if you 

can't teach people to play together, we cannot get them to work together. I was however, a little 

disappointed that most of the Members of this Legislature - things being organized as they were - had no 

chance whatsoever to take in any of those Winter Games. The vast majority of us never got an 

opportunity to go to the official opening because everything was set up in such a manner. The Games 

opened on the weekend and the House opened on the Tuesday and we had to be here for the opening of 

the House. I think as far as I am aware on our side, the only Members who had an invitation to the 

opening were our Members who live right in the city of Saskatoon. However, I do congratulate those on 

the job they did. 

 

I should also like to congratulate my own home town of Wynyard for the activities and the part they 

played in the Winter Games. We had a group of girls from Wynyard and I have their picture right here 

in the Wynyard paper who represented Saskatchewan at the Games in the ladies' curling. They took third 

place in the Canadian curling - four girls from Wynyard and district, four fine curlers. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — I think a lot of credit is due them and due to their teachers and their parents for 

the job they did. 

 

Also the Saskatchewan men's volleyball team came from Wynyard. They were guided by John 

Campbell, their physical education teacher. It is true that after they had won the right to represent the 

province they were supplemented by a couple of players from Foam Lake and one or two from other 

parts of the province. They didn't do as well in the competition as the girls' curling team but they did 

give a good account of themselves. I am sure that we are all proud of our Saskatchewan athletes 

although they didn't all get medals. 

 

Now the young men's curling team from Wynyard was competing for the Winter Games trial. They were 

led by Danny Peterson and lost out in the Northern finals to Humboldt. Humboldt, in turn, lost out in the 

Southern finals so Wynyard wasn't represented in the men's curling team at the Winter Games. The same 

Danny Peterson took his foursome to Yorkton and won the Northern playdowns on the "A" side for the 

Briar competition. He and another rink from the North played against the southern rinks and lost out to 

the southern winners. All in all I think Wynyard gave a good account of themselves this winter in their 

sports activities. 

 

Furthermore last fall, the Wynyard High School once again was the winner of the nine-man provincial 

football for the province. They have won the Provincial Championship for high school football seven or 

eight times in the last ten or eleven years. I think Wynyard is doing a very good job in helping promote 

sports. 

 

But the one thing that is wrong is our lack of assistance to sports. We do not give enough assistance to 

sports to help 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
678 

to get trained personnel to assist sports and sports facilities. Many of our boys and girls in this province 

could do much better at our various games if they had a little more help through better facilities for 

sports. We have a long winter season in this country but about the only sports that we have really have 

to be done indoors with the exception of things such as skiing and ski-dooing or so forth. But for 

curling, hockey and so forth we need more facilities, not only in Wynyard, but in many points in this 

province and many points throughout Canada. If we would spend money throughout the whole of 

Canada on facilities for sports we should have a much stronger and better nation. 

 

At this time too, I should like to congratulate the Member for Last Mountain on his promotion to the 

Cabinet. I can well understand why some of his colleagues sitting behind him feel very sore at being by 

passed. Nevertheless, the Member for Last Mountain is to be congratulated for being included in the 

Cabinet. There is no question about it; two redistribution bills wouldn't save him so now they are hoping 

that promoting him to the Cabinet will save him. Time will tell that it won't. 

 

I must congratulate the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) on his promotion or change of portfolio 

to Public Works. You know for years now I have been one on this side of the House who has been trying 

to find out what happened to some lost articles which he is now responsible for. 

 

MR. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Saskatoon Mayfair): — What did he lose? 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — He lost a car that he had and he doesn't even know where it's gone. He said 

there was another one in California. So now I hope that now as Minister of Public Works he will find 

out what happened to these cars and give us a report on what happened. I believe we have a right to 

know what happened to, the property that was there. According to him it was there on the parking lot 

when he took over, he saw it, the license and everything else. But we should like to know where it is 

now. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn my remarks to some of the general statements in this debate. I 

believe that the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) adds quite a bit of color to this House when he speaks. 

You know he is a man whom we should expect as a corporation lawyer to be able to weigh the pros and 

cons very well and come up with a sound decision. But unfortunately somehow or other he gets things 

rather twisted at times. He doesn't present his case very clearly. I can't congratulate him on the weak 

speech he made here the other day. I could well understand this when in Wynyard he spoke at the 

Liberal nominating convention. Some of the people told me afterward that it was the poorest speech they 

had ever heard a Minister present at any time. At the same-time, I don't know whether it was a 

coincidence or whether it was by design, but during the speech they had the ambulance standing outside 

the door. This is the first Cabinet Minister I have ever seen who put on a public speech and had the 

ambulance standing by for those who got sick. But nevertheless the ambulance was there ready to take 

them away. I'll give him credit for looking ahead to try to look after the people when they got sick. 

 

He said the other day that he gets a little annoyed when 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
679 

the Opposition cries crocodile tears for the small towns and rural communities. He couldn't understand 

why Members on this side of the House would cry crocodile tears. I can well under- stand then why he 

made the statement on February 28, 1969 that: 

 

I never saw better times than there are now and the farmer's wife drives into town with a new car, 

the husband comes after her with a new truck with a snowmobile in it. 

 

Then he went on to say in that same speech. Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker, this should be read and 

re-read and inwardly digested by the Hon. Members opposite. I quote: 

 

In 1942 the farmers and the elevator agents looked after it (referring to the damp grain). You 

know all things cannot come in a day. The average farmer knows that you cannot take a cow to 

the bull and bring the calf back in your arms. The average farmer has his bins full of wheat, his 

barns and corrals full of cattle and most wives full of babies for the bonus. 

 

Is that why he is saying that we cannot cry crocodile tears for the farmers and the small towns? I wish to 

advise the Attorney General that the small towns are in trouble and the rural people are in trouble and 

the policies of this Government- are driving them deeper and deeper into trouble and doing nothing to 

lift them out of the trouble. 

 

We must have a Government that believes in humanity or believes in people and not believes in Wall 

Street or Bay Street first. Here is a man who hopes to be a judge but I hope that if he is elevated to the 

Bench he will appraise the facts better than he has done in this debate and give a better judgement than 

he has on his speech in this House. I think we have to look at his ability for fair play and I resent it when 

he heaps scorn or ridicule on our rural people. That is what he did in his speech the other day but more 

so two years ago. You don't need to take my word for it, just read his speech of February 28th two years 

ago. 

 

HON. D. V. HEALD: (Attorney General): — I was quoting from a letter. 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — You were quoting from a letter that is true, Mr. Speaker, a letter for which he 

says he takes full responsibility. 

 

I wonder where he stood on the Davey-mander that we saw here last year. We had a Davey-mander in 

this Legislature that Canada has never seen the like of. I should like to say more on this topic before I 

leave it, so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to call it 5:30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you called it 5:30, I was starting to discuss the redistribution that we had in this 

Legislature a year ago. While it is usually referred to as a gerrymander, I think in Saskatchewan it will 

be known as a Davey-mander because the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) was the Minister who was 

in charge of redistribution. This will go down in the history of this province as one of the greatest blights 

on democracy that any Government perpetrated on an unsuspecting public. There is absolutely no rhyme 

or reason for the type of 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
680 

redistribution that was brought into this Legislature one year ago. It is plain to be seen that the Members 

opposite are not prepared to be judged by the people who elected them in the first place. The 

Government wants to change the constituencies, make little pocket boroughs in order to try to get what it 

considers are safe seats for themselves. And I am sure that history will record this as a "black blight". 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I have been trying to get a map of what is supposed to be the constituency of 

Wadena when the new Bill is proclaimed. I have a map here, Mr. Speaker. You can see the size it is, but 

even at that, the map isn't all there. There are two townships missing from this map and also the 

township numbers are in the wrong places. I have been back to the returning officer on several occasions 

trying to get a proper map of my constituency and as yet I haven't been able to get it. If this is a correct 

map, when you look at the map for Melfort-Kinistino and the map for Humboldt, then there are two 

townships where there is no constituency. I don't see any reason why we shouldn't be able to get a map 

of the proposed constituencies after the Bill has been passed through this Legislature after a year. I think 

there is something drastically wrong with the Administration or with the running of the returning 

officer's department or whoever is responsible for preparing these maps. There is no reason why the 

maps aren't printed correctly. 

 

I notice on the bulletin board that a school is coming tomorrow from Gronlid purported to be from the 

constituency of Nipawin. Gronlid is not in the constituency of Nipawin, not yet. Gronlid is still in the 

constituency of Melfort-Tisdale, the constituency that has no Member, the people of that part of the 

province who have been denied their right to have a Member in this Legislature to speak for them, a 

constituency that should have a right to be here and be heard, but they are not. This Government has 

seen fit to disfranchise all those people in the constituency of Melfort-Tisdale because they didn't have 

the courage to call a bye-election. 

 

They talk about Ed. Schreyer and the Manitoba Government being dictatorial - "little Ed Schreyer, old 

Ed. Schreyer" and all the epithets that they use - but here is an article in The Leader-Post of March 1, 

1971: 

 

Schreyer has called two bye-elections for April 5, one of them he had the writs ready to issue 

before he was officially advised of the resignation of one of the Conservative Members of that 

Legislature. Unofficially he had been advised but officially the Tory Party had never turned over 

to him the official notification that this man was resigning. But in order to see that those people 

had representation at the earliest possible moment because by the time the bye-election is held 

their session will be on and/Premier Schreyer did not wish to see those people without 

representation. He has issued the bye-election. 

 

That is a far cry from what we see of the so-called defenders of a democracy who sit to your right, Mr. 

Speaker. So it is a funny thing that this Government cannot do a little practising what they preach when 

they start talking about democracy. 

 

Now I should like to turn for a few moments to resources. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
681 

The Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) spoke the other- day and I appreciated his speech very 

much. I have always enjoyed listening to the Minister of Natural Resources. I'm not saying that I always 

agree with him but I enjoy listening to him. But I should hope sometime that when the Minister of 

Natural Resources is speaking that he will tell us what happened to the Hatton gas field. For how much 

did they sell the Hatton gas field to private interests? What kind of a deal was made? How much are we 

paying now for the gas? Those are things we don't know, Mr. Speaker. We do know it sold our reserves 

of natural gas but we don't know for how much or what deal we are buying them back for. Sodium 

sulphate deposits that were owned by the Crown in this province at Snake Hole Lake and Alsask were 

sold for one cent a ton to private interests. Now that some of these deposits are being developed we 

heard the Premier and the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) saying that there was an over 

production of sodium sulphate and it may be necessary to pro-rate sodium sulphate. When we had the 

monopoly on sodium sulphate we were able to supply the demand and any money that was made on it 

went to the people of this province to provide other services of one type or another. This Government 

saw fit to sell it for one cent per ton. Those are some of the blots which it will never erase from the 

pages of the political history of this province. 

 

It has already given away our road allowance oil, the oil which is on the road allowance in the proven 

fields. We had the rights on those but it let the oil companies attach them to the main bodies. We are not 

getting our fair share out of our resource revenue of this province. 

 

The timber right leases in the North, Simpson Timber Company, MacMillan Bloedel to a lesser extent 

and Parsons and Whittemore have huge tracts on leases but they don't pay the taxes the same as a farmer 

has to pay when a farmer gets the lease. When a farmer gets the lease he has to pay the Crown the lease 

fees and then he has to pay municipal taxes. But the big companies, when they get a timber lease, they 

don't pay municipal taxes the same as the farmer must pay. Once again, it takes from the little fellow and 

gives to the big fellow. 

 

All the southern lakes of this province now are not fit for fishing. There isn't a lake south of the North 

Saskatchewan River that one can feel sure that he can go and fish in and safely eat the fish. It is true that 

a number of the lakes and rivers have been condemned in this province for fishing but others have not. 

Lakes such as Greenwater, Marion Lake, and some of those, people can go and fish in but we do not 

know whether those fish should be used or not Because the fish come into Greenwater Lake, Marion 

Lake and other lakes up the Red Deer River from Manitoba and because we know that the Manitoba 

lakes due to the pollution down stream are not safe to be fished in, I feel that every lake, Mr. Minister of 

Natural Resources, should be tested for fishing because maybe they are" good and maybe they are not, 

but we don't know. I hope that the Minister will see fit this coming year to see that every lake is tested 

for fishing to make sure that our anglers are not taking home a bad fish and consuming it. 

 

Now I should like to turn to agriculture -for a few moments. This province is suffering from an 

agriculture depression. The farming community in this province is in a depression such as 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
682 

we haven't seen since the '30s. The farmers do not have the money to buy the things they should be 

buying. They do not have the money to be able to do the things they should do. Our Budget that we have 

before us offers little or no relief for them. We saw this Government soon after it took office do away 

with the AMA, the Agricultural Machinery Agency. Under the AMA the farmers knew that when new 

machines came into this province there was a way of having them tested. They could get reliable 

information to see whether that machine was good or whether it wasn't. Implement dealers knew also 

where the weak parts on the machines were and they were in a position to go after the companies to see 

that the implement companies didn't leave the dealer holding the bag on repairs. But it did away with 

AMA. We were assured at that time that we should be getting bulletins from the University which would 

do similar testing but to this day I have never received a bulletin from the University on machinery 

testing nor have I seen a bulletin that has been issued to any- one else. I just don't think there are any 

bulletins being issued. The farmers have a right to have that type of protection. We spend more on farm 

machines in this province than any other two provinces put together yet we cannot have the protection 

now which was there up until 1964. 

 

The farm sewer and water program of this province has been a blessing to rural people giving farm 

homes sewer and water. Once again, while that is a good program, a good policy, it is not being pursued 

with the vigor and with the assistance to the farmer as it was before. The cost has gone up to the farmer 

and the service has gone down. 

 

We saw Operation LIFT last year which the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) boasted about that 

it was a good program. The Premier said Operation LIFT was a fine program if people would only 

co-operate with it. We were assured this would be the real thing. The only thing Operation LIFT is going 

to do is lift them clean out of their holdings and lift them out onto the road allowance and onto social 

aid. And according to the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) if the farmer should strike 

against such goings on, if they are on strike, they'll get no assistance whatsoever from his department. 

 

We saw last year the Task Force report issued where they are going to take two-thirds of all the farmers 

off the land. What are they going to take two-thirds of the farmers off the land for, Mr. Speaker? They 

are going to take two-thirds of the farmers off the land, so they say, to make more efficient agricultural 

production. More efficient agricultural production for whom and for what? I feel society should be 

organized to serve people not people manipulated to serve a society. 

 

Under the programs we are getting from our Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), who sits across 

the way here and from his counterparts at Ottawa, the -authorities are just trying to manipulate people to 

serve an outmoded, outdated, rotten system. The Task Force should be scrapped and assistance should 

be given to our farmers because our people need some security on the land, they need some help. 

Agriculture is the greatest industry we have in this province and it gets the least consideration and pays 

the most taxes. We've seen in the past few years the Minister of Agriculture promote the production of 

hogs in this province. And now the price of hogs has gone down over the past year or two. A man who 

runs one of the auction markets 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
683 

told me a year ago last spring that weanling pigs were selling as high as $26 a piece. He says, "1^11 

admit that was a high price but I have sold them for that price." He said the average price for a good 

weanling or feeder pig was running around $18, $19 or $20. But this fall he said he sold them as low as 

$2 admitting they were the poorer ones but he said they were averaging only around $4, $4.50 and $5. 

Well, people cannot raise those weanlings and feeder pigs and sell them at that price nor can those who 

bought high priced weanling pigs last spring afford to sell them at the prices we are getting for them 

now. We have seen the Government put money into expansion of hog facilities. But now we see the 

Government telling the insurance office not to insure those hog barns without a special rating on them 

because there are too many hog barns and cattle barns being burned down and therefore no Government 

insurance agent is to issue an insurance policy and commit the insurance office to any insurance 

whatsoever without a special rating from the insurance office. They must only take the application, send 

it into the insurance office and let the insurance office do the underwriting on it. Once again, it proves to 

me that they don't trust the farmers. Now that the Government has the farmers expanding into livestock 

it says, "Now we won't give you any insurance protection." 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) appears to doubt that but he knows it is 

true, he knows it is true as well as I do. 

 

I have a farmer in my constituency who is raising hogs. The price was down and he didn't have any to 

put on the market, hence no cash. At 1:00 o'clock one afternoon a power man was sent to cut off his 

power. If his power was cut off then he would lose a lot of small hogs because he wouldn't have the heat 

lamp to keep them warm. No consideration, nothing was given. He was able to talk the power man into 

waiting for an hour or two before he carried out his instructions. He was able to phone around and get 

some of his neighbors and others to help him to raise the money to pay his power bill so he could carry 

on until he was able to sell some of his hogs. As the price was so low he was unable to pay his power 

bill. He borrowed money which he has paid back since to pay his power bill. That is the kind of 

treatment, the hard, cruel, callous treatment that is given by this Government to agricultural people. 

 

The Government has no compunction or no pity for the producers of this province. They do not care, the 

producers are dispensable, get rid of them. The Government would like to see large companies like Kern 

County Farm Company move in here where they own thousands and thousands of acres of land and 

farm with big machinery. This press-button system makes all the hired men slaves on their farms. That 

is the type of system that we are headed for unless we can divert this trend which the LIFT and Task 

Force brings forth and the policies of this Government. We've got to be able to stop the takeover of our 

farm land by big monopolies, big corporations and the absentee land owners from other countries. We've 

got to be able to set up a system whereby if an elderly farmer wishes to retire from farming the Crown 

will buy up his land at the going price. If he himself wants to sell it to a neighbor that is fine and dandy 

but if he 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
684 

has to retire he shouldn't have to give his life long work away for nothing. The Crown should buy that 

land, make it available to others to give them a larger holding to make a viable farm either on a rental 

basis or a lease option to buy when they wish to do so. And that can be done. I've heard these Members 

across the way say, "Oh, these leases, they want to have every farmer under their thumb." The Premier 

and his son didn't object to taking leases on grazing land but they never told us whom they took it from. 

 

MR. C. P. MacDONALD: (Minister of Welfare): — Russia. 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — Yes, that's what they did in Russia, just what the Premier did in getting his 

grazing land. You are right, Mr. Minister, that is what they did in Russia, take it away from the peasants 

and give it to the big boys. That's what they did in Russia, you admitted it. Now I could go on for some 

time expounding on their farm policy but I don't intend to take too much time this evening because there 

are others who wish to speak. 

 

I am sure that the farmers of this province would sooner have the land collectively owned by themselves 

in the name of the Crown or their Government than they would have it owned by Kern County Farm 

Company or other big mortgage companies from across the border or from Eastern Canada. You just go 

and ask the farmers. If you don't believe us, call an election and let the farmers tell you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the policies are so good that this Government has pursued over the past seven 

years why is it that we have driven so many people out of this province, when unemployment has been 

higher than it has ever been since the thirties. There is no work to be had any place, people walking the 

streets, there are thousands registered under unemployment, and many more thousands that are not 

registered with Manpower or with the Unemployment Insurance Commission because they haven't been 

three years on the labor market and they can't apply to Manpower. People out of high school, people on 

the farms who are trying to get jobs in the wintertime are unemployed. During the past year when we 

take into consideration the natural increase, well over 30,000 people left this province. That is a lot of 

people in one year, Mr. Speaker, over 30,000 people. What does that mean? It means that this past year, 

during the year 1970, the equivalent of the population of Battleford, Broadview, Watson, Watrous, 

Wadena, Foam Lake, Kelvington, Wynyard, Humboldt, Melfort, Tisdale, Nipawin plus the city of 

Melville, all left this province in one year. That is the amount 'of population that left here - 10 of our 

larger towns in the North, one in the northwest and one in the southeast, plus the city of Melville, that's 

how many have left the province in one year. How can we carry on and have a society for people when 

people are never considered? 

 

You know when the Premier was with the CCF, prior to his leaving the CCF, the Liberals and the Tories 

didn't believe what he said, and you know, Mr. Speaker, we couldn't trust him. And now today, we can't 

believe what he says and most of the people across there don't trust him. So it's quite a problem to see 

the way that this number one man can operate and the hold 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
685 

that he has over his backbenchers and the way he operates in this province. 

 

When we talked about electric power here on March 18, 1965 this Legislature passed a motion 

unanimously asking that the power rates be reduced for skating rinks, curling rinks, community owned 

and operated, and also community halls. We are still waiting for the benefit of that resolution. They tell 

us there has been no increase in telephone or power rates but people know differently. Last summer I, 

myself, in Saskatoon went into a call station and put in a call from Saskatoon to Regina and the 

minimum charge for a three minute call from number to number was $1.65. I could have driven from 

Saskatoon to Regina if I had a Volkswagon for less than that in the amount of gas, but that is what it cost 

me. When we have to pay that kind of bill what do we get? I have here a photostatic copy of a sales bill 

of a farmer in my constituency who sold a 350 pound boar on January 12th. After he paid the hauling 

fee and the commission it netted this man $2.44. That same hog would sell over the counter for many, 

many times that amount after it had been dressed and processed. These are the types of conditions the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) should be looking into. But he is not.‘ 

 

At the same time the farmers talk of taxes going up, they are going up tremendously all the time. 

According to the answers I have received to questions in this House - and I don't have the latest figures 

for 1970 because they are not yet available to us - in the rural areas since 1963 to 1967 property taxes 

have gone up by $7 million and for school purposes the taxes on rural property have gone up by over 

$12 million or a total for the rural property of $19.7 million more now than obtained in 1963. For the 

urban population of this province for the local general municipal purposes their taxes have gone up 

$14.2 million and their school taxes, Mr. Speaker, have just doubled. In 1963 it was $24.8 million, in 

1969 $48.9 million or an increase of $24.1 million. In round figures it has just doubled as a school tax 

on the urban properties of this province. And then they say they are giving assistance in keeping the 

taxes down. 

 

The other day speaking in the House, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) says, "You know, people 

should look up to the Liberal Party." You know when it's the Provincial Treasurer whether he's standing 

up or sitting down you still have to look down on him. We can see how the taxes have gone up in this 

Budget. We have a $450 million Budget. Where does the money come from? We see that from the 

Federal Government there is an increase this year over last year of over $69 million. We can see on the 

consumption taxes that the taxes have gone up for the people of this province on the education and 

hospital tax, gasoline tax, insurance, and a whole host of others. The individual income tax this year is 

estimated will be down about $200,000 from last year. So they say that proves that the people of this 

province are not too badly off because their income tax is going to remain about the same. The 

corporation income tax, I don't know why, but that is down $7 million in the Estimates this year to what 

it was last year. The corporations are either doing so well under this Government or else they plan to 

give them greater concessions than ever because they are going to pay $7 million less this year in 

corporation income tax than they did last year. I could go on item after item but the same story is there. 

The poor people, the farmers, and the working people, 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
686 

the small businessman have to pay the taxes, the taxes have gone up. But where the big corporations 

pay, it's gone down. When we look at the income from oils and minerals and all the things that go into 

the big companies, the same story holds true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a Budget for progress, it is not a Budget for people, it is a Budget to prolong and 

to increase stagnation. I cannot support this Budget but I must support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. M. BREKER: (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) talks like 

an authority on hog raising. Now I admit that if you farmed like he did, had one sow come in the spring 

and sold it on its anniversary date, naturally your entire sale could be sold at low prices, if you're truly in 

the hog business during the entire year of 1970, then your average sale could be about $42 a head. I 

wonder if the Member for Wadena remembers that Bred Sow program in 1963? Do you remember that 

Bred Sow program? I know of one sow that had three owners and the fourth owner said, ―I hope to God 

that she doesn't have little ones because we need meat in the house.‖ This sow made 90 miles, she was 

worth $120 and didn't have any loving. Now they talk about 22 cent hogs. 

 

MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK: (Redberry): — 20 cents. 

 

MR. BREKER: — No, 22 cent hogs, $21.50 in Regina. Now don't get excited Dick, just keep your 

cool. If we have any more money left in Public Works we are going to build you a little bench so that 

you can really get up and give that Mussolini speech. But here's the thing here, Economic Statistics, a 

little yellow book. Now what was the average yearly price in Winnipeg, not in Regina, but in Winnipeg 

which is two cents higher? Was it 22 cents? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Was it 21 cents? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Was it 20 cents? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Was it 18 cents? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Was it 16.41? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Yes! 

 

MR. BREKER: — $16.41. Now what did they pay in 1945? That was 1944, now this is 1945. Did they 

pay 22 cents for hogs in Winnipeg? Did they pay 18 cents? They paid $16.70. They paid $17.85 in 1946. 

In 1947 they paid $20.61. Oh, but now the farmers got lucky - $27.94 in 1948. It's going up. Back in 

1952 - $24.45. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
687 

Now let's get up to 1959 - $21.30, Winnipeg price, $2 more than any Saskatchewan price. 1960 - 

$21.65. Big deal! 1963 - $24.80; 1964-$23.55; 1965 - $30.05. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — And how many hogs did they have with their Bred Sow program? In 1964, do you 

know how many hogs they had? Did they have a million? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Did they have 1.3 million? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Did they have half a million? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — They had 441,000. Oh yes, they are hog men. They are great hog men. The Member 

from Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) said the only contribution that the Member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. 

MacDougall) made was to give somebody a tie. He said something about my contribution to this House. 

Well, I looked over there and I've seen that dearth of intelligence and that dearth of ability and if that 

situation existed on this side of the House I wouldn't be the financial critic, I wouldn't be the Provincial 

Treasurer, I would be the Premier of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — I know you are going to bring your big gun up here tonight right after me. You 

know a year or two ago he was running around up in North Battleford putting up stop signs. He was 

concerned with the safety of the travelling public. He even forced himself to put up illegal highway 

signs and the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) had something to say about that. Isn't it funny, on the one 

hand we have a Member of the Legislature putting up illegal stop signs to protect the travelling public 

and on the other hand he refuses to take drunks off the road? 

 

In the last two weeks I have listened to the Leader of the NDP (Mr. Blakeney), I have listened to the 

Deputy Leader, (Mr. Romanow), the frontbenchers, the backbenchers, I have listened to the Throne 

Debate and the Budget Debate. 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW: (Saskatoon Riversdale): — And Otto Lang? 

 

MR. BREKER: — Yes, I've listened to him too. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — You've listened too much. 

 

MR. J. MESSER: (Kelsey): — Your brother-in-law, remember the phone call. You forgot about that 

one. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
688 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They are better when they're sitting down, it keeps their brains warm. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — They didn't say they were against a highway program. People up in Lake Lenore, 

you talk about the people up in Lake Lenore. They are only too happy with Highway No. 368. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — $3 million. 

 

MR. BREKER: — Oh no, not $3 million. We're not going to spend $3 million up there but we are 

going to spend $300,000 when we rebuild and regrade the roads on No. 20. We are going to spend 

another $70,000 for oil. The people in Annaheim are perfectly satisfied that we are going to take in that 

road from St. Gregor to Annaheim, take it into the highway system. The people across the way haven't 

said anything against the steps that we have proposed and are proposing to help the farmer such as the 

Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act, cash intended for hog barns, the help for Indian Bands to get into cattle. 

As far as education is concerned I tell the Members opposite it is the largest provincial grant ever paid in 

the history of this province. They didn't tell us whether they were against increased pensions for teachers 

retiring prior to 1963. Oh, but the Member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) says his income is down by 

one-third and I don't doubt it a bit. I'll bet his income was down the year before that and I'll bet the year 

before that his net in- come was down. The people yonder are so concerned about taxes going up and 

new taxes there is no wonder they have gone up. There is a teacher on that side of the House whose 

wages have gone up 76 per cent since 1963. Another teacher, the teacher from Kelvington, his wages 

have gone up 51 per cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — We haven't heard if they are against the increases to the Workmen's Compensation 

Act. Are they against the Homeowners Grant? Some of them voted against it. They don't tell us what 

their stand is on the Homeowners Grant if they got in next year. I would have expected from these two 

lawyer leaders who are now so thoughtful that we should have something bold and something 

imaginative. Instead they just gave us the old Regina Manifesto (dress it up a little bit and give it to them 

again).\ 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — For the farmer, all his ills, they cure everything with one dose of Socialism. They 

contend that the land should be owned by the Government and they will lease it back maybe to the 

owner maybe to the neighbor depending on his political views. But recently the cries for Socialism have 

increased. The younger NDPers voted for nationalization of all farm lands. The old NDPers advocate the 

same kind of action. The university boys advocate the same kind of action, socialize everything, the 

natural resources, you name it. In short, the Socialists have only one answer to give the farmers and that 

is to socialize the farmers' land. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
689 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What's your answer? 

 

MR. BREKER: — The Opposition contends that farmers and unions have the same interests and that 

they should unite under the NDP banner. For years the CCF marriage counsellors have been trying to 

arrange for a nice little nuptial hour where the farming bride and the labor groom walk up to the altar 

and make a perfect union. And they stand there wringing their hands waiting for the bride and groom to 

jump into bed to consummate the marriage. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Most of the rural residents are a bit dubious about that proposition because year 

after year the farmer notes that every time they're getting ready to move their wheat to market, it's either 

the dock workers, the railway workers, the terminal elevators, or the sailors who go out on strike. Such 

strikes always disrupt the movement of grain. And I shouldn't be surprised if the dock workers will go 

out again this summer. In a major strike no one can win, the workers or their families, and this 

Saskatchewan Government is determined to find a better way of solving strikes in the not too distant 

future. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — I am sure it won't go with- out notice that every time there is a labor dispute 

regardless of the public interest, the Socialists side with the unions. Did you ever hear one of them speak 

up? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No, no! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Never, never, never; It,. doesn't matter if it's against the farmer. It doesn't matter if 

it's against the sick in the hospitals. It doesn't matter if it's against the old folks' home. Do you ever hear 

them speak up against labor? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 

 

MR. BREKER: — And another thing, this hasn't gone unnoticed either. If they do win the next 

election, they'll do away with Bill 2. Now watch them clap. 

 

This Bill at least gives some protection to farmers, the aged and the sick, and for that section of the 

population that isn't organized and that segment of the population that cannot pass on increased cost of 

production and increased cost of living. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — As I mentioned a few minutes ago, this Government has given grants to hog barns 

in order to increase diversification, in Alberta 40 per cent of the farm cash receipts come from livestock, 

in Saskatchewan 20 per cent. Our hog population has gone up 200 per cent for two reasons (400,000 to 

1,200,000), (1) because of the hog grant program, and (2) because of the wheat glut and 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
690 

this was a quick way of turning grain into dollars. But the Member from Kelsey (Mr. Messer) and the 

Member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) blame this Liberal Government. They blame our hog program 

for depressed prices (20 cents in Saskatchewan). You fellows were paying 16 and 17 cents in Winnipeg. 

Our hog numbers have expanded in a most encouraging manner and I'm glad of it because in our area 

one of the largest hog producing areas in the province, I think we're better off even if the prices are 

depressed temporarily. We are still better off than the fellows who aren't doing anything. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — We know that the price has dropped recently, but we know as the Saskatchewan 

farmers know, that hog prices depend to a very considerable degree upon the American market. You 

know that the State of Iowa raises more hogs than the entire country of Canada. And the price of hogs 

would be 21 and 22 cents whether we had one hog in Saskatchewan or whether we had a million and a 

half. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — In the past year they interviewed the Member from Kelsey on the radio. I thought he 

was their big hope but I have been wrong. I was wrong on three occasions. One time I bought an Edsel, 

the second time, that the Member for Kelsey would really be something, and I can't tell you what the 

other time was. Someone told me it was when my brother-in-law became head of the Wheat Board. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Ha, ha. 

 

MR. BREKER: — In the past year, the United States has increased its farrowing by 10 per cent. You 

know what 10 per cent is? 10 per cent equals more than the entire hog population of Canada. Right now 

we know that the farmers in the United States are paying 21/4 cents for their feed. The farmers in 

Saskatchewan were paying 1 1/2 cents. We know now too that the decrease in hog farrowings is down 

by six per cent 

 

MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK: (Redberry): — You should have waited to get that on the air tomorrow. 

 

MR. BREKER: — Dick, don't get off your chair, you're going to get your, you know… 

 

I was disturbed by the discontinuance of the Federal Hog Subsidy and because our Government feels 

that it makes sense for farmers to remain in hogs and to produce hogs they will be paid $2 on all hogs 

grading 103 and over. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BREKER: — Now this is welcome news, very, very welcome news up in our country. I hope 

farmers will not think me presumptuous if I offer one word of advice. The improved grain picture 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
691 

could tempt many a Saskatchewan farmer in my area to get out of livestock I believe that such a trend is 

dangerous and to ensure and protect themselves from future grain gluts farmers snout! continue to 

expand all kinds of livestock including hogs. 

 

I will support the Budget, but I couldn't possibly support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. KRAMER: (The Battlefords): — After that particular set of comments he might just as well 

call it an evening almost. All I would say to the Hon. Member who just sat down, ―Don't drive home 

tonight, daddy, it won't be safe.‖ 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — There are some people who we like to believe to be better than others, but you 

know, a chap told me when he was asked to blow the balloon, "You know, I just couldn‘t. I just thought 

of that Liberal Government and the Premier and I said that I thought one more Liberal wind bag would 

be too much. One more Liberal wind bag would be just too much. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's a good reason for anybody to have. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — That's right. You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about some of the 

things that have been said in this debate and add a few comments of my own. It seems there have been 

some strong speeches here in this Budget debate The Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Grant), the Attorney 

General (Mr. Heald), and we even had the sanctimonious, self-righteous. Member for Rosthern the 

Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) giving us a bit of his wisdom and otherwise. The information he 

tabled in the House I think he should have kept in his files. I think he had better Have kept it in his files. 

It was even more damning than the information, Mr. Speaker, that they gave us in answer to a question 

in 1969. The Minister of Highways attempted in tabling the information to give the impression to the 

House that God was in His Heaven and all is well with the world as far as the Department of Highways 

was concerned. Well, let‘s take a look. He didn't change anything. The fact of the matter is that the 

answer was exactly as I said it was - $24,000 plus $200 for 50 acres plus a fraction of sub-marginal land. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear!! 

 

MR. KRAMFR: — And no amount of arguments by the sanctimonious, self- righteous Member for 

Rosthern is going to change that. No amount of tabling documents in going to change that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, it‘s a pity, Mr. Speaker, that he hadn't tabled all the documents. Because I 

note that not only did they pay this amount of money, this $400 an acre for 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
692 

sub-marginal land to a Member of the Liberal Executive in the Battlefords but they brought a witness. 

They brought as a witness another Member of the Liberal Executive or a former Member. I notice that 

Mr. Warren, land appraiser, says this in referring to the document here, and I quote from it, he's referring 

to what he thinks. Mr. Warren says: 

 

Regarding the claims of Mr. Mike Gabruck, I find it almost impossible to justify his claims since 

land values on the Battleford side of the river have been depressed compared with North 

Battleford. 

 

Apparently, at this point, somebody had been talking to Mr. Warren so he waffles a little. He waffles a 

little and he says: 

 

Also a copy of a letter from E. J. Marshall. 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW: (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Who is E. J. Marshall? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — He's a former Member if not a present Member of the Liberal Executive. He owns 

the Capitol Theatre and Marshall Enterprises in North Battleford. He was a trustee of the Public School 

Board until he was voted out of office last fall. And he said that E. J. Marshall has enclosed a letter 

indicating a substantial increase in the potential of this land. All this, of course, is due to the new bridge 

according to Mr. Warren, but it was contracted prior to our expropriation and may pose a problem in 

establishing the value in court. Well, the Minister of Highways has left. He's probably thinking up some 

answers for some other problems that he's going to have to meet. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, that is the most inane attempt at covering up a piece of questionable dealing, to 

be as kind as I can, a dumb deal, yes DDT. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You can do better than that. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — That's right, I can do better than that, that's right. They like to throw innuendo 

across the floor of this House. We've seen some of these stalwarts get up (this afternoon was no 

exception) and they like to refer to the Mafia, they like to refer to labor leaders and so on, and indicate 

that there is something, some connection between these racketeers and labor leaders, and I'm talking 

about racketeer labor leaders, not the good Canadian, honest labor leaders that are our supporters and 

whom we're proud to have for our supporters. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — They hope, Mr. Speaker, that the public will forget the Hal Banks deal. You know 

the friends of Basford, the friends of some other Basfords that are in Ottawa too. Yes, that gentleman 

who was allowed to cross the border. The friends of Rivard and a few others. They'd like us to forget 

about those deals. They'd like to forget the fact that Hansard shows and I quoted from that last year, and 

I hope I don't have to do it again, that several Members of the Liberal Party were financed by Hal 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
693 

Banks' racketeers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We haven't heard very much from that side of the House about a recent Senate 

appointment from the Teamsters' Union. That haven for political heelers and sellouts and the senile, old 

men of the Liberal Party that are no longer useful to them. Jimmy Hoffa appointed Lawson, we know 

that. Of course, I think that probably Estevan is a good stopping off place for Hal Banks and I think the 

liaison man at North Portal must be the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall). He's so worried 

about covering the tracks of some of the rest of the DDT (dirty deals by Trudeau and company and 

Thatcher). 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to the attention of this House once again, some other remarks that 

were made about the former deals. There were some complaints that the odd shyster got through the net 

when the former Government was in office. And we've heard some deals mentioned about the cemetery 

plots and so on. I thought that was a dead issue. The Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) is trying his 

best to keep it alive. I appreciate that he got a lot of his friends off the hook as well as a lot of citizens of 

Saskatchewan when the Government bailed out those cemeteries and that was a mixed blessing. And 

now it seems strange to me, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Canada, the Liberal Party, the Liberal 

Government has a lot of muscle, (some between the ears) when it comes to making heroes of themselves 

attacking a group and imposing the War Measures Act on a group of demented racketeers, the FLQ. And 

I don't blame them too much for that, that was their business. But they don't have much muscle, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to doing something about the Mafia in Canada that is getting stronger every year 

permeating the whole life of Canada more every year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We read in our weekend magazines and I haven't heard anyone refuting it that the 

Federal Government was asked and the Quebec Government also (Liberal Governments both of them) to 

bring in Legislation to stop the loan shark racket. Refused. Why? Where is their muscle when it comes 

to doing something that is going to protect the young of Canada? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, the tentacles of the Mafia are reaching out into every corner of 

Saskatchewan today in the drug racket. And I ask the Attorney General and the Federal Minister of 

Justice what are they doing about it? What are they doing about it? I should like to see some beefing up, 

Mr. Speaker, of the police forces to see to it that there isn't any further spreading of crime in this country 

and my city of North Battleford. And it's getting worse all over. I want to see some action where it 

counts against organized international crime. Fine, go after the FLQ and the other rabbles that are 

seeking to damage our nation. But a far greater danger exists in the ever- spreading, ever-increasing 

power of the Mafia. Surely, the lessons of our neighbors to the south ought to be enough to spur action. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
694 

Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to say that some Members opposite when they were trying to discredit our 

Leader, our new Leader, even tied in the old Columbia Metals deal. Nobody should bring this in from 

that side of the House. I should have thought that they would have been satisfied to leave that alone. 

With all due respect, Mr. Speaker, I say that if anybody opened the gate to that type of racket it was the 

gentleman that is sitting across in the seat of the Attorney General. What did he say, Mr. Speaker, after 

the former Attorney General had tried to bring the Columbia Metals manipulators to justice for years 

and spent thousands and thousands of dollars? When the judge ordered a retrial, the Attorney General 

said that it would cost us too much to continue this fight. That's what he said. In other words, he said, 

that if you are big and powerful and wealthy come to Saskatchewan, we won't fight you. We can't do 

anything about it because you have too much money. I say that was the opening up of the gate to the 

Mafia. I say that the Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) would have been better to have 

remained in his seat. Yes, and kept quiet. It was an unhappy set of circumstances but the present 

Attorney General did very little. Here is a case where strangely the brave freedom fighter wasn't too 

anxious to continue that fight. 

 

MR. D. V. HEALD: (Attorney General): — I shall show you the file sometime. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Very well. Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General  

 

MR. HEALD: — You loused it up. You tried to prosecute him and you had no case. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor? Well, suffice it to say that the Attorney General 

did not pursue that case and I am suggesting that they, least of all, can talk about making deal's with 

various people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, another one to rise in his place was the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Grant). He chose to juggle some figures around. He talked about hospital depopulation in reply to Mr. 

Snyder. He chose just part of one year or a year that might have overlapped. But the point is when the 

Member for Moose Jaw was speaking about the Weyburn depopulation and 1,000 patients being 

discharged in one year, they were discharged quite often without the knowledge of their relatives, those 

statements were true. 

 

A woman who lives at Moose Jaw - and we are prepared to give the name - was moved three doors, 

-down from her daughter in Moose Jaw and the daughter didn't even know that she had been moved 

during that period of time. 

 

He brags about the new cafeteria in North Battleford and it is a beautiful thing. I am quite happy with it. 

But I am saying this, that it is just too bad that some of those poor mental patients who are sitting back 

in the bush quite often being used as slave labor, can't enjoy some of those facilities. No way, Mr. 

Speaker, are these kinds of people going to get the 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
695 

kind of treatment that is given at the Saskatchewan Hospital to the patients that are there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, that the treatment that is given to the patients at the Saskatchewan 

Hospital today, as in the past, is excellent. I think that the Department of Health can be congratulated on 

the care that has been given. The staff at the hospital can be congratulated and should be congratulated 

for the care that is given to those people who remain there. I say that it is unfortunate that some of those 

hopeless cases that have been shoved off in garages and basements and so on could not be there to enjoy 

those facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say further that some of the boarding places are doing an excellent job but there 

is still a lot to be desired. I am not going to say where the places are because the social workers who are 

working the area throughout the various parts of northwestern Saskatchewan are doing their best. But 

that whole program is still under staffed and I would not cast any reflection on those social workers who 

are doing the best they can because they can't possibly police that boarding out program properly. Mr. 

Minister of Health, I say that if you are going to continue this boarding out program, you must beef it up 

as well as see to it that these people who require more super- vision receive it. The people who are 

boarding these people should get a great deal more supervision than they are getting today. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Just like the Frazier Report. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, just like the Frazier Report says. Mr. Speaker, it will not be forgotten that 

there are scars on the communities and scars on the lives of families and individuals in this province that 

would not be there if it was not for this hasty program that was engineered and organized and permitted 

by the former Minister of Health who fills the Treasury seat and is not in the House. 

 

He is a man who bragged about depopulation and who maligned those people who said, "You are going 

too fast with the Saskatchewan Plan and you are going to run into trouble." I say that we did run into 

trouble in this province and the tragedy that people suffered and especially in my area in Saskatchewan 

is no forgotten. There is a case still before the courts that is a tragedy and that tragedy could have been 

avoided if the Department of Social Welfare, the Department of Health had been more vigilant and had 

provided that young man with the care and treatment that he needed when he was there and had not 

turned him loose to repeat another tragedy, nearly a double tragedy. It was a double tragedy because that 

father will never recover from that trial. 

 

I don't like, Mr. Speaker, to see the Minister of Health and I am not blaming him, but I don't like to see 

him stand in his place in this House and ridicule the people who have given constructive criticism on 

this side and completely ignore what went on in the past and what is still going on in the area of the 

mental health policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment now to the Department of Natural Resources and some of the 

things that have been 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
696 

said. It seems to me that there is a great deal of bragging going on. Quite a few statements have been 

made regarding the former treatment of Indians and Indian Bands in Saskatchewan. It seems to be rather 

strange that the Premier, who is the most voluble, forgets completely that the Department of Indian 

Affairs has always been in the hands of the Federal Government and that most of the time since 

Confederation that the Federal Government has been a Liberal Government. 

 

It seems strange that he will choose every time he gets on his feet in this House and every time that he 

moves around the hustings to point out or try to point out that the former Provincial Government was to 

blame for the situation that existed in Indian Affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a historic fact that the people who ran the Department of Indian Affairs, the Indian 

Agents that were appointed throughout the province, for the most part, were not equal to the job. If the 

Liberal Party had someone who embarrassed them whom they would like to get out of town, often times 

he turned up as an Indian Agent in some distant reserve. That was the history of the Department of 

Indian Affairs and the method of appointing Indian Agents. That, Mr. Speaker, is one of the reasons why 

we find the Indian Reserves in the condition that they are today. You will find there, hopelessness and 

distrust for the white man. You can't blame them. But when the people across the way including the 

Premier say that nothing was done for the Indians in the 20 years we were in office, that is an absolute 

untruth. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, in 1944 when the CCF Government was elected, the Indians in the 

North and especially the northern Métis settlements were dying faster than they were being born, The 

first thing that had to be done was a crash program, a program of moving in to clean up the tuberculosis 

and all the other social diseases that the white man brought to those people over the years. They were 

dying faster than they were being born. 

 

Schools, hospitals, the fur conservation practices, the fur conservation blocks, fish filleting plants - don't 

boast of what you have done for the Indians and the Métis when the Federal Liberal Government failed 

to assist with the filleting plants. They failed in this except for a 50 per cent contribution for the plant at 

Sandy Bay. That was the only time the Federal Liberal Government participated in assisting community 

projects such as a fish filleting plant and it is to the ever- lasting shame of the Liberal Party that they 

never did one other thing. They are the ones who never did a thing for the Indians. 

 

With the limited budgets we had to make the first moves to bring those people out of the morass. The 

fishing co-ops, the co-op stores were all started and these people were gradually getting on their feet. I 

think that it is to the credit of this Government that some of these programs have been carried on. I think 

that it is to the discredit of this Government that many of the programs that we had in 1964 were 

discontinued because they didn't want to give credit to the former government for the sawmilling 

program. LaLoche was a good example where we had a milling program and an Indian Band of 22 

natives went into 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
697 

the Clearwater River area, felled and sawed 250,000 feet of lumber and brought it out to LaLoche for a 

housing program which was dropped in its tracks in the spring of 1964. Half of the lumber rotted and the 

rest went out to God knows where. This Government threw out work programs and went out and 

brought pre-fabricated houses in from Alberta. Prefabricated houses! A self-help program? A lot of good 

that did, Mr. Speaker, to help the natives to help themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let it not be forgotten that there is more social aid being spent, there are more people on 

social aid, there are more social welfare workers in northern Saskatchewan now than there has ever been 

in the history of the province. 

 

One industry that really went up in the town of Meadow Lake where social aid was formerly handled by 

Jim Elliot and two clerks was social aid bureaucracy. At last count there were over 30 people working 

for the Department of Social Welfare as well as others in various points in the North. They created jobs 

all right! Plenty of jobs! Jobs for government workers and social workers dispensing relief. There is very 

little to be said for a program like that. We make no apologies for the programs that we had with and for 

the native people. 

 

The Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) spoke pontifically about reforestation and all the 

wonderful things that were being done. He did say, "You are bound to be shocked when you walk into 

the forest and see the clear cutting program." He went on to say, "We are enjoying an enormous program 

of reforestation." Well, Mr. Speaker, that enormous reforestation program apparently is about two and 

one-half per cent of what they have clear cut in one year according to Parsons and Whittemore's own 

advertisements. Parson and Whittemore's $500 advertisement that I referred to before and I have it here 

says that they are clear cutting 23,000 acres and by their own admission they have planted 900 acres last 

year. There is far more to be said about this than can be said in just one evening. 

 

I should like to quote from a statement by Dr. William O. Pruitt, Jr. He wrote an article on the rape of 

our environment in Newfoundland. He is now with the University of Manitoba. In replying to one of the 

Canadian foresters he said this: 

 

Probably the most important environmental change affecting Newfoundland at the present time 

is the current cutting practices, and I won't even call them forestry practices, of the large pulp 

companies. Because black spruce is more useful for their pulp making process than balsam fir 

and because of the economic pressure to get the maximum return for the unit effort, the 

companies practice clear cutting on Crown land as well as on lease and freehold land. There are 

several- results from this practice. One is a virtual tundra landscape for many years. Indeed some 

botanical plant experts believe will never regenerate over a large area. 

 

Strong winds will sweep over the denuded land and dry up everything before them. 

Consequently as the accumulation basins of certain key rivers have been denuded the paper mills 

had a recent shortage of water for power purposes. In the area where recovery is possible the 

regrowth is almost pure black spruce. These areas of  



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
698 

single species of pure cultures are extremely susceptible to the invasion by parasites and disease 

thus the justification is established for mass spraying. The clear cutting practice carried on in this 

province has led many laymen to believe that this is the only way to exploit the forest. Thus, 

when the St. Johns' city council needed money they authorized the clear cutting of the St. Johns' 

watershed the water source of the city's major impoundment. The result has been, as predicted, a 

series of summers with emergency water conservation measures enforced. 

 

These are the people who tell us, oh everything is fine. God is in Heaven and all is well with the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government and the exploiters are prepared to take the short term advantage of rape of 

the forest rather than the long term advantages of love and care and thought to future generations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, there will be more said before this session is over. We were promised 

by the Government when the Prince Albert pulp mill was brought in, promised that there would be no 

pollution. We are being promised now there will be no pollution of the Churchill watershed if and when 

Athabasca Forest Industries builds. I have some serious doubts about that project I am not getting too 

excited about that developing. To those people who are holding their breath waiting for the mill to come 

I'd say this, they had better take a look at what happened to the promise of no pollution of the North 

Saskatchewan River. I haven't got the final return to my question. I should be interested to get the return 

of the Water Resources Commission but the one from the Fisheries branch is bad enough. Not only do 

we lose 60 per cent of the oxygen content of the river before it comes from the industrial area of Alberta 

at Edmonton, 60 per cent of the oxygen is removed, 40 per cent still remains before it gets to Prince 

Albert and when a count was taken on January 6th approximately six points per million remained of that 

oxygen. That is a little higher than the 40 per cent. What was there after it had gone downstream? 3.7! 

That's bad enough. On February 16th it dropped to 2.0 - 2.0 before it joined the South Saskatchewan 

River. 

 

Now the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) was telling the people of Meadow Lake that the South 

Saskatchewan River ran past Prince Albert but he was a little out in his geography. The fact of the 

matter is that after that water passes Prince Albert, passes the pulp mill and the city of Prince Albert, 

again more than 50 per cent on an average of the oxygen is removed from that water and that 50 per cent 

that is taken there brings that water down to a level that is impossible to support marine life. When it 

gets down to less than four points per million fish will die. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I challenge this Government to say that the pulp mill and the city of Prince Albert 

combined - and they knew that there 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
699 

was pollution before the pulp mill was built, they knew we had that to contend with - is not polluting the 

North Saskatchewan River. I am going to be very interested to see what the Saskatchewan Water 

Resources Commission report says about the pollution level before it joins the forks of that river. 

 

MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK: (Redberry): — They'll probably… 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Oh, I don't think they'll dare do that because it is still possible to get free samples 

and an independent analysis done. I don't think they'd be so foolish. Well, they attempt to cook pretty 

nearly anything but I don't think they'll be cooking that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say they broke their promise about guarding the river and our waters against pollution at 

Prince Albert. They have admitted this with the announcement of an expansion - a $1.3 million 

expansion - of sewage treatment if and when it happens. Whether that's to get them off the present hook 

I'll never know. We won't know because that's going to take a while before that river can be tested again. 

So I say there is a danger, Mr. Speaker, that the pulp industry is going to pollute the northern watershed 

and that northern watershed, Mr. Speaker, is far more valuable to us and to future generations than even 

the biggest pulp mill in the world or two of them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I say this, that if we are going to put up all that money, back the rotes, 

take all the risks in putting up a pulp mill, maybe we might just as well own the pulp mill ourselves It 

might seem logical. They say, ―Oh, that's Socialism.‖ Well, they don't hesitate to own 30 per cent. They 

say that's good. In fact, I think it was the Premier who said that we are much better off than Manitoba 

because we own 30 per cent of it. Well, Mr. Speaker, if it is good to own 30 per cent, I imagine it would 

be better to own 50 per cent. I should think so. And if it is good to own 50 per cent, why not 75 or 100? 

The Premier by his own admission says that we're better off than Manitoba because we own 30 per cent. 

Why not all of it? 

 

I'll tell you another reason, Mr. Speaker, why it might be a good idea. The reason we are facing this 

pollution situation on the North Saskatchewan is because we are running so close to the line. This 

Government is so anxious that the pulp mill shall not be hampered in any way to give them a free go that 

they have refused to take the necessary precautions or make the mill take the necessary precautions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Because the investment and the margin of operation seems to be too great. Another 

reason our forestry practices have become so lax is once again to allow Saskatchewan Pulp Company, 

our subsidy, to operate as cheaply as possible. So here again we have sacrificed our forest, our forestry 

practice in order to pour a cheap product into the mill. I say if we have to do all these things, Mr. 

Speaker, we might just as well lose a little money, provide the employment that's necessary and keep 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
700 

a little closer tab on the mill. We can do that with public ownership rather than be blackmailed as 

apparently the chemical plant - the Co-op Chemical plant - was into providing cheap chemicals to the 

point where it nearly went bankrupt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that the only thing that stands between us and the proper and safe utilization of our 

resources is the courage to do the job. And as far as I am concerned the Saskatchewan people, certainly 

the New Democratic Party, have no such lack of courage. We are brave enough to tackle this job. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We were brave enough to tackle the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, one of the 

most successful Crown corporations in Canada. We are told this was started by the Liberals. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The wreckage, yes. We know about the puny, little wreck the Liberals called the 

Power Corporation. We know about that, Ross. Yes, the wind-chargers of Jimmy Gardiner, we know 

about them. We know about Saskatchewan Government Insurance which was maligned and continues to 

be maligned by some of the Members opposite, one of the most successful Crown corporations 

anywhere in Canada, possibly anywhere in the world. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — A real success story. We know how healthy Saskatchewan Telephones became 

after the Liberals went out of office in 1944. Now it has even got to the point where it can even 

subsidize the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). We know about many of the - others. The Provincial 

Treasurer likes to sit and burp pulp mill and shoe factory and woollen mill and one thing or another but 

with all those combined, you know, you can't have a lot of successes without a few failures. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — That's right, but you never talk about successes. Saskatchewan Sodium Sulphate 

ran pretty well until the Premier got hold of it. It doesn't look very good by the report right now. If you'd 

have kept your cotton-picking fingers out of it, Mr. Premier, and hadn't let your friends in on Snake Hole 

and some of the others and given those resources away, it still would have been making a million dollars 

a year for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — But you couldn't leave it alone, could you? 

 

MR. W. R. THATCHER: (Premier): — make more this year than you fellows ever did; 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Oh yes, sure. Well, Mr. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
701 

Speaker, I think we'd just better take a look before we leap into this major pulp mill operation. And that 

Bill is coming before the House. We'll have ample time to take a look at what is being done there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've had enough of this pollution party. We've had enough of this DDT. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I agree with Mr. Deputy Leader (Mr. Romanow) and the Member for Moose Jaw 

(Mr. Snyder) that the sooner they call an election the better. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The sooner you people get out of office the better. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We're ready any time. How about it? How about it, Ross? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to support the amendment. I do not support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A. R. GUY: (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of taking part in 

this debate but I cannot let some of the misrepresentations and un- truths that we have heard in the past 

few weeks go unanswered. 

 

First of all I want to refer to some of the comments made by my good friend the former mayor who is 

still my MLA for Regina South East (Mr. Baker). He referred to everyone in Saskatchewan being deeper 

in debt. Well, I don't know, Mr. Speaker, if that's true for everybody in Saskatchewan but I can tell you 

that anybody who lived in the city of Regina while he was mayor for 12 years is deeper in debt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — In fact the reason he was defeated at the polls last fall is because of his completely 

irresponsible approach to financing. He ran the city of Regina into a financial fiasco which it will take 

years to get out of. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — In fact he's done so badly that even his own party aren't sure that they want him back. He 

hasn't got too much left to go for. He tried one nominating convention and because 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
702 

of a packed house from the union hall he lost that one. Now today he's waffling around trying to find a 

seat where he thinks he can win and there isn't much left. They hurried up the nomination in Lumsden so 

that he couldn't get in there. They rushed one in Touchwood so that he couldn't get in there. So they say, 

well, maybe we'd better let you go in Wascana, you'll never win it anyway and this is really what we 

want. Because I can tell you that as long as they have Members like that as well as the Member for 

Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) who gave the financial speech the other day, there is no one in his right 

mind in this province who would let anyone from those benches control the financial responsibility of 

this province.] 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — We've listened to it over the last few days. They don't know what financial responsibility 

is. One minute they say you shouldn't be doing that and the next minute they've got $30 million or $40 

million of new projects and they say, we'll do it without any tax increases. Well, they tried that for 20 

years and it finally caught up to them and the people. As I said earlier in this session, I believe one dose 

of Socialism in any province is more than any province can stand. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Now I want to refer for a minute or two to the comments of the Member for Wadena 

(Mr. Dewhurst) and I am sorry that he is not in his seat. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, there he is. 

 

MR. GUY: — Oh, I must apologize to the Member for Wadena because he didn't make that intelligent 

speech. It was the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) to whom I want to refer. He referred to some 

of the rising property mill rates in rural municipalities. He referred specifically to the Rural Municipality 

of Garry where he claimed the mill rates increased from 35 to 45 mills since 1964. Well, we all 

recognize that mill rates have been increasing over the years and it isn't only since 1964. I remember a 

lot of rural municipalities in 1944 that had mill rates of 12 and 13 by the time we got rid of the Socialists 

they were up to 30, 31 or higher. But what the Member for Touchwood conveniently forgot to tell this 

House was that in 1963-64 under the NDP the municipality received the magnificent sum in equalization 

grants of $2,027. $2,027 in equalization grants when the mill rate was 35. In 1970-71 from the 

benevolent Liberal Government they received $14,955 in equalization grants. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — So while the mill rate went up 28 per cent their equalization grant was increased by 700 

per cent to help cover this increase. Why didn't he tell the House this? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Now we come to the fellow 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
703 

from North Battleford (Mr. Kramer) and he's out of the House as usual. As I said, I suppose he's starting 

to walk home. 

 

He referred to the Senate and he said that this is a haven for political heelers. You know a few months 

ago I was rather proud of the Prime Minister for going across party lines and picking some of our great 

Canadians to fill seats in the Senate. And I can think of one, of Mme. Therese Casgrain of the Province 

of Quebec who, regardless of her political affiliation, has made a tremendous contribution to Canada 

particularly the eastern provinces. She has been well thought of by members of every party particularly 

the Liberal Party or she would never have been asked to occupy one of those honoured seats in the 

Senate. And so what does one of the NDP Members in Saskatchewan say about this lady? They say that 

she is a political heeler and should never have been appointed to the Senate. A Member of her own party 

attacks her when she's not here to defend herself. This is the way they attack the women's movement in 

the NDP. We only have to think back a couple of years when the women tried to get some additional 

representation on the federal council and they said, no, there's no room for women but we've got room 

for 12 automatic members from the international labor unions. That‘s the way they treat the women in 

their party. 

 

I think that this is a statement that the Member for North Battleford (Mr. Kramer) should come back in 

here and apologize for. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — One of the finest women in Canada and one of his own party and he calls her a political 

heeler who has no right to go to the Senate. It's a disgrace. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — I am sure that the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) will get up and 

compliment her for her appointment and ask for an apology from his colleague. 

 

The Member for North Battleford then went on and talked about the cemetery fiasco and he said it was a 

dead issue. He thought he was being funny but I can tell Members of this House that the people of 

Saskatchewan know that it isn't funny and it is not a dead issue. Members opposite should be ashamed 

of themselves for the pain and misery caused the thousands of people in this province who were rooked 

by this organization. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — But no, they say that there is nothing to it. As I pointed out earlier, the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) over there now was so pleased with his accomplishment in getting these 

people into the province and the chap from Toronto even held a tea for him in the 1960 election. This 

was part of the payoff for allowing them to come in here to carry out this nefarious program. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
704 

Then he got on to drugs and I don't know whether he's on them or off them. He never told us. But I want 

to tell this House that only since 1964 has there been a Federal Royal Commission and that was the 

LeDain Commission on Drugs and the Opposition didn't present a brief to it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Why didn't they present a brief at that time? I'll tell you, because if you want to look for 

most of the drug pushers and users in this province, you'll find them in the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Then he went on to Columbia Metals and he said, you know, this wasn't that bad. It 

wasn't that bad to Members opposite but he forgot to mention another case that was in the public eye 

about that time and that was the Rawluk case. T.C. Douglas, Fines and Walker wouldn't even let the 

Rawluk case go into the courts. They said, no, no, we'll have a legislative committee. They packed the 

legislative committee with CCF Members and they then came into the House and made their report. 

They said everything was fine, nothing was wrong, everything was above normal. But when the Liberal 

Opposition at that time asked to have a judicial enquiry, the Leader and Premier of the province Tommy 

Douglas looked at Mr. Fines (now in a $500,000 home in Fort Lauderdale) and said, don't worry, we've 

got our cut, forget about it. It never did get into the courts of this province where it belonged. The MLA 

for The Battlefords didn't have the courage to stand up and say anything about it. 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART: (Provincial Treasurer): — Was he in the Cabinet? 

 

MR. GUY: — No, he was the last one to get into the Cabinet. They ran out of possibilities and they had 

to scrape the bottom of the barrel. 

 

Then the Member for North Battleford came down with one of the great statements of his speech. He 

said, regarding Indian Affairs, we never did anything because it was a responsibility of the Federal 

Government, the Federal Government is responsible. Well, I can tell the Members of this House, in fact 

I don't have to tell you, the Federal Government today is responsible for Indians on Indian Reserves. But 

we haven't let that deter us from accepting our responsibility. We have provided roads, power, 

telephones, housing, employment, education. We have done every- thing within our jurisdiction to help 

our Indian and Métis friends. We weren't prepared to sit back and say, " Oh, this is a Federal 

responsibility, we're not going to do anything." In fact, we are trying to help the natives in the face of 

opposition politics. I think we are doing a good job. In fact, I read a letter to the Editor in tonight's paper 

and I'm sorry that I didn't cut it out and bring it with me but it's in to- night's paper if you want to take 

the trouble and look it up. One of our Indian friends has written a very heart-warming letter to the Editor 

commending the Government for the things that they have tried to do. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
705 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — But in the last sentence he said, "In spite of what the Opposition and those leaders of 

ours who are playing politics, the majority of Indian and Métis people in Saskatchewan are very pleased 

and happy with what the Government is doing." 

 

Now the Member for The Battlefords came to the question of reforestry. You know, for a man who was 

a former Minister of Natural Resources his comments leave a great deal to be desired. After all, he 

knows full well that he had people in his department who were the best qualified foresters in the 

country. Yet who does he refer to making comments about reforestation? He goes back to some Socialist 

professor in Manitoba who knows nothing about Saskatchewan and according to the Member for The 

Battlefords, based his report on what he knew from pulp mills in St. John's, Newfoundland. He 

overlooked the capabilities of this province for some Socialist professor whom he doesn't know and has 

never met. He picked up a paper, probably the Commonwealth, read it and now all of a sudden it 

becomes gospel. That's the attitude of Members opposite. They never accept the facts from people who 

know. They've got to be Socialists or else they are not on the right wave length. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Tell you what: Put them in a can of beans, shake them up and they'll all come out the 

same color. 

 

Then the Member from The Battlefords goes on to pollution. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, if there is 

any one thing in the minds of the Members opposite it's that they hope that the North Saskatchewan will 

become polluted. Everything they say is never positive it is always that they think it is going to be 

polluted. Well, what makes them think so? Well, I'll tell you. Somebody in the university or somebody 

in the Commonwealth said it's polluted. So that is all they go by. 

 

I can tell you that there will be no pollution of the North Saskatchewan. We are as aware as any 

government in this country that you have to be able to put the clamps on industry and you'll see from our 

legislation this year that we are prepared to. But another thing to recognize is that you can't have a 

pollution free environment over night when it is polluted to start with. This is something that Members 

opposite won't recognize. 

 

Then the great Member for The Battlefords who was a Minister of Natural Resources got on the pulp 

mills. Of course, he is an authority there. He never got one so that makes him an authority and he starts 

to talk about the financing of the Prince Albert and the Athabasca pulp mills. I am going to have a little 

more to say about that later on so I won't spend too much time on his comments. I want to tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that 30 per cent equity in Saskatchewan is far better than putting $92 million in cash into a 

bankrupt project in Manitoba. They talk about Manitoba but they don't tell the truth. They say that this 

was a project that was under way before the Socialists got into power that this is a Conservative fiasco. I 

have to 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
706 

admit that the Conservatives are the ones who probably started the problem but I'll tell you one thing, 

after the NDP became the Government in Manitoba, it was then that the $92 million of the taxpayers' 

hard cash was thrown down the drain. They didn't have to put that $92 million in there. They could have 

called an enquiry right then before they spent one dollar. You know what Premier Schreyer said when he 

was asked, "Why didn't you stop that $92 million?" He said, "Well you know we just came into 

Government. People think we are a little bit anti-free enterprise therefore we don't want to stop a project 

even though it doesn't look that it's too good." So what did he do? He put $92 million down the drain to 

try and show that he was a friend of free enterprise. 

 

MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK: (Redberry): — Baloney, baloney! 

 

MR. GUY: — Those are the facts and I defy you to stand up on the floor of this House and prove 

otherwise. You haven't done it yet: The Member for Redberry made a great speech the other night. He 

waved his arms and took off his shoes and did every- thing but tell the truth about the pulp mill. 

 

Now finally the Member for The Battlefords referred to the election with tongue in cheek. I'll tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, we have a candidate in North Battleford this year, Roy Dean who was a former mayor and 

who will take that Member to the cleaners as he has never been taken before. I think he is a little 

worried. If you look back and I took the trouble to look back over the last five or six years, I found out 

that the Member from North Battleford made one speech over the last five or six years in each session. 

He attended three days each week, gone Monday, gone Friday. But what about this year? Oh no, two 

speeches already and he is supposed to be - I think somebody from the other side today said - the 

clean-up man. Can you imagine that? The clean-up man from North Battleford. Well I can tell you if 

anybody gets taken to the cleaners it will be the Member from North Battleford by Roy Dean. There's a 

winner if I ever saw one. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to refer to the comments from the Member for Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky). I regret that I have to do so. I am sorry to have to criticize the 

Member from Prince Albert East-Cumberland on the veracity of the statement that he made because 

probably this will be his last Budget speech in this Legislature. I am sure that I speak in sincerity for all 

Members on this side of the House and I say sincerely that we shall miss our friend from Prince Albert 

East- Cumberland. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — My only wish is that he could have left this House in the knowledge that at least in his 

last speech he had told the whole truth and nothing but the truth. But unfortunately this was not the case. 

I was disappointed when he used one of the most bare- faced political tricks that has ever been used in 

this House. He mentioned questions that he had asked regarding the amount of monies paid out on 

February 15th on construction projects that were announced late in December which was only six weeks 

earlier. Now anyone who knows anything about the construction 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
707 

industry - and it is obvious that Members opposite don't fall into that category - knows that very little if 

any has been spent for several good reasons. First of all, it takes time to complete the working drawings, 

calling the tenders and awarding the contracts. After the contract is awarded it takes time for the 

contractor to get his equipment and men on the site and arrange interim financing. It is also well known, 

certainly by those in the labor movement, that the first progress payment is not presented for at least 30 

days after construction starts. Following that, it is several weeks before the Treasury makes the payment. 

So therefore, it is very unlikely that any money will be spent within two months after a project is 

announced. Members opposite know this. In fact, the truth of the matter is that the answer tabled in the 

Legislature the other day which showed some fairly substantial figures on some of these projects 

showed the sincerity of this Government in getting these projects under way. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Now the Member was concerned that no money had been spent to date on the 

Cumberland House School. Again, he knows that this isn't surprising and he is trying to play a little 

politics. After all, schools are not due to open until September 1st in the year that they are constructed 

and there is plenty of time to complete the construction before school starts this fall. 

 

MR. W. J. BEREZOWSKY: (Prince Albert East Cumberland): — It took seven years to build it. 

 

MR. GUY: — You know better than that, Member from Prince Albert East-Cumberland. We built more 

classrooms and teacherages in Cumberland House in six years than you ever built in 20 years. In fact, I 

sometimes wonder whether the Member ever went into one of the polls in your constituency. Then he 

made the statement that no money was being spent for schools in northern Saskatchewan this year. I 

don't know whether he is blind, dumb, or a combination of both, but why would the Hon. Member make 

such a statement, Mr. Speaker, when all he had to do was pick up the Estimates for 1971-72 and see that 

$1.3 million was budgeted for northern schools in the next fiscal year. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this will be 

the fourth year in a row that more than $1 million has been spent in providing educational facilities for 

our northern students. I want to tell this House that the most that the NDP ever spent and that was in an 

election year, was $400,000 or just a little more for northern schools. The Member for Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland also conveniently overlooked the fact that in this Budget there is $200,000 for a sewer 

and water system in his beloved Cumberland House. Why didn't you give thanks to the benevolent 

Liberal Government when those people had been trying for a sewer and water system under the NDP for 

so long. As I say, I am the most disappointed Member in this House to think that the Member from 

Prince Albert East-Cumberland is so ungrateful because in so many respects he's a good guy and we've 

all gotten along fine but I can't stand this politics at the expense of northern students. 

 

The MLA for Prince Albert East-Cumberland next claimed that all the people from Creighton were like 

Joe Borowski in the NDP 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
708 

Government in Manitoba. I doubt that this is true or that they would wish to be placed in this category. 

The people from Creighton whom I know and I know a fair number of them after having to go over 

there from time to time to look after things for the Member from Prince Albert East-Cumberland. I know 

for a fact that they have never gone around the province casting slurs against our war veterans and our 

Indian friends. This is the record for Joe Borowski of the NDP Government in Manitoba. 

 

Several Members opposite have made references to the aid we are providing for our rural and urban 

municipalities. I think the Member from Swift Current whom I have a great deal of respect for was one 

of the Members but again, I was very disappointed in his veracity. They are trying to convince the 

people that their assistance was much greater than ours. But I want to put a few facts on the record and I 

trust that the Member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) will take these facts home and tell them to his 

RMs. 

 

I want to turn first to some of the grants for rural municipalities. I want to look at the grid and farm 

access road grants. In 1963-64 - and I am glad you are listening. Sir - do you know how much you 

provided to municipalities? You provided $4.3 million. Do you know what we are providing this year? 

$6.3 million. Then we go to re-graveling grants. In 1963-64 the big NDP spenders put $189,000 out for 

re-graveling in municipalities. This year - $480,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — What about equalization grants? This is a story in itself. We had one example earlier 

tonight, and this is a pattern that appears in every RM in this province. In 1963-64 the benevolent NDP 

gave $420,000 in equalization grants and I think the Member for Swift Current was a Minister at that 

time. What is it this year? $2,750,000. I know that he is ashamed of himself and I am sure it isn't his 

fault. It is some of those Wafflers he got mixed up with. 

 

Well the facts are, Mr. Speaker, that in the last eight years that we were blessed with Socialism they 

spent $3.3 million in equalization grants and in the eight years of Liberal Government we spent $14 

million. More than 400 per cent increase in those hard Liberal times that we hear referred to. 

 

Now we can turn to resort roads and in 1963-64 they out did themselves - $2,000. This year, $100,000 

and the same was true last year. 

 

Now here is a good one - maintenance grants. We always hear about the maintenance of grid roads and 

how hard pressed the municipalities are. In 1963-64, what did they spend? Zip! Nil! No program for 

maintenance, not a dollar, not a cent! What do you think we are spending this year? $1,255,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Those were the so-called friends of the municipalities. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
709 

Now we have got another good one - snow removal. How much do you think they spent in 1963-64? 

You're right again. Nothing, not a penny, not a penny. This year - $360,000. Where was the Member 

from Swift Current in those days? Where was he? 

 

You know we heard quite a bit from the Member for North Battleford (Mr. Kramer), the Member for 

Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst), the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) about how they are all for the 

Indians, how they want to see them get the same services as any other people in this province, how they 

want to treat them the same as we do the municipalities. Well I guess they did. They gave them nothing, 

absolutely nothing! This year we are spending the same as we did last year, $500,000 for roads on 

Indian Reservations. 

 

So the facts are, Mr. Speaker, that the total grants to RMs in 1963-64 were $5.8 million. Today they are 

$30.3 million. If you want to carry it a little further, in the last eight years of the NDP it was $44.9 

million, the first eight years of Liberal Government $71.4 million. Who are the friends of the RMs? 

Well, I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they know, they don't have to be asked. 

 

Now we come to the urban municipalities. You know, this is where all the working people are living 

who need assistance and who want their property taxes lowered. They need help from the Government. 

Let's look at the record. The graveling of urban streets - what do you think they were paying in 1963-64? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — I don't think the former Minister of Industry should be answering these questions because 

he has an inside track because he was the former Minister of Municipal Affairs. I should like to have 

some of the other Members answer this. What do you think they gave? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Zip! 

 

MR. GUY: — Right, zip, nothing! In 1971-72, $250,000 will be paid. Homeowner Grants - in this 

regard it is funny to hear the Members opposite. One day you hear the Member from Regina South East 

(Mr. Baker) saying, ―Oh, those Homeowner Grants, I announced them in 1964, I introduced them, they 

aren't big enough, they should be bigger.‖ But the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) says they are a 

complete and absolute failure, they have done nothing. So who are you going to believe? But anyway 

let's look at the record. 1963-64, Mr. Attorney General, what do you think they paid? 

 

MR. HEALD: — Zip! 

 

MR. GUY: — Zip, right you are. 1971-72, $12.8 million to the property owners of this province. 

 

Now we come to police grants. 1963-64, what do you think they paid? Nothing, nothing. This year, 

$560,000. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
710 

Snow removal grants to the urban municipalities. The Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) 

should have the answer. What did you fellows pay? Come on, answer up, tell us. Absolute zip again, 

nothing. This year we are going to pay $410,000. 

 

Now surely the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), the Deputy Leader, the financial 

critic, can answer this one. What did you give in house building assistance grants? Zip: Right. He's got 

the answer. We've got $500,000 to spend again this year, the same amount that we had last year. 

 

Now we come to one of the most important aspects of all and Members opposite have been crying that 

we are not doing enough in this regard. This is in the area of subsidized low- rental housing. What sort 

of a grant are we giving there? Well, you've got to have the answers. What sort of grant did you give in 

1963-64? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — You gave nothing. You gave absolutely nothing. This year we are providing $204,000. 

 

You know in the first year that we became the Government we found out that in their last year the NDP 

made a contribution of $2.3 million in grants to urban municipalities. This year we shall pay to urban 

municipalities $15 million, a 650 per cent increase. So in 1971-72 we shall pay to urban municipalities 

the sum of $28.3 million compared to $8.1 million during the NDP's last year of office. Again I ask you, 

who are the friends of the municipalities in Saskatchewan? 

 

Now we come to low-income housing and the NDP record is one that I want to put on the records of this 

House. You know the Federal-Provincial program for lower income public housing was started in 1949. 

Do you know how many houses the NDP built in 1949? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Zip. 

 

MR. GUY: — Zip. What about in 1950? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Zip. 

 

MR. GUY: — Zip. What about in 1951? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Zip. 

 

MR. GUY: — Zip. What about in 1952? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Zip. 

 

MR. GUY: — Zip. But in 1953 they started to use it. It built a few houses in 1953-54. What do you 

think it did in 1955? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Zip. 

 

MR. GUY: — Zip. 1956, 1957, 1958, 1959, Zip. That Government never used it again until 1960 before 

a general election. In 15 years 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
711 

it built 344 units, an average of 23 units a year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — In the seven years we've been the Government, 1,282 units have been built or 183 units 

per year. In the coming year we expect to participate in an additional 382 senior citizen and low-income 

housing. This year alone we shall participate in more homes than the NDP did in the complete 15 years 

that they had the program. And they call themselves the friends of our low-income and senior citizens. 

 

The Members opposite call themselves, as I mentioned, friends of our Indian and Métis. How much 

public housing did it provide for them? Its only interest now is to abolish the Indian and Métis 

Department. The answer again, of course, is none, not one home. Today, we have built 145 in centres 

where Indian people have secured employment. In addition, another 40 were provided in northern 

Saskatchewan because we believe, regardless of what Members opposite believe, that providing housing 

for our native people is as important as providing jobs or training programs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as in the Throne Speech Debate, Members opposite cannot take their seats without 

lashing out at the Prince Albert and the new Athabasca pulp mill. The fury of their speech is in direct 

proportion to how little they know about the mill. A good example was the Member for Redberry (Mr. 

Michayluk) who was a good example of Members opposite. Oh, here he comes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there is a man who couldn't finance a free lunch without going 

broke and yet he is trying to tell this House how to finance a pulp mill. What Members opposite refuse 

to recognize is that regardless of who owns the pulp mill, some company has to build it and no company 

will build it unless they can make a few dollars profit. Even if the Government owned 100 per cent of 

the mill it couldn't build it. It would have to contract it out to a company in the pulp mill construction 

business. I am sure that our friends opposite will agree that if we had to choose a company that we 

should be wise to choose a reputable firm with plenty of experience. If one were to do this, experts 

throughout the pulp industry around the world will tell you that there is no more reputable or 

experienced firm in building pulp mills than Parsons and Whittemore. They have built mills all over the 

world in all kinds of climatic conditions. The fact that the start up period of the Prince Albert pulp mill 

was shorter with less problems than any mill in the history of Canada is testimony to their capabilities. 

So if your Government, regardless of ownership of the mill, was to use any company but Parsons and 

Whittemore it would not have the best interests of Saskatchewan people at heart. Whether they make a 

profit or whether they don't doesn't enter into the picture at all. Whether it is company ABC, XYZ or 

PDQ it doesn't matter who built it, they would expect a similar profit and in all probability their work 

would not be as well done. It is this failure by the NDP to understand the basic facts of economic life 

that makes its criticism of the pulp mill so ludicrous. In fact, it points out more than ever that its 

criticism is politically oriented rather than economically oriented. 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
712 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that rankles the Opposition as much as the fact that they failed 

where we have succeeded. Our success is eating away at their insides and they can't help it. What is 

bothering them more is the knowledge that they will have to stand up and be counted when the pulp mill 

legislation is before them. I don't think, Mr. Speaker, there is one chance in a thousand that they will 

have the courage to vote against the pulp mill legislation. But I wish they would, oh how I wish they 

would! Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot think of one issue that I should rather fight an 

election campaign on in my constituency than the issue of the Athabasca pulp mill and Gulf Minerals. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if an election is called on this issue, it wouldn't be just whether we get a pulp mill or 

don't get it or whether it is American money or it is not American money that builds it, the big issue is 

one of pride and dignity. Whether we should deny the thousands of unemployed in the northwest part of 

our province the pride and dignity of having a chance for permanent employment or whether we should 

desert them and leave them forever the slaves of social welfare. And you know, Mr. Speaker… 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And polluted environment 

 

MR. GUY: — Our polluted Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). You know he resided in 

a city which put the raw sewage in the North Saskatchewan River all the time that his Government was 

in power and never had the courage to say one word and now he talks about pollution. 

 

But I think that this is the difference between the Liberals and the NDP, Mr. Speaker. We believe that 

we have the responsibility to provide an opportunity to everyone if at all possible. We believe that a man 

will be a better member of our society when he has the pride and dignity of being permanently 

employed. What do the NDP believe? They believe that by controlling a man's stomach through welfare 

payments they can also control his mind for their own political benefits. I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 

Prince Albert pulp mill, the Athabasca pulp mill, the Wollaston Lake developments are the greatest 

developments northern Saskatchewan has ever seen and will provide opportunities for thousands in their 

own environment. You know, the Members opposite and this is one of the comments of the Member 

from Prince Albert East-Cumberland who said, "Oh you moved the Indian people South to find 

employment when they should have jobs in the North." Now that we are creating job opportunities in the 

North they are going to vote against it. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP vote against the pulp mill legislation, I submit they will be wiped 

off the face of Saskatchewan in the next election. You know, people are sick and tired of their attacks on 

industry glared to help our province for their own political gain. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, before taking my seat I should like to refer to one other part of the Budget that 

has been criticized by all Members opposite and that is the transfer of dividends from Crown 

corporations to be used for financing Government programs of benefit to our people. I'm glad the 

Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) is in his seat because I'm going to have a few comments to make 

about him. You know, these criticisms 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
713 

fall into the same category as the pulp mill. They come from envy and jealousy rather than common 

sense. This envy, of course, results from the fact that under the efficient business-like approach of the 

Liberal Government Crown corporations like Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Sask Tel and so on are 

making substantial profits. This was an event relatively unknown in the days of the Socialists. Members 

opposite are so blinded by this envy and jealousy that they won't accept the truth. 

 

The Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) the other night was the loudest and most vocal in his 

criticism of his approach to budgeting. He said what a terrible thing for the Provincial Treasurer to 

balance his Budget by taking 50 per cent of the profits of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation into 

general revenue. The NDP never did it when it was the Government. That is what you said. 

 

MR. MICHAYLUK: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — All right, good. I hope you'll stand up and apologize when I'm finished. You know I don't 

expect the MLA from Redberry to stick to the facts because he never has but I did expect better from the 

MLA for Swift Current (Mr. Wood). I always thought he was an exception on that side of the House 

who would, on principle, rather tell the truth than an untruth. And it was a surprise for me today, in fact, 

I was very unhappy to hear him say categorically and I hope that if I heard him wrong he will stand up 

and correct me because I didn't want to hear this from the Member from Swift Current. But he said 

categorically that the NDP never took profits from the Power Corporation into Government revenues. 

 

MR. WOOD: — No. 

 

MR. GUY: — Oh, oh, don't go away. He doesn't want to hear the truth, he can't stand it. You know the 

trouble with Members opposite is that their brains have been whitewashed by their leaders. They should 

take a little time to see what really went on when Douglas, Fines and company were in charge of the 

provincial treasury because it would be a real revelation to them. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that it took 

them only three years to start that kind of financing and I've got here the annual report for the 

Saskatchewan Power Commission for 1947 and 1948 and it is a very revealing statement and I hope the 

Member for Swift Current will pay attention. In 1947 the annual report of the Saskatchewan Power 

Commission, page 23 shows that from a profit of $632,774, 500,000 was transferred to the Government 

finance office. And he had the nerve to stand up here today and say, ―We never took a nickel from the 

SPC.‖ No, never took a nickel. 

 

Then in 1948, the 1948 annual report showed that there was a profit of $427,000. You'll notice that it is 

down as Socialism is starting to creep into this Power Corporation. But of $427,000, $400,000 was 

transferred to the Government finance office. This isn't 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, but literally 100 per 

cent and at a time when profits were declining under the Socialists and every dollar was needed for 

expansion. Now this shows the stupidity and ignorance of Members opposite when they attack 

procedures and policies which their own Government followed religiously. And again, it is almost 

beyond comprehension that the Member for 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
714 

Swift Current whose integrity has always been above reproach in this House would stand up and say 

categorically that the SPC never took one nickel from the profits and put it into the general revenues. I 

must tell you. Sir, that I am disappointed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — You know, Mr. Speaker, because Members opposite have adopted this approach of 

spreading untruths and misrepresentations and the fact that they are more interested in political gain than 

in the welfare of the province, I am sure that the answer will be told by the people of this province 

before too long. And because I know what their answer is going to be, I am very proud to Support this 

magnificent Budget of our Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and I oppose the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK: (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister permit a question? You 

mentioned that I stated that we didn't take any dividends from the Power Corporation. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to say this, that in the financial statement for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1970 issued by this 

Government, page 94 shows comparative statements for 1961 to 1970 of the general revenues of the 

Province under the major sources of revenue. Permit me, Mr. Speaker, to prove my point. Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation dividends  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order: 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Let him ask the question. 

 

MR. MICHAYLUK: — I'll ask the question. 1963, 1964, 1965… 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Now this started by you asking me if you could ask the Minister a question and 

you are not going to have a second debate. You have spoken once in this debate and we are not going to 

have people speaking twice. Now state the question. The Minister will answer as he said he would. 

 

MR. MICHAYLUK: — Would the Minister agree with this report published by the Government for the 

fiscal year ending March 31, 1970? 

 

MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, it is not a question of whether I agree with what happened from 1961 to 

1962., The question that the Member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) in his ignorance didn't know that 

the NDP were in power from 1944 isn't my fault. But the fact is that he is a present Member of the 

Opposition party and is responsible for every action that party took from 1944 to 1964. As I pointed out 

the NDP did take profits from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation regardless of what the Member 

from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) or the Member from Redberry or the so-called financial critic from 

Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) says. They did take those profits and they misrepresented the 

facts. In fact if I wasn't a gentlemen and I knew 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
715 

that you wouldn't call me out of order, I should say they told a down right lie but I know that it wasn't, it 

was an untruth and I would never, never suggest that those two hon. Gentlemen would ever tell a lie but 

they didn't tell the truth. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. WHELAN: (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members opposite have counted 

the Hon. Member for Regina South East out before. They counted him out in 1967 and they should 

know by now they shouldn't count him out too soon or too fast. I want to say to the Hon. Member who 

has just taken his seat: If you are so confident and you're not afraid of the people why then such a 

blatant, undemocratic gerrymander in preparation for an election? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget was balanced only because of the benevolence of the Federal Liberal 

Government, the administrative governmental partners of the Members on that side of the House. At one 

time the Hon. Premier carried on a running battle in the newspapers with the Government in Ottawa. 

The Premier insisted that Ottawa didn't understand Saskatchewan and that we should think in terms of 

seceding from Confederation. The Liberals at Ottawa and Liberals in Saskatchewan were different. All 

of us recall the battles over special concessions to potash companies. Under the heading of secession, 

Mr. Speaker, numerous statements and news stories galore received attention right across this country 

announcing the need to let Ottawa know that we were prepared to quit Confederation. Mr. Speaker, 

everyone in this House watched in the last provincial election as the Liberals campaigned with the 

slogan ―Vote Saskatchewan Liberal‖. Mr. Speaker, as if there was a difference? 

 

What is the picture today? Mr. Speaker, Federal Liberal Cabinet Ministers are brought to the province in 

droves to campaign provincial ridings because they understand the problems of the day, federally and 

provincially. The talk of seceding has creased. The Premier in his most expansive style has become a 

Confederation exponent in favor of a strong central government, advocating policies of any kind 

providing they are Liberal. The Saskatchewan Liberal slogan has disappeared, Mr. Speaker. As the 

Conservatives, New Democrats and everyone else who has suffered at the hands of the Liberals 

federally and provincially know, they now admit for all the world to see that they are the same people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — With his best public relations image the Premier says of the Prime Minister, ―Right 

man for the job.‖ What brought this about, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, can't you see the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) advising the—Premier, can't you see him saying, "We're in trouble and if we're 

going to balance the books even after we take money from the Crown corporations, we still need around 

$70 million." Mr. Speaker, what a rude awakening: What a shock! What an assault on the fierce 

independence, the all-out against Ottawa image of the Hon. Premier. Mr. Speaker, those must have been 

trying times, they must have been very, very difficult times for the Premier, to have to come all the way 

down from his perch where he fired away at Ottawa. Can you imagine him saying, ―Mr. Minister, we‘re 

in trouble. We can‘t 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
716 

get out unless we get $70 million.‖ Get the picture. A humble Premier talking to the completely 

independent and powerful Prime Minister who is also a Liberal and at the moment he is begging for $70 

million. What is the Prime Minister saying? "Mr. Premier, you're lucky we are still on speaking terms. 

I'm surprised you are still in Canada and part of this country. And for someone who is not supposed to 

understand, I'm surprised that you even suggest that I should recognize that you might need $70 

million." 

 

Then the Premier says to the Hon. Prime Minister, ―You know I was only kidding, I didn't mean what I 

said about Otto Lang and I didn't mean to humiliate him in front of that big convention and I shouldn't 

have mistreated him and I will be nice to Otto from now on.‖ And can't you see the Prime Minister in 

his moment of triumph, ―Oh, this is all very well. Well, you are going to get $70 million with a few 

conditions attached. First, if we decide to introduce a plan to reorganize the farm economy of the 

province and the number of farms is reduced by 50 or 60 per cent, we don't want one squawk out of you 

then and secondly, if we have a policy convention in Ottawa, you will do one of two things, you will 

either stay home and keep your mouth shut or will come to Ottawa and keep your mouth shut.‖ Mr. 

Speaker, they couldn't go to Ottawa and keep their mouths shut so they stayed home and kept their 

mouths shut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was another condition – ―We want to come to Saskatchewan to visit and we want to 

be introduced to everyone including the ladies and we don't want any of the former Liberals throwing 

wheat at us.‖ Mr. Speaker, thus far the conditions have been met. It has been a very satisfactory 

arrangement for the Prime Minister of Canada. When they introduced their new agricultural policy plan 

to stabilize or eliminate farmers and had meetings all over the province. Liberal MLAs, Liberal 

Presidents, Secretaries and Executives did what they were told. They must have cried in the comer. They 

must have felt frustrated and hamstrung. They must have felt tied and gagged and muzzled. But they did 

what they were told. Why even their own farms were probably being included in the elimination 

scheme. They stood by the Premier for his $70 million.‘ 

 

And then there was that convention at Ottawa. Don't you remember how they flew in Liberals from all 

over Western Canada, met in a group, hammered out a western policy, led by people with lots of 

enthusiasm they headed for Ottawa. Not this time. They were told to stay home and be quiet. They 

picked out the nicest fellow in the group and they sent him, Mr. Speaker, on about the third day and to 

my knowledge he didn't let them down. He didn't say anything on behalf of anyone. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, there was that party on Saturday in February when we cancelled the session to roll 

out the carpet for the Prime Minister. There were photographers and there were Cabinet Ministers 

holding teacups and there were announcements hither, thither and yon, and when it was all over, Mr. 

Speaker, they said in glowing terms and the Premier said, ―He's the right man for the job.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a price to pay for a $70 million grant. The Premier if he was representing the people 

of Saskatchewan should have said, ―Mr. Prime Minister, you're the author of the unemployment idea, 

you caused it, you sponsored it, you originated 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
717 

it, you advertised it, you did this to us deliberately. You are chasing the people out of the province, 

people whom we trained, they're gone and we have lost hundreds of them, thousands of them in one 

year, lost forever the money spent on education. The cream of our population, technicians, tradesmen, 

gone never to return. You did this to us to fight inflation, so you did.‖ And he could have said, if he 

hadn't taken the $70 million grant, ―You could subsidize our farmers, you could give them some in- 

come, you could stabilize their positions.‖ And he wanted to continue in his best labor baiting style, but 

the Federal Liberals need labor votes. After the $70 million payment wasn't there a change? No more 

anti-labor legislation, no more anti-labor speeches. After all these fellows saved us from complete 

financial ruin, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You can eat a lot of crow for $70 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — No, it wasn't the Hon. Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) who by his courageous 

one-man stand stood up for labor. No. They did it for money. They did it because they needed money, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the price came as high as $70 million. Mr. Speaker, it is just amazing, nothing 

short of amazing, how we could suddenly discover that the Ottawa Liberals understood them after all 

and they're absolutely in favor of Confederation. There is no difference between Saskatchewan Liberals 

and Federal Liberals. Otto Lang even with his wildest ideas to eliminate farmers is absolutely okay. 

Unemployment isn't too bad. Those labor fellows are nice fellows. Isn't it amazing, Mr. Speaker, what 

$70 million can do for the philosophy of the Saskatchewan Liberals? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to the Budget itself. It doesn't matter what we vote for in the Budget but 

what really matters is what money we spend. Last year, Mr. Speaker, when the Throne Speech came 

down there was a big headline in the paper, "Speech Predicts Winter House Building Grant" (February 

12, 1970). There was going to be a bonus to build houses. I am sorry the Hon. Member for Athabasca 

(Mr. Guy) isn't in his seat. Mr. Speaker, we voted these administrative geniuses, these aggressive 

leaders, these convinced fighters of unemployment, $500,000 to build houses, enough money for 1,000 

houses with a $500 bonus for each. Mr. Speaker, first the program got away too late, about July 1st. 

Second, the contractors couldn't make any plans and didn't. Third, in answer to a question the other day 

on the order paper, they spent $218,000 of the $500,000 at $500 a house, a total of 451 houses. Mr. 

Speaker, this program was so effective, it was planned so well, it was handled in such an aggressive 

manner, the contractors got off to such a flying start, that they didn't build more houses, they built fewer 

houses in the province of Saskatchewan than at any time for many years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at this Budget, they've got $500,000 again and with the 

aggressive leadership, the cost of publicity, the lack of income and the need for employment, they 

probably won't do as well this year. They probably won't spend the money we vote them for housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget should provide employment. People 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
718 

who claim there is no unemployment haven't counted the number of people who have left every block in 

the city of Regina. Housing construction has to be down. They didn't spend the money for the $500 

bonuses and they didn't spend the money we voted for our share of low rental housing either. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, this has been consistently the case under this Government. What 

makes anyone in this House think that they might change? On behalf of the unemployed, on behalf of 

the people who have left, on behalf of the people in the city of Regina and the smaller towns and the 

farms who need good housing, Mr. Speaker, I have no intention and there is no justification for voting 

for this Budget. 

 

Grants for urban assistance have been listed and sent out. But does Regina get its share? It will be so 

small, I predict, that it will not prevent a mill rate increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plan for bursaries and the plan for hiring 2,000 students is woefully inadequate, 

completely unimaginative and will not prevent an exodus of our best people and will not renew the faith 

the young people of our province should have in those who administer our affairs. 

 

Let's look at this, Mr. Speaker: 2,000 jobs. In my constituency alone, Mr. Speaker, there are 1,500 grade 

11 and 12 and university students - 1,500 in my constituency alone. Add to that the students in nearby 

constituencies in grade 11 and 12 and going to university on the Regina Campus and those who have 

graduated from grade 12 and university and who have nothing to do and one can come to the conclusion 

that this is a frivolous item thrown in and will not satisfy the demand and solve the unemployment 

problem for the young university students or the secondary school people over the whole province. Mr. 

Speaker, I question if there has been any planning. We will be asking for the names of the Committee on 

Scholarships and Bursaries. We will be asking for detailed information on the work that has been done 

in the Crown corporations and in Government departments to provide employment. We will be asking 

these questions when the Estimates are before the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish that the administration of the program for bursaries and jobs was in the hands of an 

independent committee rather than the Provincial Government. When the bursaries and job program 

were announced it was drawn to my attention by the young people in my constituency that in most 

instances scholarships and jobs even on a temporary basis had constantly gone to the people who were 

friends of the Government. Mr. Speaker, with the former organizer for the Liberal Party in charge of this 

job program, it is the considered opinion of the young people in my constituency that there will be job 

precedence for certain people. There won't be enough jobs for all the students. There will only be 

enough jobs to take in some of them. The record of this Government thus far in providing employment 

for students and giving them an opportunity to receive loans is ineffective and without imagination. I 

have a constituent who has a dependent, who has a BA and who has been unable to find work. Because 

she has been unable to find work, this constituent has been unable to pay back her loan. Let me 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
719 

read a paragraph of a letter from this constituent pointing out how anxious they are to collect that loan 

and what action has been taken. I'll take responsibility for the letter. I'm quoting directly from it. 

 

Because I am unemployed and have a daughter, I am forced to accept welfare. Out of my 

monthly cheque the Government receives $10 to repay my student loan. This to me does not 

make sense. For three years the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have helped to educate me. Surely 

these same people should not be expected to support me any longer. 

 

Without a job would a student want to owe this Government for a loan? Mr. Speaker, I wonder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I turn for a moment to the Budget and what it says in regard to senior citizens. In this 

area, Mr. Speaker, the Budget is hazy and without positive proposals where action is needed. In my 

constituency because of lack of maintenance grants by this Government, rents in Pioneer Village have 

been raised effective April 1st from $49 to $51. And in the bachelor units the rents were raised $1.50 per 

month effective April 1st. This is a result of the Provincial Government's program to make these senior 

citizens' housing units self-sustaining. Senior citizens whose pensions have been increased 42 cents per 

month by the Government's friends at Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Government will subsidize maintenance grants to prevent this type of 

increase. Pensioners in my constituency are harassed and worried and embarrassed by the payment of 

$2.50 per day for deterrent fees. Mr. Speaker, a New Democratic Government will abolish this unfair tax 

on the sick. Payment for drugs by senior citizens who are ill is a hardship, a worry and a constant fear 

haunting them. The New Democratic Government will provide a prescription drug program. Mr. 

Speaker, senior citizens are without finances to pay for hearing aids, teeth and glasses. A program to 

provide these needs will be undertaken by a New Democratic Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I intended to speak at some length about the problems of the senior citizens and day care 

but my time has run out. In summary I just want to say this, that I feel very strongly that the Budget does 

not really consider many people in my constituency. For those without homes there is no hope for low 

cost housing in this Budget. For those who are unemployed there is no hope for a job. For the student 

there is inadequate money for bursaries or employment. For the senior citizens there is no relief from 

economic hardship and medical costs. For working mothers the day care grant it absolutely unrealistic. 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of those people in my constituency I most strongly oppose the Budget and 

support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I had intended to speak a little 

longer this evening than I am going to have the opportunity to speak. While I was listening to the Hon. 

Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) I was thinking of an old story about someone telling all that he was 

going to do and where he was getting all this stuff 



 

March 4, 1971 

 

 
720 

that he was going to do it with and I thought to myself, "Where is the Member from Athabasca getting 

all that money from which he is giving out in grants?" And I guess, Mr. Speaker, he's getting it from the 

highest tax rate ever in the history of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — 1,477 new taxes, John. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — That's where he's getting the money from - from the highest tax rates ever 

in the Province of Saskatchewan, and the highest debt rate ever in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — Since I have some more remarks to make later in the debate, Mr. Speaker, 

I beg leave to adjourn the debate, 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o'clock p.m. 

 


