



















































Hansard: February 19, 1971


101 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

 

4th Day 

Friday, February 19, 1971. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I wish to introduce the following groups of students in the galleries; from the 

constituency of Regina South represented by the Minister of Health, Mr. Grant, 63 students from the Massey 

School under the direction of their school teacher, Mr. Brown; from the Strathcona School in the 

constituency of Regina South East, represented by Mr. Baker, 63 students under the direction of their 

teacher, Mr. Falkowsky; from the constituency of Kelsey represented by Mr. Messer, 24 students from the 

Zenon Park School under the direction of their teacher, Mr. K. Wilson. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members wish to join with me in extending to these students an extremely warm welcome 

to the Legislature and express the very sincere wish that they may find their stay here enjoyable and 

educational and we wish to wish each and everyone of them a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

SGIO AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE RATES FOR 1970-71 

 

HON. A.C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources): — As you know insurance companies 

throughout Canada face repair costs of alarming proportions. The escalating costs of replacing parts, 

increased labor costs, coupled with generous court awards have pushed insurance rates across Canada up 

each year and again this year Canadian motorists will face substantial increased insurance rates. Some points 

face a 30 per cent increase in the cost of insurance. Saskatchewan has not escaped the increased cost 

associated with the automobile insurance. Fortunately, however, steps taken by the Government to remove 

the impaired and irresponsible driver from the highways has resulted in a significant reduction in the 

accident rate. At a time when Canadian motorists continue to be plagued with soaring insurance costs I am 

pleased to advise motorists for the fourth consecutive year there will be no increase in Saskatchewan 

premium rates. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — No increase for private passenger, farm trucks, nor any category of vehicles. The 

success of The Automobile Accident Act has been such as to permit us not only to hold the line on insurance 

costs but to make some changes in the 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

102 

surcharges which will benefit Saskatchewan motorists. At the present time as Hon. Members know drivers 

are surcharged when an accident costs the fund in excess of $50. This amount we propose to raise to $75 

before a surcharge is applied. In addition we have liberalized the classification of drivers by increasing the 

number of rating points before surcharges are applied to them. This will exempt a number of motorists from 

surcharges for various infractions under The Vehicles Act. As a result, the number of operators who would 

be surcharged will be reduced this coming year from 28,000 to approximately 19,000 and this will exempt 

9,000 motorists from surcharges in the province this coming license year. 

 

The action we have taken here clearly demonstrates what benefits can accrue and will accrue to motorists as 

the result of improved driving habits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure all of us welcome the 

statement by the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance (Mr. Cameron). We have 

known, as he has pointed out, the fact that all across Canada higher and higher rates are being charged by the 

private insurance industry. We have long been convinced that a public corporation can provide automobile 

insurance at attractive rates. We have long been converted to the belief that crown corporations are 

exceedingly useful in this field and we welcome the fact that Members opposite now agree with us and that 

the people of Saskatchewan can continue to have the benefits of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

COMMENT BY PREMIER ON MANITOBA PULP MILL 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to put a question to the 

Government. The Premier made some statements in the House yesterday which are quoted in the 

Leader-Post this morning. With respect to his general comments, I have received a report from the office of 

the Premier of Manitoba in which the Premier comments that if Mr. Thatcher made the statements attributed 

to him he is mistaken. It is not in accordance with the facts. The Parsons and Whittemore approach was 

made . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If the Member wishes to ask a question I suggest he come to the point. It is improper to 

have a preamble as long as this when preparing your question. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The point I then make is in view of the fact that Mr. Schreyer has said if Mr. 

Thatcher made the statements attributed to him he is mistaken, it is not in accordance with the facts; is the 

Premier ready at this time either (a) to retract his statements or (b) to substantiate them with details of who, 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

103 

when and where? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, not only will I not retract but I will have more to say 

about this matter later this day. The facts are that the Government of Manitoba approached Parsons and 

Whittemore directly and indirectly to see if they would not be interested in taking over the mess that they 

have on their hands. If Mr. Schreyer wants to deny the truth that is up to him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Now before we enter into the Orders of the Day I recall that I was instructed by 

a motion of this House to introduce students. I am not quite sure how wide this latitude in regard to 

introductions went and how wide my responsibilities are. However, I did perhaps neglect to introduce 

another group of people in the gallery, the 25 members of the Eastview Homemakers Club of Saskatchewan 

with their president, Mrs. Claude Carefoot in the galleries. I am sure we wish to welcome them also and I 

apologize for not having mentioned them at the time that I mentioned the other people in the galleries. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Mitchell (Bengough) and the 

proposed amendment thereto of Mr. Blakeney (Leader of the Opposition). 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we listened to a two-hour dissertation by 

the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney). I along with most Members of this side of the House, found it 

rather strange that he made virtually no reference whatever to the Throne Speech that we are now debating, 

except to say that it depressed him. I don't blame him for being depressed, because the Throne Speech was 

one more nail in the coffin of Saskatchewan Socialists. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Members on this side of the House believe that the Throne Speech was sound, was 

responsible, and was constructive. Of course it didn't contain a lot of promises, which were not financially 

feasible, because this Government believes that in normal times a budget should be balanced. The Throne 

Speech mentioned a number of measures, some of them were to help the critical unemployment situation. Is 

the Leader of the Opposition opposed to the crash public works program? Is he against the commitment to 

find several thousand jobs for students? Is he opposed to the Athabasca pulp mill? He didn't say. Is he 

against the largest highway program in the history 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

104 

of this province, which is designed to create jobs? He didn't tell us. Then he came to agriculture. Is he 

opposed to the steps we are proposing to help the farmer, such as The Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act, the 

cash incentives to hogs, help for Indian Bands to get into cattle, SEDCO loans to farmers and so on? He 

didn't tell us. As far as education is concerned, is he opposed to the largest Provincial grants ever paid in 

history given to local governments to help keep the property tax down? He didn't tell us. Is he opposed to 

student representation on the Board of Governors at the University? He didn't tell us. Is he opposed to the 

expanded bursary program? He didn't tell us. Is he against increased pensions for teachers retired prior to 

1963? We had to bring that measure in because the Socialists didn't do anything for those teachers when they 

were in power . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — . . . but he didn't tell us. Where does he stand on the program that is going to help 

our northern and some southern airstrips obtain lighting? He didn't tell us. I am quite sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan would like to know whether he is opposed to another increase in the minimum wage. Is he 

opposed to increased benefits to The Workmen's Compensation Act? Is he against the new consumers' 

legislation? He didn't tell us. I know the people of Saskatchewan will want to know where he stands on the 

increase in the Homeowner Grant, because some of his Members opposed it when this legislation was 

originally introduced. There again, he didn't tell us. Yesterday all these questions went unanswered, while 

the Leader of the Socialists gave us the latest version of the Regina Manifesto — and really it didn't read 

much different than it did back in 1933. 

 

Now I say that the Throne Speech contained many sound proposals, perhaps not spectacular, but designed to 

provide good government for the people of this province. One thing the Leader of the Socialists did do, he 

talked about the NDP election platform, and that platform does make amazing reading, Mr. Speaker, because 

the approach is completely negative. Even that left winger or Waffler or whatever you call him, Don 

Mitchell, said that the new Leader and his party are completely negative and that if they don't do something 

to change it, they would not win the next election. Well I agree with them on that fact. We had expected the 

new Leader yesterday, we had expected the Socialists when they announced their new platform, to come out 

with something that was bold and imaginative and constructive. Instead all they did, was to announce a lot of 

warmed-over promises that they had been making for decades — pious hopes, cliches, platitudes and 

out-dated Socialist theories. As I said yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the only thing I liked about their 

platform was that it ensures the return of a Liberal Government in the next election. 

 

There is only one point that I must again mention. They said that an NDP government would abolish the 

Indian and Metis Department. What a plank! During all their years in office the Socialists did absolutely 

nothing for our native people. They had no programs for them, they had no interest in them, they were quite 

prepared literally to see them starve to death. Oh yes, I'll admit that they gave our native people liquor on 

election day. 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

105 

On taking office the Liberals embarked on a far-reaching program to help our native people. The Provincial 

Government has set the example, thousands have been hired through the new Indian and Metis Department. 

Today we have 700 or 800 working for the Civil Service and in our Crown corporations. We have asked the 

Department of Highways to have contractors hire a percentage of natives. We have asked that new buildings 

which are being constructed with government grants use a percentage of Indians as labor force. We have 

asked our hospitals to hire a percentage of Indians. We are not, of course, satisfied with the overall results, 

but we have made progress. As I said yesterday afternoon, when this Government formed office, after 20 

years of socialism, four reserves had electricity on them. Today 65 Indian reserves have electricity. We 

brought telephones, better housing and educational courses, highways and roads to Indian reserves. Yet now, 

the Socialists say they would throw out the only Indian and Metis Department in the whole Dominion of 

Canada. I say that that plank alone will antagonize every native in this province. It's a blatant example of 

petty political partisanship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Legislature has convened at a time when the economy generally appears to be regaining 

momentum. The past year has been a difficult one for the people of Saskatchewan. Our wheat farmers have 

faced problems more serious than any since the depression. Export sales have been slow, prices have been 

depressed, quotas have been disappointing. Since 40 per cent of the gross provincial product still comes from 

agriculture, the farmers' difficulties have permeated through our whole society. No one can say that all our 

farm problems are behind us. However, brightened export prospects have done much to dispel the gloom of 

a few months ago. The grain picture has improved mainly because of drought in Australia, drought in the 

Argentine, drought in Europe; and because of the corn blight in the United States. But I think the recent grain 

sale to Communist China was the best news that farmers have received for a long time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Officials of the Canadian Wheat Board tell us that this year we should have the 

largest grain sales in many, many years, probably an all time record of 700 million bushels. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Because of this fact, most authorities feel that by spring our farm economy should be 

staggering back to normal. During these months of adversity the Saskatchewan Liberal Government has 

continued vigorously to promote agricultural diversification. I don't propose to enumerate all our incentive 

programs this afternoon but I shall mention several. 

 

Under The Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act, Hon. Members will recall, farmers can go to any bank or any 

credit union in the Province, and borrow up to $6,000. The interest rate over 7 per cent for breeding stock is 

subsidized. I want to tell you, Sir, that by the end of last year 7,257 farmers had used that legislation, many 

of them to go into livestock for the first time, and they borrowed almost $27 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

106 

MR. THATCHER: — The Socialists always like to compare what's going on in Manitoba. What did their 

Mr. Schreyer do as far as farm credit last year? I quote the Canadian Press of December 19th: 

 

The Manitoba Agricultural Credit Corporation has loaned more money this year than in any 

year since its creation 11 years ago. Agriculture Minister Sam Uskiw said the Corporation 

had already loaned $12 million this year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — In other words, in 1970 the Saskatchewan Liberal Government loaned more than 

double the amount of money to farmers for agricultural purposes than did the Manitoba Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Because of this Liberal legislation our hog numbers are up 50 per cent, our beef 

heifers are up 35 per cent, sheep are up 10 per cent. I hope the Leader of the Opposition will realize these 

facts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The cost of this subsidized program will be approximately $220,000. As I said a 

moment ago, the Throne Speech has indicated that there will be new legislation to help our Indian Bands. 

Many of the native people have not been able to take advantage of the legislation we introduced at the last 

session because they don't own their own land. This Session we shall have amendments to the Act which 

will permit an Indian Band to go directly to a bank or a credit union. The Indian Bands will be able to 

borrow up to $18,000 for livestock herds, they will be able to get the interest rate subsidized and the 

Government will guarantee the loan. We hope that this program is of some benefit to the provincial 

agriculture economy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — SEDCO loans will be increased again this year. About 75 farmers have used this 

legislation since we began loaning money for feedlots, dairy herds and so on. We hope more will be taking 

advantage of this legislation in 1971. 

 

As I mentioned a few moments ago, our hog numbers have expanded in a most encouraging manner. We 

know that the price has dropped recently. However Saskatchewan farmers realize that hog prices depend to a 

very considerable degree upon the American market. In the United States over the past year thousands of 

farmers increased their hog numbers by feeding surplus grain and this has depressed prices, probably for a 

few more months. We are disturbed that at the same time, the federal hog subsidy has been discontinued. 

And so, as the Throne Speech indicated, because our Government feels it makes economic sense for farmers 

to remain in hogs, effective April 1st a subsidy of $2 per hog will be paid on all hogs grading 103 index or 

over. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

107 

MR. THATCHER: — Naturally that subsidy will only be paid on hogs produced in Saskatchewan. The Act 

will stay in force for 12 months, and then be reviewed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope farmers will not think me presumptuous if I offer one word of advice. The improved 

grain picture could tempt many Saskatchewan producers, again, to get out of livestock. I believe that such a 

trend could be fraught with danger. To protect themselves from future grain gluts, farmers should continue to 

expand all kinds of livestock feeding, including hogs. 

 

May I emphasize this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan Liberals believe that when the farmer has 

money, everyone has money. That's why we intend to take every possible step in the future to provide 

additional help toward diversification. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) will outline other programs when he 

speaks. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House, should like to think that in Saskatchewan the Liberals are 

the farm party. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Socialists, of course, dispute this claim. Their recently announced platform 

promised to restore and promote what they call "viable family farms". Their promises look pretty hollow 

when compared to what their actions were when they were in office. I was amazed yesterday, to read the 

amendment moved by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney). Just unbelievable. The Leader-Post said: 

 

Failure to save family farms charged by NDP. Opposition Leader Blakeney Thursday moved 

the NDP first non-confidence motion of the current Session of the Legislature on the grounds 

the Government failed to take steps to save family farms. 

 

What did they do when they were in office? In 1944 there were 132,000 family farms in Saskatchewan. The 

year they formed the Government 132,000! Twenty years later, when they left office, there were only 88,000 

family farms left. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — In other words, 44,000 fewer farms when Members like the Member for Wadena 

(Mr. Dewhurst) had something to do with this Government. With friends like the NDP the farmer doesn't 

need any enemies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I ask the people of Saskatchewan to note that, over the years, the Socialists have had 

just one main solution for farming problems. Ever since the days of the Regina Manifesto, right through to 

the days of Allan's manifesto, they've got one 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

108 

pledge — to socialize all the farm land. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — They contend that farm land should be owned by the government. Then, they will 

lease it back, perhaps to the owner, perhaps to the neighbor, depending on his political views. Recently those 

cries for socialization have increased in crescendo. Here's what the Young NDP said in Moose Jaw January 

20th, 1969: 
 

Saskatchewan Young NDP members, Sunday voted to press for nationalization of the farm 

lands in Canada. 
 
At the Provincial convention, later the same year, senior NDPers advocated the same kind of action. The Star 

Phoenix, July 11th: 
 

A resolution aimed at public ownership of farm land as a basic plank, was passed Thursday 

by an agricultural panel at the Saskatchewan NDP convention. 
 
A few days later, again according to the Star Phoenix: 
 

Members of the Saskatoon University provincial NDP constituency organization called 

Tuesday for public ownership of all Saskatchewan natural resources, including farm land. 

The resolution was passed with only one dissenting vote. 

 

In short, all the Socialists have to answer the farmer with or to give the farmer, is socialized land. I don't 

think rural residents will buy that rather frightening proposal. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Recently farmers in this Province were given even more reason to be suspicious of 

the NDP. A few months ago the NDP had a leadership convention. Three out of the four candidates, Mr. 

Speaker, were city labor lawyers, with little or no knowledge of agriculture. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — One of those city labor lawyers was elected leader. Later he appointed another city 

labor lawyer as Deputy Leader. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Neither one of them have any real knowledge of agriculture. Even their own 

Members admit that. Here's what the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) had to say. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Star Phoenix of May 21: 

 

NDP agriculture critic, Jack Messer, Wednesday expressed concern that neither of the 

provincial NDP leadership candidates, A.E. Blakeney of Regina nor Roy Romanow of 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

109 

Saskatoon, had taken a stand on the Province's depressed farming economy. Because of the 

attempts to gain his support, Mr. Messer said it was obvious that both candidates are having 

some trouble in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) said that neither one of the leadership candidates 

knew much about farming, we must agree. With all deference I say this, I don't think that the Hon. Member 

for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) or the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) would know a bale of hay 

from a load of oats, and neither do most of their colleagues. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, in recent years the NDP has become a straight labor-oriented party, 

owned, directed and financed by the trade unions. Hon. friends in the Opposition continue to contend that 

farmers and labor have the same interests and that they should unite under the NDP banner. Well, most rural 

residents are a bit dubious about that proposition. Year after year the farmer notes that every time the farmer 

is getting ready to move his wheat to market, it's either the dock workers who go out on strike or the railroad 

workers or the terminal elevator employees or the sailors on the Great Lakes and these strikes always disrupt 

the movement of grain. As spring approaches again, wouldn't you know that the dock workers are talking 

about going out on strike and also the railroad workers. During this last year we have seen a series of very 

major strikes in Saskatchewan. This Government has maintained that if inflation was to be brought under 

control, wage demands had to have some restraint exercised. We have insisted that wage increases be related 

to improved productivity. That was true all over Canada, but it was more than true in Saskatchewan at a time 

when our farmers had such a wheat crisis. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Our Government asked all unions whose salaries had to be paid partially or wholly 

by the Government, to keep their wage demands within 6 per cent, and I think most of our people in 

Saskatchewan, regardless of politics, supported the Government in that position. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, the NDP may say what they like, but the Liberal 

party is not anti-labor and we are very much aware that a well-paid labor force makes for a healthy 

community and a healthy province. However, in a period of crisis, in a period of raging inflation, we believe 

that labor must show some restraint. That is why we were obliged to take a firm stand in connection with 

wage settlements in the Civil Service, the hospital workers' contract, the pulp mill union, the teachers and the 

construction workers. 

 

In a general way, I think most people agree that the wage guidelines have worked and they have kept wage 

settlements within the ability of the Saskatchewan taxpayer to finance. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

110 

MR. THATCHER: — Circumstances have changed the past few months. The threat of inflation is still 

serious but the dangers of unemployment are even greater. Moreover, as I mentioned earlier, the grain 

picture has improved. At the same time we note that the Federal Wages and Prices Commission has ceased 

its effort to control wages. Under these circumstances, and taking the current economic situation into 

account, the Government believes now that the 6 per cent guidelines can be withdrawn. We still ask all 

unions and all corporations to use restraint in wage settlements, because in our opinion inflation has not yet 

been solved. However, we do feel that ordinary economic pressures will probably keep most wage 

settlements on a fair basis. Effective immediately, I wish to announce that the Saskatchewan Government's 6 

per cent guidelines are no longer in effect. 

 

Let me repeat then, that this Government will be just as generous to labor as we can. However, we have 

refused to be intimidated by tough union leaders in the past and we will refuse to be intimidated by tough 

labor leaders in the future. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I believe that the people of Saskatchewan, regardless of their politics, are fed up with 

irresponsible strikes. Today in Saskatchewan, as I said yesterday afternoon, in many cases we haven't got 

trade unions we've got political unions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Many of the Federation of Labour leaders, like the Member for Moose Jaw South 

(Mr. Davies), like the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek), like Bill Gilbey and a few others; if 

they spent half as much time agitating for the union as they do politically, the workers would be a lot better 

off. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I challenge the Federation of Labour to forget politics and begin dealing with bread 

and butter union matters on behalf of their members. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — In a major strike no one can win, the workers, their families, the company or the 

Provincial economy. This Saskatchewan Liberal Government is determined to find a better way of solving 

labor disputes, and in the not too distant future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure it has not gone without notice, that every time there is a labor dispute, regardless of 

the public interest, the Socialists side with the unions. It doesn't matter if the strike is against the farmers or 

whoever, the NDP are for labor. It has not gone unnoticed that the Socialists have told us that regardless of 

the public interest, if they are elected they'll abolish Bill 2. There is not much fear, I think, on the part of 

most people of Saskatchewan of this occurring. 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

111 

For all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I have noticed as I go around the province, for the first time people are 

leaving, former CCFers are leaving the NDP, not by the hundreds but by the thousands. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Now I turn to another critical problem. Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about 

unemployment. It has been serious. Across Canada there has recently been 8 per cent of the labor force 

unemployed. In the mighty United States it is almost 7 per cent. In Saskatchewan we have had special 

difficulties, because as I said a moment ago, 40 per cent of our gross product still comes from agriculture, 

primarily wheat. Not only have we had a wheat surplus but we have had a potash surplus. These surpluses 

have slowed down our economy. In passing I must say that Members on this side of the House take some 

satisfaction from the fact that Saskatchewan, month after month, has had the lowest unemployment rate in all 

Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — For example, the latest figures show that unemployment in Quebec was 10 per cent, 

British Columbia 9.4 per cent, Alberta 6.5 percent, Manitoba, under the Socialists 6.5 per cent, 

Saskatchewan 6.2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, if the Socialists in Manitoba have any easy answer to the 

unemployment problem, why haven't they demonstrated that fact? Why is it that month after month, under 

Premier Schreyer, there has been higher unemployment than there has been here in Saskatchewan? Mr. 

Speaker, we don't even have to go to Manitoba for an example. We had a Socialist government here for 20 

long years. When they were in power what did they do about unemployment? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Nothing. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — At this moment, 1st of February, we have about 21,000 unemployed, and this is most 

serious. However in 1958, under the Socialists official figures showed over 26,000 unemployed. In 1959, 

under the Socialists of Saskatchewan, 26,000 unemployed. In 1960, 26,500 unemployed. In 1961, the NDP 

had no answer to the unemployment problem when they were in office, and I suggest to you today, Sir, they 

have no more idea at this time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The hard facts are that unemployment is a world-wide phenomenon. It is being 

encountered by nations all over the world. There are many factors which affect unemployment — Canadian 

Fiscal Policy, Federal trade, American decisions. I have a word or so for you, Mr. Kramer. I wish you would 

stay in your seat. 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords): — Going to take a walk. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Private enterprise companies make many decision which 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

112 

affect employment. Thus effective provincial action which can be taken is limited. That doesn't mean to say 

that this Provincial Government has not been vitally concerned. I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that despite the 

fact that Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada, we are taking every feasible step 

to create additional jobs. 

 

As far as housing is concerned, at the last legislature session, we began to pay $500 grants to any citizen who 

built a new home. We have endeavored to persuade Central Mortgage to put as many low cost housing 

projects in Saskatchewan as possible. We are not satisfied, and we admit it. However, unbelievably high 

interest rates have hindered home construction. Moreover, there has been a population exodus, and that 

means that there has been a lessening of demand. But I assure you, that the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

(Mr. Guy) will do everything possible to increase housing construction in the months ahead. 

 

This Government has attempted to persuade municipal governments to proceed with public works. We've 

suggested to the local government board that it would be in the provincial interest to ease financial 

restrictions on local governments, so that public works could be expedited at the municipal level. I believe 

they have tried to be co-operative. We have made additional capital available to municipal governments 

through the Municipal Loan and Development Corporation and these measures have helped. Nevertheless, it 

would only be fair to say that tight money, high interest rates, and high levels of municipal taxation, have 

generally resulted in most municipalities being hesitant to proceed. 

 

For many months, the Provincial Government has been endeavoring to embark on a crash program of public 

works. Sir, I want to tell you that almost 200 projects are being commenced or are on the drawing boards. 

Some of them are very small. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Some of them are very large. We have taken just about every project that was on the 

drawing boards for the next three years and tried to expedite it. There are limits to that kind of a program. 

After all, we can't build new schools and new hospitals in communities where they are not needed. We have 

to relate our university buildings to operating costs. But I think our public works program is one of the best 

in this country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — And now, in addition, our Department of Natural Resources has embarked upon 

many park projects, where such projects involve high labor content. This program will particularly be helpful 

in areas with a substantial native population. 

 

At the same time, we have done our best, and not without success, to attract new industry. In the past year, 

with tight money, high interest rates and ever increasing freight rates, there have been some major 

difficulties. Nevertheless, through SEDCO we have made a great many loans for industrial purposes. Central 

Canadian Distillers down in Weyburn, involves about $3 million and 50 jobs. Meadow Lake Sawmills, up at 

Meadow Lake, 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

113 

I think was $6 million and 80 jobs. Native Metal Industries, here in Regina, helped abut 50 natives to gain 

employment. The Ipsco expansion, $2.5 million, 200 new jobs. Mid Canadian Plastics at Melville, 20 jobs. 

Roll-o-Flex Snowmobiles in Regina, 50 jobs. Big River Sawmill, being rebuilt, 110 jobs. Waldman and Paul 

Expansion, this is one we sneaked out of Winnipeg, 70 jobs. Canada Wire and Cable Expansion, Weyburn, 

20 new jobs. Simpson Lumber Expansion, 40 new jobs, and so on. In other words, we are not satisfied with 

the number of jobs, but we have made every effort, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Our efforts to attract new industry have not been made any easier by the attitudes of 

the Socialists. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Probably the greatest industrial achievement of this Liberal Government, up until 

yesterday, was the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — This enterprise has created about 1,000 jobs in the plant and in the woods. Jobs, 

moreover, in an area where pockets of real poverty exist. But ever since its inception, the Socialists have 

disparaged the mill. Today that mill is operating successfully. It's making a healthy profit. That fact is made 

all the more evident when you compare it to the Manitoba situation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Schreyer has had his mill for a year and a half or two years and it gets steadily 

worse by the day. The cost of the Prince Albert mill is $55 or $60 million. In Manitoba, the cost is $105 

million. We got a 30 per cent equity for our $60 million guarantee. In Manitoba, they didn't get one per cent 

equity, not one per cent. We got a mill that is producing about 900 tons per day. Over in Manitoba, they have 

a mill that produces 300 tons, if it ever gets started. The Prince Albert mill was put up almost completely 

with capital borrowed by the company. On the other hand the people of Manitoba have had to put up hard 

cash. After looking at the Manitoba picture, the people of Saskatchewan certainly realize what a fine deal 

this Government made at Prince Albert. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Socialists say that we made a poor deal financially. I told the House yesterday, 

we could take our equity in Prince Albert and sell it tomorrow for a profit of perhaps $15 million. But if we 

did that, my old friend Mr. Berezowsky, the Member for Prince Albert East-Cumberland, would be the first 

one to say that we are selling out to the Americans. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That a boy, Bill. 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

114 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, from the day this mill started, the Socialists have been critical. Why 

was little Allan raising so much cain yesterday? Because he knows that for 20 years the Socialists tried to get 

a pulp mill and they failed completely. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I went back in my files this morning, Mr. Speaker. I've got a newspaper clipping in 

my hand, I hope you can see it. Thursday, May 31, 1956. "Pulp Mill for Prince Albert," says the headline. 

"City selected as key centre of the biggest industry in Saskatchewan." Then the story goes on: 

 

Announcement of plans for the establishment in the Prince Albert area of a $60 million pulp 

mill was made today. Announcement of the plans were made in Regina at a press conference 

attended by the Hon. J. Brockelbank, Hon. L.F. McIntosh, and the Hon. C.M. Fines. 

 

This paper shows the kind of action the Socialists had as far as the pulp mill was concerned. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They have all gone to their reward. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert mill is operating successfully and well. It 

is making a major contribution to Saskatchewan, and it is providing almost 1,000 urgently needed jobs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Yesterday morning it was my great honor, with Mr. Landegger, to announce another 

pulp mill complex, half as large again as the Prince Albert mill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — 1,600 jobs directly, more than 4,500 indirectly. Most Members of this House know 

that the north west section of this province has consistently lacked adequate development. There have been 

areas of poverty for years in Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and so on, where people have never 

had permanent jobs. This mill will take hundreds and hundreds of these people off social welfare. But again, 

we get sour grapes from the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — All of the Opposition. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Again, we get sour grapes from all the Socialists. Why? What did they do about a 

pulp mill in Meadow Lake when they were in the government? Well, I found another clipping in my files 

this morning. I hope they can see it, April 3, 1957, the Saskatoon Star Phoenix and the headline says, "Start 

work this year of $40 million pulp mill in Meadow Lake area." The story goes on: 

 

A second multi-million dollar pulp mill operation in 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

115 

northern Saskatchewan was announced today in Regina. The scope of the new scheme was 

disclosed early today when Natural Resources Minister Kuziak announced the deal. 
 
And so on. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — For a number of years, Mr. Speaker, our Government has endeavoured to persuade 

Canadian companies to build these mills. We should prefer Canadian companies, but despite incentives, 

despite guarantees, we have not been able to get one Canadian company to show an interest in either Prince 

Albert or Meadow Lake. That was the reason we approached Parsons and Whittemore. And, as I said 

yesterday, the new agreements on Meadow Lake will be signed just as soon as the Legislature ratifies it. The 

quicker the NDP vote for Meadow Lake, as they will — oh, they will talk against it but they will vote for it, 

Mr. Speaker — then the quicker we shall get those thousand jobs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I was rather amused, if that's the word, at a press conference held by the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney) this morning. He was even weaker in that press conference, I am told, than he 

was yesterday in the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — "Why," he said, "we're not against the pulp mill, but we are against those Americans 

taking over all of our resources." 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — When they were trying to get their never, never pulp mills, whom did they try to get 

to take the construction? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Alice in Wonderland . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I quote from the Industrial Saskatchewan in July 1956. This is a Prince Albert pulp 

mill announcement again. 

 

Financing for the nearly $60 million project is under way, with participation by interests in 

New York. 

 

That's where they were going to get the money, Mr. Speaker. What about Meadow Lake? Where were they 

going to get their money for the $40 million Meadow Lake mill? Well, I quote my old friend Alex Kuziak. 

"He confirmed in a telephone interview an agreement signed by himself, of last September between Ellis E. 

Patterson and Associates of Studio City, California, and the Provincial Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, what then is the situation? Here are these Socialists who tried to get a 

pulp mill all over the 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

116 

United States, who offered terms that were far easier than this Government has ever given, who failed to get 

American capital, now criticizing the Liberals for getting a pulp mill and using the kind of capital they 

couldn't obtain. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I say, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the people of Saskatchewan, the story of the pulp 

mill is a typical example of Liberal success versus Socialist failure. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I say again today, when the Hon. Provincial Treasurer (D.G. Steuart) brings up those 

agreements, I'll bet we shall see every Socialist weaseling around, talking against the Meadow Lake mill, but 

you will see them vote for it when the time comes, because they would not dare to do otherwise. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — There is another project that I want to talk about, and I am going to have a fair 

amount more to say before the Session is ended. That is the Gulf Mineral project — Uranium Mine at Rabbit 

Lake. This development will mean about $50 million, give employment to 550 people during construction, 

and when it is in operation, it will employ about 400 men. As well a whole new community in our northern 

area will be developed. These are the kind of projects that Liberals are finding to provide jobs, and yet the 

Socialists are against any kind of foreign capital. Every time you talk about foreign capital, the Socialists are 

against it. But as I said yesterday, Premier Ed Schreyer of Manitoba is down in New York from time to time 

trying to find all the American capital that he can. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They don't trust him. That's what they told me. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — We know from hard and bitter experience that a new and developing country like 

Canada lacks adequate capital. If we are to proceed with these immense projects, we must take capital where 

we can find it. Of course, we can wait for Canadian investment. But let us realize that it could be 50 years 

before there is enough Canadian investment capital available. The choice we have is to take capital now, 

where we can find it, or wait 50 years. I think most of our students and others looking for jobs want this 

Government to proceed now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Of course, the Socialists with their usual consistency say this Government, first of 

all, isn't finding jobs, then as soon as we do find some jobs, they are opposed to it. What is even more 

serious, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are even threatening some of the industries which this Government has 

obtained. Private enterprise companies! Our province now has 10 potash mines, eight of them located in 

Saskatchewan since this Government took office. 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

117 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Their total investment exceeds $800 million. I remind the people of Saskatchewan 

that these mines are paying sales tax, they are paying royalties, and if they make any profits, they pay 52 per 

cent corporation tax. Those millions of dollars in revenue help us build hospitals and schools and highways. 

Yet in their most recent "Allan's Manifesto" the NDP have threatened to socialize the potash industry. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said yesterday afternoon, the NDP went broke running a box factory, they bankrupted a 

woollen mill, they lost their shirt in a shoe factory, they lost everything in a tannery, they lost hundreds of 

thousands of dollars in a brick mill, and they did likewise with an airline. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 

without any doubt in the world, they demonstrated that they couldn't run a peanut stand. Now they are going 

to take over $800 million worth of potash. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — It's the silliest election plank I ever heard of in 25 years in politics. As I said, who is 

going to run it? The Member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst), the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes), or the 

Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer), or perhaps one of the other Members opposite. My guess is that 

maybe Henry would have time to run it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Apart from being silly, Mr. Speaker, that suggestion is fraught with danger, because 

the potash companies could lose their markets overnight. Do you think the purchasers down in the United 

States, if they heard that a lot of Socialist nuts had taken over the industry, would continue buying from 

them. I tell the workers in that industry, the easiest way to lose their jobs is to see the NDP take the industry 

over. The potash industry had problems, but because this Government had the courage to introduce 

prorationing, orderly marketing and sensible pricing, very few of the potash workers have lost their jobs. We 

have kept the jobs for the workers. 

 

The people living in the North should realize that the NDP are hindering development in that great area. 

Here is what the vice-president of Gulf Minerals had to say a few months ago and I quote the Leader-Post. 

This is a man who is helping to bring this $50 million uranium refinery into northern Saskatchewan and I 

quote: 

 

The vice-president credited the Provincial Government for helping to promote mining in 

Saskatchewan and in particular for its role in helping to ensure that Gulf can proceed with its 

project. 

 

I quote again: 

 

20 or 25 years ago, said Dr. Early, when I was working in northern Manitoba no mining 

company in its right mind would work in Saskatchewan 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

118 

MR. THATCHER: — 

 

With today's Provincial Government it is a different situation. The present Administration 

has brought mining to the province. 

 

Those are not my words, Mr. Speaker, they are Dr. Early's. Mind you, they are very profound in my opinion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that outside companies must act as good corporate citizens. Liberals believe that we 

must have investment laws which will protect our people in every way. I assure our people that the 

Government of Saskatchewan will continue to find job-creating industries. I think that we have one or two 

surprises, perhaps before the Session is ended. 

 

The Government is also perturbed about student unemployment. The Minister of Labour (Mr. MacLennan) 

before too long will announce a program, under which, we think we can hire a great many students this 

summer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Let me emphasize that this Government is very much aware of the misery inflicted 

by unemployment. We know the terrible and critical problem which faces the province and the nation in 

creating jobs. Probably our greatest task in the months ahead will be to restore the confidence of the private 

sector, because it is the private sector which must build the industries, the businesses, the stores and the 

houses. We want an atmosphere which will make it possible for them to do so. 

 

I want to turn now to the field of education. This Government gives it a top priority. We give it in cash, not 

in words like the Socialists. We all recognize that our Province's future is determined by the quality of 

education which we provide. In a world that grows even more complex, the young person who does not 

obtain the very best education of which he is capable, is handicapped for life as he seeks employment. May I 

remind the House that when we formed the Government, $59 million was being spent on education. This 

year we shall spend $153 million on education. At the last session the largest increases in provincial grants 

in history were announced. Most communities were able to hold their mill rates as a result. Mr. Speaker, I 

think we are going to do the same thing again this Session. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Let me say again, that the Liberal Government accepts the principle that an even 

greater portion of educational costs must be shifted away from the property owner. As the Throne Speech 

indicated, the Government this Session intends to increase the Province's share of these overall costs. Some 

would say that the entire burden of education costs should be removed from the property owner. Some of my 

NDP friends ran around making such a claim. We should all like to see that, if it were economically feasible. 

But to take that kind of action, the Provincial Treasurer would have to find another $84 million. If you found 

it by means of the sales tax, that tax would have to go from 5 to 12 per cent. If you took it from the 

corporation tax, corporation taxes would have to go to 76 per cent. If you wanted to take it from other fields, 

it would almost be equally 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

119 

gigantic and disruptive. As far as Liberals are concerned, we are going to try and shift that burden, but we are 

going to try and take it from all the various tax fields. Let's not try to kid anyone, as the NDP are doing, that 

this shift is going to happen overnight. 

 

In the past 12-month period all school budgets have been submitted to the Department of Education for 

perusal. The Government feels that this exercise has been most successful in restraining and controlling 

expenditures. This means that, in general, budget reviews have been well received by school boards. 

 

We have heard a good deal about the student-teacher ratio. Over the years the annual salary bill for teachers 

has been very high because of a combination of three factors. First of all, general wage increases; secondly, 

an increase in the general level of teacher qualifications; thirdly, a gradual lowering of the provincial 

student-teacher ratio from almost 24.1 in 1960 to less than 21.1 in 1969. I want to say a word to my teacher 

friends. The NDP are running around in their manifesto, saying that they will throw out the student-teacher 

ratio. Let me tell you, Sir, that when we took over from the Socialists, the student-teacher ratio was 23.1 to 1 

and it went down to about 19.5 to 1. With the action we took this past year it went up to about 21.4 to 1. But, 

it is still almost two students per room less than it was in the days of the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — We know that when that ratio goes up by one student, we save roughly $3 million. 

We think we can do this without lowering the quality of education. We make no apology for taking these 

measures to restrain escalating costs. We make no apology either for the quality of our educational programs, 

which compare most favorably with any other province in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — This process has caused some disruption but we feel that the kinks in the system can 

be eliminated during 1971. The Government does not feel that it will be necessary to proceed much further 

in this direction at most provincial centres. 

 

During 1970, the Government made some exceptions to the new ratio in its grant formula, recognizing that 

certain rural areas were somewhat unique. Despite this fact, a few unit boards used the changed ratio as a 

reason for closing some low-enrolment schools. The Department, under the old legislation inherited from the 

NDP, had no authority to interfere. As the Throne Speech indicated, legislation will be introduced which in 

the future will require the concurrence of the Department of Education where a board proposes to close 

schools offering instruction in the lower grades. The Government feels that there is a limit to the time that 

young children should be obliged to spend in school buses, and that community-based schools should be 

maintained for younger children in rural Saskatchewan, wherever practical 

 

Mr. Speaker, some teachers will be interested in the pension proposal of the Government in the Throne 

Speech. Many teachers retired in the NDP days with pensions which were very low. So 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

120 

this Session we are bringing in reforms, that will increase the pensions of any teacher who retired prior to 

April, 1963. 

 

We are going to do something about bursaries in post-secondary schools. There have been a lot of 

weaknesses in our bursary programs. This year we will sharply expand the number of dollars available. This 

year we shall set up a bursary committee which will go over the priorities involved. Hopefully those 

bursaries will be paid in the coming semester. What is more, for the first time in history, we are going to pay 

bursaries for technical school students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, today, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the subject of pollution. Most authorities today agree that 

pollution is the number one global problem of the 1970s. We have seen what has happened in the Great 

Lakes. We have seen what has happened in Japan and other countries. There are many difficulties that 

Governments must face in trying to clear up pollution. The costs are massive and overwhelming. Pollution 

sometimes originates in one country or one province and spreads to others. Federal states, such as Canada, 

have jurisdictional problems. The Provincial Government has always accepted its responsibility as far as 

pollution is concerned. 

 

I want to talk about just a few of our programs. To ensure that air pollution stays under control, the 

Government passed legislation giving powers to the Minister of Public Health to control air pollution. A 

series of sample stations have been established in our major cities to collect data. In addition, special tests 

are being conducted to determine air pollution from specific industries. A special study is being conducted to 

determine the effect of emissions on agriculture. 

 

Water pollution control is the responsibility of the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission. Control is 

achieved primarily through a system of licences governing the construction and operation of sewage works. 

Before any industry or municipal government may build or extend sewage works, the Commission must 

approve the design and the location. The Commission also conducts detailed studies in order to determine 

the causes of water pollution. The Government will introduce this Session, legislation respecting the 

prevention of pollution from feedlots. Legislation respecting non-returnable bottles will also come forward. 

Amendments to The Water Resources Commission Act will provide the Government with the power to act 

promptly and forcefully in cases of severe water pollution. 

 

I don't think our record is very bad in Saskatchewan because we have the least pollution of any province in 

the nation. We have been rather fortunate this past year in that where we have found pollution we have been 

able to quickly control the source. We had some trouble with one of the co-ops and IPSCO which was 

turning out 40 pounds of mercury emission a day. We took action that reduced the emission to one-quarter of 

one pound a day. We have had problems with the sewage systems of Prince Albert and Saskatoon. We have 

required them to build new sewage plants and have helped them financially in order to speed up the 

construction. We have taken other measures to make sure that pollution is kept within reasonable bounds. 

 

In the new Socialist Manifesto it was announced that the NDP would set up a new department for pollution 

control. How interesting, Mr. Speaker? During their 20 years in office, they 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

121 

displayed not the slightest interest in the subject of pollution. They passed not a single meaningful Bill. They 

took not a solitary step to combat the pollution evil. Now that they are in the Opposition, they are going to do 

something about pollution. As usual, Mr. Speaker, they are too little too late. A few months ago, the 

Government asked the Interdepartmental Committee on Pollution to make an in-depth study and analysis of 

all our anti-pollution legislation. We also asked the Committee to look into the programs operating in other 

provinces. As a result, I wish to announce today that The Clean Environment Authority Act will be 

introduced shortly in the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The new Act, The Clean Environment Authority Act, will have the powers to do 

almost everything to control pollution in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we believe this legislation to be only 

the latest of very progressive actions taken by this Government in the field of pollution. I invite Members of 

the Legislature to compare our record on environmental control with that of other provinces. Pollution 

problems have been less severe in Saskatchewan. Our Government intends to keep it that way. The Minister 

of Municipal Affairs will give details of the new Branch when the Bill is before the Legislature. 

 

What about the Province's economic future during 1971? Saskatchewan was the first province to experience 

economic difficulties that later engulfed all of Canada. We believe, on this side of the House, that 

Saskatchewan has a chance of restored prosperity ahead of the rest of the nation. On what basis do I make 

that claim? First of all, because as I said earlier, overall grain sales will be at an all-time record. Agricultural 

purchasing power this year will substantially improve. Due to the conservation policies of this Government 

the potash industry is gradually being restored to health. Sales will go up 10 per cent in 1971. Both the 

American and Canadian Governments are expecting record housing starts during 1971. The increased 

demand for lumber in the export market should help our lumbering industry. As the Prince Albert pulp mill 

expands production, and as the other mill comes into production, manufacturing expectations can be termed 

favorable. Of course the great Athabasca pulp mill project and the Gulf mineral project should be a great 

shot in the arm for our northern areas. 

 

There are several other major factors which should spur business activity. The Federal Government has 

announced easier credit, easier money, lower interest rates, and even deficit financing. That will put 

additional cash into the economy. Moreover, with President Nixon having an American election in the 

future, the effects of that economy will improve and spill over into Canada. Then, of course, the effects of 

our crash public works program will really be felt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we know that the people of Saskatchewan have 

experienced many difficulties in recent months. But I think they have weathered the storm, and I think they 

can look forward to the future with optimism. I suggest to you today, Sir, that the Provincial Government has 

taken every reasonable or feasible step to cope with our economic 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

122 

difficulties, even though many of them have been beyond our control. The recent recession was a unique 

one. It was not caused by shortages or poverty. Rather it was caused by great over-abundances and surpluses. 

I am convinced in the next decade people around the world will need our foodstuffs, people around the 

world will need our natural resources. I suggest to the Opposition, if they could have less talk of gloom and 

doom and more talk of optimism, the people of Saskatchewan would benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that I shall vote against the amendment and support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.M. McPHERSON (Regina South West): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on the Throne Speech I 

should first like to congratulate the mover and the seconder for the job well done. I think both of these 

gentlemen covered all the areas of the province, the economic situation and the general well-being of this 

great province of ours. 

 

I should also, Mr. Speaker, like to congratulate the Member from Saskatoon City Park University (Mr. 

Charlebois), on a job well done in organizing the Winter Games and bringing all the great people he did to 

Saskatoon, the competitors, the spectators and also bringing with the official opening, the Governor General 

of Canada, the Prime Minister, Mr. John Diefenbaker and Mr. Stanfield. This was indeed a great group and 

has contributed a great deal to the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — I should also, Mr. Speaker, say a few words about the Prime Minister's visit to 

Regina, along with the 20 Cabinet Ministers. I think that this was indeed a great occasion and contributed a 

great deal to the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Here these Ministers were able to meet with our Cabinet Ministers and with people from all over the city of 

Regina and Saskatchewan in general to discuss the problems that we have. 

 

First the Federal Cabinet met with our own Provincial Cabinet and they had a good meeting. Then Mr. 

Basford met with a CAC group, about 80 attending this meeting, at Mrs. Helen Brown's. Mr. Herb Grey met 

with the Jewish community, over 100 attended. I could go on and on and mention the different meetings, but 

it was a great thing for Saskatchewan. 

 

During the whole day of this visit to Saskatchewan, the only problem the Prime Minister encountered was a 

group of 30 NDPers, I should imagine, because standing in the front were the three men who wrote the new 

platform for the CCF, Warren Carragata, Stanley Rand, and also the great Don Mitchell. Here were the three 

unwashed gentlemen who were going to lead Saskatchewan, who had dictated the great program that you are 

going to put on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was the only problem that the Prime Minister encountered of all the good citizens of 

Saskatchewan. And when you have to consider these three, you don't have to 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

123 

worry too much about what they are going to do. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — I should like to deal, Mr. Speaker, with a subject that every citizen of Regina is 

interested in. They want to know what the Provincial Government is doing for the city of Regina. It is doing 

a lot, Mr. Speaker. Regina is the capital city of the Province of Saskatchewan and it is the largest, the fastest 

growing and most progressive city in the province. 

 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney), who can never get his facts straight, said that there 

were 100 businesses closed in the city of Regina, closed or went out of business. He didn't mention how 

many new ones had come in, which is typical of the Leader of the Opposition, and so we checked and I think 

that I would get someone over there, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, to check your figures so that you can be 

straight. 

 

Now take the year 1969, and I wish that you would write this down, there were 56 businesses closed or went 

out of business and there were 56 opened up in the city of Regina. For the year 1970 — your great man who 

looks into figure, you reported 100 — but actually there only were 98. And I want you to get this, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition, 138 new businesses opened in the city of Regina. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Your Provincial Government has over the past years contributed a great deal and 

will continue to contribute to the city of Regina. 

 

I should like to deal with urban assistance. Regina has a high standard of pavement and our streets are 

second to none in this province. Since 1964, Mr. Speaker, your Provincial Government has contributed 

through the Department of Highways well over $6 million in urban assistance. Included in that sum, Mr. 

Speaker, are contributions of almost $400,000 towards the Albert Street subway; over $250,000 on the 

Wascana Parkway; and more than $700,000 on the Ring Road. Along with this, Mr. Speaker, it has 

contributed $650,000 to new roads in the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has done much for education in the province and is proud of its contributions 

towards educational facilities. In 1964 operating grants given by the Provincial Government to the school 

boards in Regina amounted to $2,600,000. That was in 1964. In 1970 these grants have risen to over $6 

million, an increase of 230 per cent. In addition to this, Mr. Speaker, in the last six years the Provincial 

Government has contributed another $6,500,000 in buildings and other special grants. A great addition to our 

city is the Vocational A High School which is being built for $3,100,000. Here students who were not able to 

obtain their regular programs will be able to attend classes and I think that this is a great boon for Regina. 

 

On the Regina Campus, Mr. Speaker, since 1963 when the buildings were commenced, your Provincial 

Government has contributed over $58 million to capital construction. The Regina 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

124 

Campus is the city's ninth largest employer with a total payroll this year of over $7,600,000. In addition to 

this, Mr. Speaker, the 4,500 students on the Campus spend another $6 million for books, board and 

entertainment in the city. The economic benefit of the University to Regina is therefore substantial, Mr. 

Speaker, to say the very least. 

 

The Department of Municipal Affairs has over the past six years in this city contributed almost $600,000 for 

housing. Since 1968 also our Indian and Metis Department has given another $100,000 towards the housing 

of our native people in Regina. In addition to this the Province has contributed, since 1964, almost $200,000 

towards the city's winter works program to help provide employment. In 1970, the Legislature also made 

grants of $143,000 available to the city to assist in both policing and snow removal. And this is so important 

to the city of Regina at this time. 

 

In Public Works, Mr. Speaker, the Public Works Program helped to keep unemployment low. Since 1964 

your Provincial Government has spent almost $16 million in Public Works Programs in Regina. These work 

programs, Mr. Speaker, have included a $2,800,000 expenditure on the Provincial Correctional Institute and 

over $6 million on the Centre of the Arts and over $700,000 on the Veterinary College here in Regina. In 

addition to this, Mr. Speaker, it was announced in December that an additional $7,500,000 would be spent in 

Regina during 1971, a great boon for the city and something that we need. This includes, Mr. Speaker, a $6 

million expenditure for student residences on the Regina Campus and over $1 million for the nursing homes. 

 

I now wish to say a few words about the Department of Welfare. As everyone knows our service 

organizations in the city of Regina are second to none. We have great organizations in our United Appeal 

and they are all working for the good of the community. The Welfare Department, since 1964, for the 

various service organizations in Regina such as the Martha House, Ranch Ehrlo, Regina Senior Citizens Day 

Care Centre and the YMCA has spent $195,000. In addition, Mr. Speaker, over $1,400,000 has been 

allocated in the past six years towards the maintenance and doubling the numbers of the homes in the 

housing units that are included in the special care units. 

 

I should like to say a few words about industry. Much of Regina's growth and prosperity is due to the large 

number of industries that have been attracted to the city of Regina in the past few years. Since 1964, with the 

assistance of the Provincial Department of Industry and Commerce, over 45 new ventures have been 

undertaken in the city alone involving expenditures of $17,281,000. SEDCO was directly involved in a 

majority of these projects. I have said and will say again, Mr. Speaker, Regina needs more industry to keep 

up our tax base. 

 

The Centre of the Arts is something that this Government has contributed to the city of Regina and no city is 

complete without a good cultural and artistic centre. The Centre of the Arts is the pride and joy of Regina 

and of all South Saskatchewan. When the city found that it was unable to complete construction of the 

Centre of the Arts, the Provincial Government moved in and donated $6 million to the completion of this 

important project and this is a great credit to the Government 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

125 

MR. McPHERSON: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about the South Saskatchewan 

Hospital Centre. Good progress is being made on the construction of the hospital at Regina. It is expected 

that this 302-bed hospital, costing just under $16 million will be completed in the latter part of 1972. The 

Federal Government has designated this hospital as an approved health training facility, thereby making the 

project eligible for cost-sharing under the Health Resources Fund regulations. The South Saskatchewan 

Hospital Centre will function as the main teaching and research centre in the southern part of the province 

for medical and paramedical educational programs. To facilitate this teaching responsibility, the Centre will 

be affiliated with the College of Medicine of the University of Saskatchewan at Saskatoon. The full time 

heads of major departments will be appointed jointly by the Hospital Centre and the College of Medicine. 

This extension of the clinical resources available to the College of Medicine will provide a wider range of 

clinical experience for undergraduate and graduate medical students. In addition, Mr. Speaker, it is planned 

to have programs of continuing medical education for practising physicians. 

 

The Hospital Centre's medical teaching program will be co-ordinated with other health oriented programs at 

the Regina Campus, University of Saskatchewan and the technical health sciences complex that is soon to be 

created on a site adjacent to the hospital. The Hospital Centre will serve as a resource centre for the 

provision of clinical experience to students in a wide range of programs, including: degree and diploma 

nurses, certified nursing assistants, orderlies, laboratory x-ray and operating room technicians. 

 

An active research program, Mr. Speaker, is planned to ensure that highly qualified staff can be attracted and 

retained by this hospital. It is expected that a research program will also enable Saskatchewan to contribute 

to the solution of some of our health problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to say a few words on health care. I should like to say that this Government is interested 

in the health care of its citizens. Citizens of Regina and surrounding municipalities have always enjoyed 

good hospitals in the city of Regina. In the past six years this Government has contributed $71 million in aid 

of the operations of both hospitals. In capital construction in six years, this Government has also provided 

for the city of Regina a total at the Regina General Hospital under construction for six years of $2,355,575; 

at the Grey Nuns' Hospital $271,860; the Wascana Hospital $82,000; South Saskatchewan Hospital 

$16,500,000 and at the Regina Red Cross Clinic $155,000. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, this all adds up, in six years from 1964 to the present time, to $19,364,435 

contributed by this Government to the city of Regina. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like you to take a look during the CCF's time from 1944 to 1964 and I am going 

to give them all the credit in the world. For the General Hospital in 1950 you contributed to construction 

costs $1,273,000, in 1954 - $554,000. In the same year you also made grants to the isolation ward of 

$135,000, in 1959 - $284,000. That all adds up, Mr. Speaker, in 20 years for the Regina General Hospital to 

$2,246,000. Now let's see what you did for the Grey Nuns' and we shall go right back. You didn't do 

anything in 1944, 1945, 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

126 

1946 and 1947, and you can tell me if I am wrong. In 1951 it was $902,000; 1961 - $99,000; 1962 - $19,300; 

1963 a great year - $1,500. That is what you gave to the Grey Nuns' Hospital. In 1964 - two grants. One for 

$91,000 and the other for $89,000. This adds up to a total from 1944 to 1964 of $1,103,000. This is a grand 

total for the city of Regina for 20 years of $3,349,000. 

 

Now let us compare what the Liberals have done in six years and that totals $19,364,000. 

 

Both Regina hospitals must be kept up and must be kept growing. I sincerely believe that under one board, 

the General and the Grey Nuns' can come together to keep these two great institutions growing. 

 

I should like to deal for a few minutes with the problems of the 1950s and early 1960s. From 1954, Mr. 

Speaker, the Board at the General Hospital realized that something must be done to upgrade the number of 

beds and also to upgrade the hospital. The hospital had a large waiting list and there was overcrowding and 

so the Board called in consultants to come and see what could be brought up-to-date. In November of 1959, 

the Elerbe people made a report and I can say that under three different Ministers of the previous 

administration, the Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies), the Member from Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney), and Mr. Erb, these recommendations were all turned down although the Government had told the 

hospital to go ahead. Because of the Medicare crisis in 1962 or whatever it might want to blame it on, the 

Government wouldn't do a thing for the city of Regina. 

 

This brings the hospitals up-to-date, Mr. Speaker, and we do hope that they will be updated as fast as 

possible and brought to the status that they should be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the Premier for his talk today and also the Deputy Premier, Mr. 

Steuart, first for the extraordinary effort that they made on behalf of the Saskatchewan residents in leading to 

the establishment of a second pulp mill. This mill will provide jobs for thousands of workers, many of them 

of Indian ancestry. The $117 million venture comes at a time when the economy of North America is 

sagging. Members on your left, Mr. Speaker, would like you to believe that the economy is sagging only in 

Saskatchewan when informed sources in both Canada and the United States frankly admit it is a general 

condition. It is my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that these great things that are happening in Saskatchewan at this 

time will certainly improve the conditions now existing. 

 

As a Member of the Lakeview Regina Constituency, personally I am delighted to see these projects because 

many of them are being carried out in the city of Regina and provide jobs here. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that this is a great thing for the province and also I will support 

the motion that is before the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. MESSER (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I first want to congratulate our new provincial Leader, Mr. 

Allan Blakeney. After being elected Leader of the New Democratic Party at one of the most dynamic and 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

127 

enthusiastic leadership campaigns this province has ever seen. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — He has wasted no time in the glory of leadership for leadership alone. He has 

aggressively involved himself in the capacity of mobilizing a team with links of support to every area and to 

every segment of society in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — He has appointed as his Deputy Leader, Roy Romanow, the Member from 

Saskatoon-Riversdale to further strengthen that team. I also offer my congratulations to him on that 

appointment. 

 

In answer to the Members opposite that they are relieved in the Liberal party that they will be contending 

with Allan Blakeney in the next election rather than Roy Romanow, and that they will be dealing with two 

labor lawyers which is not a fact, I must remind them that those to your right, Mr. Speaker, have a hardware 

dealer and a clothing merchant leading that party. I doubt very much whether the farming electorate of the 

Province of Saskatchewan will be putting any faith in them. However the farmers have faith in the New 

Democratic Party and the platform that it has. 

 

Members opposite are desperate in their attempt to establish a smoke screen. They suggest that Allan 

Blakeney can be handled easier because they know him better, therefore making it probable that they could 

win the next election whenever it may be. This is ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. What they are really trying to do 

is implant in the elector's minds that there are fallacies in our program and there is some weakness in our 

party. This simply is not true. If the Members opposite were moving around their constituencies they would 

know that this party is prepared and will win the next election whenever that election is called. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — I want, Mr. Speaker, to straighten out the Member for Lakeview South (Mr. McPherson) 

on one point he made in regard to the number of firms that went out of business in the city of Regina in 

1970. I have here a letter from Mr. Bruce Smith, City Manager for the city of Regina. He states that 166 

firms have gone out of business in the city of Regina, and he attaches a list naming some of those businesses. 

Thatcher Hardware happens to be one of them. That's the administration of the Premier of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Not 98, but 166, all listed here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier stated in this Assembly yesterday that the program of the New Democratic Party and the 

programs it has advocated in the field of agriculture is an insult to the intelligence of Saskatchewan farmers. 

It is obvious from that statement, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has not seen or read the program that we in 

the New Democratic Party are proposing. It is further obvious that he has not listened or was absent from the 

Chamber when our Leader highlighted some of the policies that we would implement for the farming 

industry in this 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

128 

province. For if he had he would know that farmers throughout the length and width of this province are 

talking about our policy and how it would meet completely the problems of the day and provide assistance 

and solutions and stability to the farmers. 

 

The Premier never seems to change, for when he is backed into a corner by logic and fact, his mistake is to 

talk louder and louder about less and less. This is exactly what you saw him do in this Legislature yesterday 

and today. Yesterday he talked loud and clear about the Socialists and their program for farmers in 

Saskatchewan during their 20 years of government. Not to anyone’s surprise he had nothing good to say 

about that 20 years of CCF government. In fact, the Premier fell back on his old acid test routine about 

population exodus during that 20-year period. He made reference to the depopulation of farmers from 1944 

to 1964. We don't dispute the fact that there was a depopulation of farms in the Province of Saskatchewan 

during that time. There was a good reason for depopulation. In 1944 there were large numbers of farmers 

who were farming a quarter section of land or less in this province. Since that time, due to changes in 

farming practices and the introduction of modern farm machinery, farm size had to increase. But I want to 

state emphatically that the farm size by 1964 had reached a size that would provide stability for farmers on 

their land. It would also make for and maintain a desirable social and rural way of life. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Therefore, efforts should have been taken in order to stabilize that number of farmers. 

 

In 1964 the last year the CCF Government was in power, there were 87,000 commercial farms in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. In seven years time under the present Liberal Government we find the number of 

commercial farms reduced to 65,000, a loss of 22,000 farms in that seven-year period of time. A drastic 

reduction in farming numbers shows the concern the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan has towards 

farmers and farming. 

 

Still shouting louder and louder the Premier has to make reference to the performance of the Power 

Corporation under the former government. I just want to refresh the Premier’s memory, and the memories of 

the Members opposite, that the Power Corporation was formed by the Liberal party in 1929. When the CCF 

took office as the Government of Saskatchewan in 1944 there was an astronomical number of 132 farms 

serviced by power. In 15 years, Mr. Speaker, it managed to electrify 132 farms. In the following 20 years 

under the CCF Government there were 60,000 farms electrified in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Virtually every farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan had electric power by 1964. 

Obviously, when the Premier yells nonsense he is completely unknowledgeable as to what he is talking 

about. If he were knowledgeable he would not be making the statements he just made in this Legislature. He 

knows and his colleagues know including the Member from Athabasca, that there is need for a Land Bank 

Commission which could purchase 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

129 

land offered voluntarily on the market, at competitive prices and lease this land guaranteeing tenure on the 

basis of need, with the option to buy with the objective of promoting the maximum number of viable farms 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Members to your right, Mr. Speaker, know the need for such policy in 

Saskatchewan, the people in Saskatchewan know the need for such policy, but does the Liberal Government 

come forward with policies such as this? No! But the New Democratic Party does. 

 

The Premier and his colleagues know the need for a farmers' Bill of Rights which would provide information 

and legal advisory service for farmers in financial difficulties, which would re-activate and strengthen the 

Provincial Mediation Board. This would guarantee the provision of electrical power and other essential 

services to farmers unable to pay their bills because of circumstances beyond their control. 

 

The Members to your right, Mr. Speaker, know the need for such policies. Again the farmers of 

Saskatchewan know the need for such policies, but does the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan bring 

forward such policies? No, they do not. But the New Democratic Party does. 

 

The Premier and his colleagues know the need for the downward adjustment of property tax mill rates, for 

basic school operating costs on homes, farms and small businesses. Do the Members to your right again 

introduce such policies? No, they do not, but the New Democratic Party would do so. 

 

I could go on and on with the obvious needs of the people of Saskatchewan today, all of which have gone 

unrecognized by the Premier and his colleagues. If he is so convinced that the Socialist program is an insult 

to Saskatchewan intelligence, or is nonsense in his words, I suggest to him that he go to the people of this 

Province and ask them if the policies of this program that we advocate is acceptable to them. Go to the 

Province! 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker. While the Premier was ranting in the Legislature yesterday afternoon, 

readjustment figures were released in regard to unemployment in Saskatchewan. From the actions of the 

Premier and the content of his statements one would wonder whether he had any direct influence in regard to 

these statistics. According to these figures, unemployment in Saskatchewan rose to 6.2 per cent in mid 

January, compared with 4.7 a month earlier. The release from Man Power's district economists' office in 

Saskatoon revealed that there were 7,000 more unemployed in Saskatchewan between December and 

January. The figures show that there were 21,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan by January 1971 

compared to 18,000 or 5.5 per cent in January of 1970. In December, there were 16,000 or 4.7 unemployed 

in this province. For the Premier's benefit and for his colleagues to the right, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 

statistics that show the real unemployment in the Province of Saskatchewan should be stated now. The 

average labor force in 1970 was 350,000, the average unemployed in 1970 was 15,400. The total population 

loss in the Province of Saskatchewan in 1970 was 31,000. Since unemployment was the major factor 

promoting a population loss, it 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

130 

could well be reasonably assumed that if these people had not left the province, they would be unemployed. 

This would make the total unemployment at a figure somewhat closer to the 46,000 people or 13.3 per cent 

for the average during 1970. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a headline in this morning's Leader-Post is a statement made by the Premier, "Manitoba 

begging New York firm to operate mill, Thatcher." He was going to explain this and here he comes now, 

perhaps he has forgotten that he did not explain it. This article states that Premier Thatcher said that the New 

Democratic Party Government of Manitoba is begging the New York firm of Parsons and Whittemore to 

take over the troubled pulp mill in that province. He further stated according to this article that the Leader of 

the Opposition had implied and I quote: 

 

Mr. Landegger was nothing less than a pirate stealing our resources. 

 

He then went on to say, and I quote: 

 

Then why is old Ed Schreyer in Manitoba begging them to take over the Manitoba mill that they 

have made such a big mess of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's not all that the Premier said in this Legislature yesterday. He emphatically stated that the 

Manitoba Government, or old Ed Schreyer as he refers to the Premier, had directly been making telephone 

pleas to New York begging Parsons and Whittemore to take over the mill. Again he further stated on a 

number of occasions, "Cabinet Ministers from Manitoba had been in New York in consultation with Parsons 

and Whittemore in regard to a possible takeover." 

 

MR. THATCHER: — That is a correct statement, Sir! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest to this Legislature and the Province of Saskatchewan that the 

Premier is again uttering statements that are highly dubious and more probably fictitious. I say this, Mr. 

Speaker, because his statements are at best second or third hand and indeed probably only rumor. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — They're first hand! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, Members of this Legislature and the people of Saskatchewan have now 

reached a point where they are fed up and dissatisfied with the wholesale statements made by the Premier. I 

therefore ask the Premier and his Government either to bring forward documentary evidence that such 

begging as he termed it, has actually been instigated by the Manitoba Government, or retract the statements 

that he has made in this Legislature and which were quoted in the Saskatchewan newspapers today. He was 

going to straighten the matter out, Mr. Speaker, obviously he is unable to do it because . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — . . . right now, they were correct. The Manitoba Government went to New York and 

tried to get Parsons and Whittemore to take them over. My source is Parsons and Whittemore. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I should like equal time! 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

131 

MR. MESSER: — I ask the Premier of this Province either to bring forth documentary proof that those 

statements are indeed facts, or else retract. He obviously is not going to retract so he knows full well that 

those statements are indeed rumor without any facts. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I resent that, Mr. Speaker, they are, he is calling me a liar and I'm saying that they 

are . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I was listening very carefully to the words of the Member and I didn't 

hear him make any direct accusation as to anyone having lied. Had he done so, I should have called him to 

order. 

 

I should trust that all Hon. Members from here on in will try to maintain a degree of order and not interrupt 

each other in debate. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your observation. I may have said they are slippery 

and misleading. I certainly did not say he was a liar. 

 

As I was saying, I therefore ask the Premier and his Government either to bring forward proof or 

documentary evidence that such begging as he termed it has actually be instigated by the Manitoba 

Government or retract the statement that he made in this Legislature and which was quoted in Saskatchewan 

papers today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — The facts of the matter are, Mr. Speaker, that there have been absolutely no contacts 

from the Manitoba Government to the Parsons and Whittemore Company. It is, however, highly possible, 

Mr. Speaker, that the nature of the contact that the Premier refers to came not from the Province of Manitoba 

to Parsons and Whittemore, but from Parsons and Whittemore to the Government of Manitoba, seeking to 

take over the Churchill Forest Products operation in Manitoba. That is more likely. I should suggest that the 

Premier just slipped in under the line with the signing of the contract in that instance. The Province of 

Manitoba is much smarter than the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I can assure this Legislature that if Premier Ed Schreyer or his Cabinet were 

seeking someone to operate the mill in Manitoba it will be done in the best interests of the people of 

Manitoba . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . of projecting a policy of returning to that province all that it is deserving of. 

 

I further suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that is the way it should be. The Manitoba Government is looking after 

the best interests of the people, rather than relying on a free enterprise company to look after them. That's the 

difference, that's the difference, Mr. Speaker, between our philosophies, Manitoba's good 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

132 

government and the chaos that we presently have in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to make one further reference to this article, Mr. Speaker, and again refer to the Premier's unfounded 

statements where he reiterates that the mess in the Manitoba Churchill Forest Products is a mess that they 

made, referring to the New Democratic Government in Manitoba. That is an unfounded statement, the fact of 

the matter is, every person in Manitoba knows, every person in Canada knows, that it was the previous 

government, the Roblin Government, the previous free enterprise government that sold the people of 

Manitoba short. Sold the people of that province short, the same way the people of Saskatchewan are 

probably being sold short today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I now want to mention something that the Premier did not bring forward in 

his address yesterday and today. Again front page headlines in the Leader-Post this morning inform us in 

Saskatchewan that the Federal Government plans for 1971-72 fiscal year will provide an equalization grant 

to Saskatchewan that is more than twice as large as last year. This means that Saskatchewan will be getting 

not $29.9 million but $61 million in equalization grants. It is indeed strange, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier 

does not make some flowery statement in regard to these increased equalization grants. He does about 

everything else. The answer is obvious to those who are knowledgeable about eligibility of equalization 

grants. Amounts of money available through Federal equalization grants are made on the basis of prosperity 

within the province. That therefore is the reason the Premier has neglected to boast about this increase for he 

knows that this Province under him and his Liberal Government has slid from a previous "have" province to 

a poverty stricken "have not" province. 

 

The article further points out that the Federal Government is contributing under shared-cost programs to 

ventures such as hospital insurance, medicare and welfare, a combined total to the Province of Saskatchewan 

of $193 million. This is $1 million less than the Province of Newfoundland is going to get. It is a further $7 

million less than Manitoba will get even though Manitoba's population is almost identical to that of 

Saskatchewan. There is only one other province that will be getting less and that is Prince Edward Island. 

The obvious reason for Saskatchewan getting so little in this area is that the present Government does not 

have the initiative to involve themselves in a shared-cost program nor has it concern for the welfare or the 

social services that are in demand in our province. 

 

In the same article it was brought to our attention that the public works estimates provided for only $4.8 

million which exceeds only one province, that of Prince Edward Island. By contrast the other Prairie 

Provinces are allotted $13.3 million and $16.9 million respectively. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, I ask the 

Members to your right, does this amount, the second smallest allotment in Canada show concern towards 

activating and rejuvenating our labor force in this province, thereby establishing some upward trend for 

economic stability in this province? 

 

My next words this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, would have to be to the seconder and the mover of the Throne 

Speech. At my first session as Member of this Assembly in 1967, I, at that time, 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

133 

understood it to be an honor to have the opportunity to move and second a Throne Speech. After scrutinizing 

and debating the content matter of Throne Speeches of this Government since that time, I have come to the 

conclusion that it cannot be an honor but an exercise in futility. I say futility, Mr. Speaker, because this 

Government has generally failed to fully recognize, comprehend or come forward with meaningful answers 

in legislation to correct the problems that are confronting Saskatchewan and its people today. This applies in 

particular to the area of farming and agriculture in total in our province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, and in truth all 

Members opposite who rise in support of this Throne Speech should either consider themselves hucksters or 

perhaps I should have said super salesmen. If my recollection is accurate, the Premier has already been noted 

as being a super salesman. It is unfortunate that the people of Saskatchewan have paid heavily to find out 

how the Premier "finaggled" that dubious honor. I say super salesman, Mr. Speaker, because this Throne 

Speech is no different from those that have preceded it. It has nothing to offer Saskatchewan other than 

carrots for an election and not very many of those. 

 

In fact the Members opposite are nothing better than coster-mongers selling sweet fruits for the future, that 

ultimately turned sour. Their hope is to bribe and to confuse the electorate into again supporting their empty 

promises. 

 

I want to inform the Premier and his colleagues if he has not already been made aware — and I suspect he is 

— that it is going to take more than peddlers and hawkers to elect them to a government of Saskatchewan 

again. It is going to take recognition of and solutions to the problems of the day confronting this province. 

This Throne Speech again makes no attempt at solving these problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want next, to direct my remarks mostly to the field of agriculture and because I want to do 

that in some detail on Monday, I should ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

STATEMENT ON MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — We now proceed to Motions for Returns "not debatable." They should have appeared 

on the Order Paper immediately after questions put by Members and they will tomorrow. They will appear in 

their proper place. Before we enter into this procedure which is a new procedure and a new departure from 

previous years, perhaps I should give a few brief words of explanation. 

 

These motions will be called by the Clerk and will be moved by the sponsoring Member and no debate can 

ensue thereon. The question will be put and decided forthwith. However, if any Member wishes either to 

amend, speak on or oppose the motion, it will be necessary for him to rise and say so. He may say "debate" 

or "oppose". Probably the best word to use will be "debate" and that motion will then go down under 

"Motions for Returns Debatable" and it will be dealt with in the usual way and in the customary manner. 

 

If anybody has any questions, let him ask them now before we proceed any further. 

 



 

February 19, 1971 

 

 

134 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, just for clarification, is it necessary for the Member to 

rise and ask to present the motion or shall we deal with it the same as questions? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It can be dealt with in exactly the same was as if it was a question if the Member so 

wishes and I suggest that it would be the most speedy way to do it although I would not deny anybody the 

right to rise in his place if he wanted to. Are we all clear in our minds? We will take this slowly for the first 

time round. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:40 o’clock p.m. 

 


