



















































Hansard: July 29, 1971


27 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Thursday, July 29, 1971 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Doré Lake Pulp Mill 
 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 

like to direct a question to the Premier. In view of the unemployed situation, the number of jobless, in 

view of the statements made recently by groups of various political parties, I wonder if he could tell the 

Assembly now whether he is prepared in fact either to go ahead with the Doré Lake Pulp Mill or to 

cancel it? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to advise the House that negotiations are 

still very much in progress with respect to the Athabasca Pulp Mill, that the Government is aware of the 

need for a speedy decision and that we hope to be able make a more complete statement in the House, if 

the House is still sitting, within the next, say, seven days. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I wonder if he could inform the House how 

much it is costing the Government to delay this decision every day? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I haven’t the slightest idea of what the likely cost to the Government or to anyone 

else is for delay. I think that no reliable figures are available. 

 

Firing of Public Servants in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Premier another question. I 

want to ask the Premier a question about the firing of public servants in Saskatchewan. You know 

during the campaign one of the major promises of the Premier throughout the Province of Saskatchewan 

was that there would be not witch hunt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I shall state my question, Mr. Speaker. No witch hunt of public servants or 

political firings. Since the NDP have taken over the Government, a vendetta of major magnitude appears 

to be in progress. It includes senior civil servants right down to students, Mr. Speaker. In addition, senior 

civil servants have been summarily dismissed with only the normal 30 days notice despite family or 

personal obligations, despite the length of service and responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

28 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I’m coming to my question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the Hon. Member state his question rather than make a speech on the question, 

please. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. There is certainly an atmosphere of suspicion and fear 

throughout the Province of Saskatchewan. Now the question is, Mr. Speaker: firstly, what is the policy 

of firing of civil servants by this Party which preaches a new deal for people, now and when this Session 

is completed? Two, what is the policy of this new deal for people regarding severance pay offered to 

senior civil servants or any civil servants who have been fired in the past and who will be fired in the 

future? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to reply to the question. I won’t take this opportunity 

to reply to the speech since I think that that would have been better made on the debate which we are 

now going to enter. 

 

With respect to the dismissals and the alleged witch hunt I have before me a list of the total number of 

dismissals. It consists of two executive assistants to Ministers. I should have thought that these would 

have expected to have been severed since some of them indeed — and I see one sitting, the Member for 

Lumsden — I think would be free to admit that they engaged in political activity and it was . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I guess that no one suggest that these gentlemen should not be severed since they 

were, in fact, very much political appointments and there were three others — Mr. Weymark, Mr. 

McIlrath and Mr. Beeson, all in the Department of Natural Resources. I don’t think I need discuss if you 

wish, the reasons for their severance — one in a Crown corporation is, I think, the person who was 

actively campaigning during the months of May and June and will be known to the Minister. And that is 

not the first or only time he was actively campaigning. I don’t think there is any necessity of entering 

upon a discussion of the names unless Members opposite wish. 

 

Now with respect to the alleged dismissal of university students, I shall be delighted if any member 

opposite will provide us with any single name so that we may pursue this story. I have seen it in the 

Press. I am not aware of any. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I certainly will provide him with names 

of four university students who have been dismissed. I’ll see that the Premier gets them immediately. 

We should certainly appreciate a response in the House at an early date with regard to those four 

students. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We will be delighted. We checked with the Public Service Commission; they weren’t 

able to find them. Perhaps they are with some other agency of which we are not aware. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

29 

 

Student – Teacher Ratios 
 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Education, dealing with the guidelines set out by the Department with respect 

to teacher-pupil ratios. I refer here to the seven students per teacher in the retarded classes that are 

beginning this fall for the first time under Liberal legislation and plus the other guidelines that are a part 

of that. Now the NDP campaigned on a promise of complete abolition of these guidelines. Shortly after 

they became the government the Minister reneged on this promise. And my question is, Mr. Speaker, in 

view of the fact that there is a surplus reported of some three to five hundred teachers in the province, so 

I am informed, seeking employment at the present time, will not the Minister immediately reconsider 

and reverse that decision in order to give employment to those people, particularly the young graduates 

of the colleges of education? 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Hon. Member opposite, 

may I say that so far as school planning is concerned the rigid pupil-teacher ratio has been removed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, in regard to the present situation facing school boards, I have sent a 

directive to all fiscal boards inviting them to present requests to me and to the Department of where they 

feel that the pupil-teacher ratio is providing undue hardship. We are ready and willing to invite them to 

present their proposals; we shall examine their requests in the light of the Budget that was left to us by 

the former Administration. And might I say also, Mr. Speaker, that requests have been coming and are 

presently coming in and we have been able to so far meet many of the requests from boards and we shall 

continue to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — A supplementary question. Mr. Speaker, I am glad to hear that the Minister just now 

abolished the pupil-teacher ratios in the province because up until now he has publicly said that they are 

not going to be abolished. But my question is this, Mr. Speaker, the directive that he refers to, I should 

just like to ask him in what way does it differ from previous policy? What he is telling me is this: that 

they are continuing the same policy of the previous Government that they would consider any situation 

of any board at any time and that is what we have been doing for several years. I wonder if he could tell 

us how his policy or his directive is in any way different from previous Liberal practice. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Hon. Member’s question, that if I am given the 

opportunity to speak in the Throne Speech Debate, I shall be certainly prepared to reply and point out 

the differences. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

30 

 

Hospital Closures 
 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister 

of Public Health (Mr. Smishek). I think it is a matter of urgent public importance. During the election 

campaign a number of statements were made on the closure of small hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I’ll come to the question. Just settle down. We’ll get there, we’ll get there. 

 

It is a matter of urgent public importance because there are 11 hospital boards that were closed two years 

ago, Mr. Speaker. Many of them received public statements by candidates who have been elected 

opposite. These boards now want to know, Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of Public Health, as to 

whether the hospitals will be allowed to reopen or whether they will not. The question is, Mr. Speaker, 

when? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, the matter of the hospital closures is 

presently being considered and under review and the government policy will be announced in due 

course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that a number of these hospitals are still having 

janitorial services and still being taken care of, these boards would like to know when they will receive 

this information. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — The Government policy will be announced when considered. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

Special-Care Homes 
 

Hon. G. T. Snyder (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a 

statement that I should like to make concerning the operation of special-care homes in Saskatchewan. 

 

It will be known, Mr. Speaker, for some time that the political party that I represent has been deeply 

concerned with the entire financial status of the special-care home program in the province. We are 

concerned that the maintenance rates charged by special-care homes to their guests have been increasing 

sharply in recent years and have placed, thereby, an unrealistic financial burden on many special-care 

home guests and their families have suffered a severe burden in this connection. We are also concerned, 

Mr. Speaker, that many special-care homes still do not meet the minimum requirements of programming 

as set out in the special-care home regulation. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

31 

 

My Government, Mr. Speaker, intends to meet the needs of our senior citizens but will do so within an 

equitable distribution of financial responsibility. As a first step in meeting this objective, Mr. Speaker, I 

have established a study committee which has been given the task of researching and analyzing all 

aspects of the special-care program and proposing alternate methods of financing these services. We are 

not prepared merely to endorse the policies of the previous Liberal Government and continue the 

escalation of rates, but rather we are prepared to develop anew financial base for the special-care 

program. 

 

My Government is not prepared to alter any maintenance grants during this study period, and I am thus 

establishing an appeal committee whose take it will be to review the financial situation of any home 

which feels it is in financial difficulty. My Government is not prepared to let special-care homes operate 

on a deficit basis, and upon recommendation of the appeal committee, my Department will make block 

payments to those homes that require financial assistance in order to maintain an adequate level of care 

and operate on a non-profit basis. 

 

May I turn then for just a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the actions of the previous Liberal Government in 

regard to the special-care home program. That Government, I suggest today, Mr. Speaker, made a 

deliberate . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minster making a statement? He is making a 

speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Minister can make a statement but I will hope he will keep it to a Governmental 

statement and not a review of the past because that is what our debates are for. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, I am obliged at this time to draw attention to the actions of the previous 

administrations. I think forthwith you will understand the implications. 

 

I want to turn to the actions of the previous Government in a deliberate politically motivated decision to 

hold back increases to these special-care homes until after the June election. The subterfuge used at that 

time was an indication that an adjustment in the minimum wage rates made this necessary. I repeat 

today, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal Government did not permit the increase in rates because of the 

impending Provincial election on June 23rd. Instead, the Government promised subsidies to cover the 

increased operating costs only after the election. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, that is not a government statement, that is a speech. And I ask you to 

make the Minister stick to a government statement. He is making a speech, it is not a government 

statement to say what we might or might not have done when we were the Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I do believe some of these statements would be better made where they could be 

debated out. I do believe that Ministers should stick close to statements and further matters which they 

disagree with, bring up during debates. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

32 

 

Mr. Snyder: —A concluding word, Mr. Speaker. I just want to suggest that in a letter to the special-care 

homes, the former Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) assured these homes that the Government of 

Saskatchewan would underwrite the amount of the increase during that period, meaning that a subsidy 

would be paid to non-welfare patients in excess of $470,000 and this warrant was with my Department 

at the time we assumed office. The Government opposite passed this warrant on the 29th of June. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Why doesn’t the Hon. Member, Mr. Speaker, pay attention to your ruling? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I am saying in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that this Government will not make payments 

as proposed by the Liberals under the $470,000 warrant but we will launch an immediate study into 

special-care homes and we will develop a program which will not continue to keep our citizens requiring 

institutional care in the state of perpetual poverty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before I give the right to a Member of the Opposition to reply to the statement, I hope 

that Minister’s statements will be just straight statements and not raise arguments so that arguments can 

be raised in debates and not in the question period. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your viewpoint and I am looking forward to 

replying in a very non-political manner as well. 

 

I just should like to say that I have with me a clipping from the New Deal for People Plan in reducing 

health costs and now this gives the Opposition an automatic opportunity to carry on that election 

promise immediately. In Assiniboia on June 14, 1971 the now Premier of the Province said: 

 

Along with the abolition of deterrent fees the NDP will include level-three nursing home care under 

Medicare. This means that when older persons get sick and require care in a nursing home the Hospital 

Plan will pay the difference between the cost of the normal requirements and the cost of nursing 

homes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Member also said that there was a subterfuge, that it was a deliberate political 

move. I should like to give you the dates of two letters I have in my desk both dated February 22, one 

from myself and one from the director of the Special-Care Homes Branch, informing them about the 

Special-Care Homes Branch now doing an allocation of rates. I want to point out to you and to quote to 

the House from the Saskatchewan Care. This is not put out by the Government of Saskatchewan, this is 

put out by the Saskatchewan Housing and Nursing Home Association. And here is what it says: 

 

Notes from a letter to nursing homes from the Hon. Cy MacDonald. It says: “The Government is now 

in the process of reviewing its minimum wage legislation. If 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

33 

 

this review concludes that an upward revision of the minimum wage is approved, the maximum 

special-care home rates will require an upward adjustment. It is not desirable to have the two upward 

rate adjustments within a short period of time, therefore, no increase in maintenance rates is authorized 

at this time. As soon as the review of the minimum wage legislation is completed and a decision made 

as to the amount if any, that minimum wages should increase in the province, you will be notified as to 

the final rate structure approved for your home. At that time you will then be authorized to implement 

adjustments. During the intervening period, my Department will be prepared to underwrite the 

differential expenditure for all clients, both Saskatchewan Assistance Plan and non-Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan recipients that you accommodate. This underwriting provision will be made effective 

April 1, 1971, carry on through until a decision is made and communicated to you. 

 

I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this is a public document and if the member for Moose Jaw 

(Mr. Snyder) has had the good sense to pick it up — if he is so interested in nursing homes — he would 

have known that everybody in the province knew about this. Also it says — March 1971: 

 

This is a first. So far as we know it is the first time individuals not receiving Saskatchewan assistance 

have been subsidized by the Province to help the cost of care in nursing homes. 

 

And we think that was a good policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — And now they are saying that they are going to do the same thing. And I wish to 

say if you want to carry out that health promise, all you have to do is you have to get up from this House 

at 5:30, take the Premier and the members of the Cabinet, go straight into the Cabinet room and in five 

minutes pass an Order-in-Council increasing maintenance rates for the hospital and you can remove all 

costs, as you promised senior citizens in nursing home care. I want you to remember that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Thanks for the advice. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — This is your promise, not mine. 

 

I wish also to make one more comment, Mr. Speaker. Now he just said that: “you know there is a 

change in nursing home rates coming up.” And I should like to read form the journal of the Canadian 

Hospital Association, February 1971. 

 

Nursing homes throughout Canada can finally expect some action on the inclusion of nursing home 

coverage under the hospital and medical care insurance plans in the next year. This is a result of the 

recent Federal-Provincial health Ministers’ conference. The Ministers’ conference stressed financial 

flexibility in Federal-Provincial health programs. 

 

I just want you to know that the Federal Government, I as 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

34 

 

Minister, my colleague, the former Minister of Health, have been working on this for two years and now 

we expect you to put it in operation and real soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Just one word in reply, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! We can’t have debates on these statements. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — On a point of order. The Minister is required to sit down. On the point of order, the 

Minister, if allowed to make one statement, we are allowed to make one reply. That has been conducted 

according to the rules. I hope, Mr. Speaker, you will see that the rules are followed in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have just stated that we cannot permit debates on statements on Orders of the Day. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

Mr. B. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park) moved, seconded by Mr. I. Carlson (Yorkton): 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE STEPHEN WOROBETZ Lieutenant-Governor of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honor for the gracious Speech which Your 

Honor has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne may I 

express my thanks to Premier Allan Blakeney and the Government of Saskatchewan for the confidence 

that they have placed in me today. It is an honor to me and a tribute to the many fine people in the new 

constituency of Saskatoon City Park whom I very proudly represent in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — I approach, Mr. Speaker, my position as an elected representative from the constituency 

of Saskatoon City Park, with a real feeling of modesty and at the same time a sense of challenge. My 

address today is a very tangible part of that challenge. 

 

I should like, Mr. Speaker, to take this opportunity to welcome you back to the Chair. I know that when 

you presided over this Assembly from 1962 to 1964 you commanded the respect and confidence of Hon. 

Members from both sides of the Chamber. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

35 

 

There is no doubt in my mind that you will command that same respect and confidence from this 

Legislature. 

 

I should like, before proceeding, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate and thank all unsuccessful candidates of 

all political parties who allowed their names to stand in the election of June 23rd. It takes no little 

personal courage and no little sacrifice of time and energy to fight an election in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Many of the defeated candidates possessed very impressive records of experience in 

public service, and I hope that they are neither discouraged nor deterred in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, June 23, 1971, must be recorded as a momentous days in the history of the Province of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — . . . for it was on this day that the present Government, under the dynamic leadership of 

Premier Elect Allan Blakeney, achieved one of the greatest landslide victories in the history of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — And, as a result of that victory, the whole direction, the whole thrust, and the whole 

approach to Provincial Government was changed. 

 

The floodgates for real and tangible social and economic change were again opened and progressive-

minded people, people with ideas, people all across this Province breathed a sigh of relief and they again 

had hope. Once again this great province of ours is on the threshold of a new era — an era marked with 

new and exciting ideas. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, June 23rd was a momentous day, but it was also unique. It 

was unique in that it was the first time in the history of Canada that a democratic Socialist Party has 

been returned to office after leaving office for a period of time. Far from being annihilated, far from 

being submerged, far from being forgotten as the Hon. Members to your left, Mr. Speaker, would have 

us believe, we have bounced back with resiliency born of the determination and conviction of people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — And that day in June was unique for yet other reasons. It was the first time in Canadian 

history that two provinces had democratic Socialist governments in office simultaneously. Oh no, Mr. 

Speaker, our party was not submerged and forgotten. On the contrary, we are just beginning to gain 

momentum, and I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, the eyes of this continent will be on these two provinces 

in the years ahead. 

 

During the last seven years since 1964, this province has sustained some rather difficult times. You 

know, the political party represented by the Hon. Members opposite would have had us believe at that 

time that the land of milk and honey was just around the corner. Their story was a real Alice in 

Wonderland thriller with a new twist. You know, Mr. Speaker, in 1964, one 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

36 

 

would have thought the heavens were about to open and huge quantities of investment and industrial 

development would suddenly pour forth. In fact what was their record in terms of investment and 

industrial development? From 1968 to 1970 investments declined form $1,242 per capita to $1,038 per 

capita. And this per capita investment takes on particular significance when one considers that our 

population was declining during this period time. 

 

They thought that the panacea to all our problems, as they saw them, was simply to attract more 

business. And over the years we had banner headline after banner headline, reporting all the new 

businesses coming to our province. But somehow most of these ventures never materialized. There was 

the heavy water plant at Estevan. It never materialized. After the heavy water plant there was to be a $20 

million ammonia plant at Estevan. It never materialized. There was the $2.5 million asbestos cement 

pipe manufacturing plant to be built in Regina. It never materialized. There was the iron pellet plant to 

be built by Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company. It never materialized. There was the Chemical 

Plant in Prince Albert — $5 million. There was the Volkswagen distribution centre. There was the wine 

plant in Moose Jaw. None of these materialized. 

 

The end result in the main was the investment by a handful of giant foreign corporations who were 

attracted to this province by provincial social welfare in the form of loans, grants, virtual royalty 

holidays and numerous types of subsidies. And even here they failed. In the end we were left with a 

serious over-supply situation in these industries. An over-supply of pulp. An over-supply of potash. An 

over-supply of uranium. An over-supply of sodium sulphate. The Hon. Members across the Chamber 

and their erstwhile colleagues who were unsuccessful in the recent election have failed, Mr. Speaker. 

The champions of big business have failed in their own corporate backyard. Their promises, so full of 

sound and fury, in the final analysis signified nothing. A more classic case of government 

mismanagement could not be found anywhere in the annals of modern political history. 

 

Well the fairy tale is over. The people of this province got a little tired with the lyrics and said we will 

have no more. W can now once again get on the serious business of building this province. Since the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was prepared for a special session only, it did not include many of our 

plans for the future industrial development of this province. But perhaps it may be strategic and 

pertinent to mention just a few at this time. 

 

We plan to create in this province a Saskatchewan Development Corporation in which everyone may 

invest. The funds will in turn be used to invest in the resource and industrial development in the 

province. There will be a planned and orderly resource development in this province with proper 

pollution controls, and where our own people will enjoy the fruits and benefits of such development. 

 

We will establish a Department of Economic Development to plan and encourage this orderly economic 

growth. In addition to this Department we will integrate and co-ordinate such programs as Northern 

development and urban and rural planning. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

37 

 

We will encourage Saskatchewan investment through diverting pension funds and insurance premiums 

into the local economy. We will create a new division of government to promote the interests of a sector 

in our economy the previous Government has failed so miserably, namely the small and medium-sized 

business firms. Many of these firms are very integral parts of our rural communities. Business 

representatives will be appointed to provide technical services and information concerning Government 

programs, legislation, and regulations useful to these business firms. We will establish a lending agency 

to provide long-term capital for smaller business which are not manufacturers or primary producers. 

 

In concluding this brief section let me say, Mr. Speaker, that there is another potential in Saskatchewan 

to which insufficient attention has been paid in the past. We have a very valuable resource in the form of 

our wide-open spaces, clean air, relatively unpolluted streams and our many easy access towns and 

cities. 

 

I was talking recently with a number of people visiting in Saskatchewan from Eastern Canada and they 

were very appreciative and visibly impressed with the vastness of our province. I believe the tourist 

industry has real potential in our province and I am sure the Minister of Natural Resources, the Hon. Mr. 

Kramer, representing the constituency of The Battlefords, will be giving this area a good deal of 

consideration in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have dealt, in a rather cursory way, with a very important responsibility of the Provincial 

Government, namely the fostering of economic development in our province and I thus only provided a 

miniature glimpse of a total Economic Development Program, that as it unfolds in the years ahead, will 

be exciting, imaginative and most of all, successful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have in my address so far intentionally omitted the most important sector of the 

Saskatchewan economy, namely agriculture. But there is a very good reason for this. I have the pleasure 

of having a seconder to this motion the Hon. Member from Yorkton, Mr. Irving Carlson, whose 

knowledge of agriculture is certainly superior to mine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — I am sure he will make an excellent presentation on this and other areas. 

 

I have had the pleasure, on a number of occasions, of travelling through the constituency the Hon. 

Member represents. I have always been impressed with the very eye-catching countryside and the very 

fine farms in that area. I am sure he must be very proud to represent that constituency in this Assembly. 

 

I was pleased, Sir, that your Speech included a proposed amendment to The Medical Care Insurance Act 

and The Hospitalization Insurance Act that will have the affect of abolishing deterrent fees for hospital 

and doctor calls. I need not employ the tie time of the House in enunciating all the arguments against 

this tax on the sick, or my personal abhorrence of the tax. Members on this side of the Chamber have 

been critical of the fees since their inception in 1968. Suffice it to say that it was a tax on the wrong 

people — the sick. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

38 

 

If it deterred, which I doubt in the light of recent rising health costs, it deterred the wrong people, who in 

effect were forced to diagnose their own illnesses. I should like, Sir, in a moment to remark on another, 

more effective ways of reducing health delivery costs. 

 

Your Speech, Sir, also included the cancellation of medical and hospital premiums for people 65 and 

over. There are many older people . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — . . . in Saskatoon City Park, as there are across this Province, many of whom have the 

senior citizens pension as their sole source of income. I am very familiar with the hardships they endure 

in order to meet their financial commitments. I am familiar because I have visited with these people in 

their living rooms and on their doorsteps. During the eight or nine months prior to the recent election I 

was able to call at over 2,000 homes in my constituency. In this way I was able to really understand 

some of their concerns and problems of these and many other people. The cancellation of these 

premiums will be welcomed by them as will the abolition of deterrent fees. 

 

I mentioned a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, that I should return to plans pertaining to the matter of 

reducing health delivery costs. There are a number of plans to which I am sure the Government will be 

giving early consideration. 

 

Firstly, there is the community clinic approach. The Saskatoon community clinic since its inception and 

organization has been extremely successful in reducing health cost. It encourages frequent medical 

check-ups and employs very sophisticated health profiles of all patients. By encouraging frequent 

medical check-ups, maintaining detailed records of individual medical histories, and by encouraging 

preventive medicine, it has been highly successful in keeping people out of the hospitals. 

 

There are other efficiencies intrinsic in the operation of group practice clinics, when you have a number 

of different doctors and specialists working under one roof. There are the obvious advantages of high 

utilization of medical equipment and apparatus when a number of physicians are sharing this equipment. 

There is the advantage of easy consultation among doctors about individual patients. There are obvious 

administrative advantages. There is the centralizing of patient records and files, not to speak of the 

convenience to the patient in having a number of different physicians and surgeons under one roof. 

 

This Government will encourage and assist the growth and expansion of community clinics throughout 

this Province as one way of reducing health delivery costs and still maintaining a high level of health 

care that in the past Saskatchewan people have come to expect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — Mr. Speaker, the Members of this Chamber are well aware of the high costs of one day in 

the hospital. In the past all patients were given more or less the same intensity of care. That is up until 

recently. The University Hospital in 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

39 

 

Saskatoon has been experimenting with a self-help section in the hospital where patients that are 

recovering from minor surgery or were admitted for a battery of tests were allowed to maintain 

themselves to a large extent, on a self-help basis. The obvious effect of this is to reduce staffing 

requirements. From the information I have this approach appears to be working reasonably well. 

Another technique used has been the portable nursing station which would have the effect of 

decentralizing nursing functions to some extent. The whole area of varying the level and intensity of 

nursing care warrants much more investigation and study. 

 

In discussions I have had with a number of different hospital personnel recently, Mr. Speaker, I have 

been informed that many hospital patients, often older people, do not require nursing care of the type 

delivered in our hospitals. What they do need is level four treatment, i.e., nursing homes. But the 

problem here, Mr. Speaker, is that there just isn’t sufficient accommodation for these people at a price 

they can afford to pay. Because of this these people often remain in hospital. This points up the fact that 

there is a crying need for many more non-profit nursing and senior citizen homes in our province. 

 

During the years from 1964 to 1971, the Government provided assistance in the form of capital grants to 

a maximum of 20 per cent of total construction costs to only seven projects, a rate of roughly one a year. 

A total of around $5 million in construction grants to special care homes was made during this period of 

time. Over the same period of time hundreds of millions were spent on highways, some of which started 

in a no-man’s land and ended in a no-man’s land, others of which were located in certain geographical 

areas so as to give the driver four different alternatives to travel from point A to B. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in ending this section of my address, let me comment briefly on two other aspects in the 

process of total health care. I am very pleased to note that your speech included proposed amendments 

to The Mental Health Act which will have the effect of limiting the charges on the estates of those 

people who have received treatment at any of Saskatchewan’s four major treatment centres. Families in 

such circumstances are usually in no financial condition to assume these costs. Such legislation tends to 

distort the differences between mental and physical illness. 

 

Moving to the area of a prescription drug program, let me say, Mr. Speaker, that here is an area where 

significant savings can accrue to the people of Saskatchewan. A recent study carried out on prescription 

drug costs indicate that the average cost per family is not significantly high. Somewhere between $25 

and $30 per year per family. However, individual families, frequently older persons are faced with 

prescription drug costs that amount to hundreds of dollars per year. In view of this, Mr. Speaker, an 

excellent case can be made for disbursing the costs of these drugs through insurance and I am confident 

that Throne Speech of the future will include this. But, Mr. Speaker, I have cited only one aspect of the 

problem. Another aspect, and perhaps a more vital one, is the exorbitant costs of prescription drugs. All 

inquiries in Canada in recent years into the quality, manufacturers’ costs and prices of prescription 

drugs, have clearly demonstrated that on the average drug prices are higher in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan than in any other industrialized country in the world today. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

40 

 

The major responsibility for the high costs of drugs must be laid at the door of the Pharmaceutical 

Manufacturers’ Association of Canada — PMAC — an alliance of approximately 56 companies, mainly 

American subsidiaries, that manufacture 85 per cent of the drugs sold by prescription in Canada today, 

and more directly, the responsibility lies with the brand-name manufacturers. Far from providing a 

humanitarian service in a humanitarian way, as they like to pretend, they have been acting as little better 

than bandits preying on the sick. They have persistently over-charged the public and in so doing they are 

persistently engaged in a campaign of vilification of generic manufacturers, who alone have tried to 

supply drugs at reasonable prices. 

 

The many investigations into the industry have revealed some startling facts. While two per cent out of 

every prescription dollar in 1967 was spent for research, 11 1/2 cents was spent on advertising and 

promotion. Except at the level of advertising, competition is virtually non-existent. Brand name drugs 

sell at prices far above the charge levied for the same drug selling under the generic name. 

 

The solution to this serious problem, Mr. Speaker, lies in part with the Federal Government but there are 

a number of steps that could be taken at the Provincial level. A system of central drug purchasing could 

be established for hospital and other government supported institutions. This centralized purchasing 

agency could, through a policy of accepting tenders, force price competition. Establish the sale of drugs 

by generic names and this would force price competition in the private sector rather than the current 

advertising competition. Draw up a provincial drug formulary listing drugs meeting approved standards. 

Because there are basically only about 200 drugs from which over 90 per cent of all prescriptions are 

filled, this would tend to reduce the stock that pharmacists must carry and thus reduce the costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked about only some of the ways to reduce the cost of health delivery to the 

people of Saskatchewan. There are others, but again let me say, Sir, that I am confident future speeches 

will cover all of these and this Province as a result will again take a giant step forward in the field of 

health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — Mr. Speaker, let me say how pleased I was to hear His Honour say that Bill 2, namely 

The Essential Services Emergency Act, would be abolished. This abhorrent piece of legislation has been 

hanging over the heads of labor like a Damocles’ sword for too long. Bill 2 is another clear 

demonstration of the previous Government’s limited concept of freedom and rights of people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — They talk about freedom and free enterprise but freedom and free enterprise for whom? 

Bill 2 in effect was an outright denial of the right of labor people to free collective bargaining. This 

piece of legislation was a blatant example of the dictatorial approach that was rapidly developing in the 

previous Government. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

41 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — The abolition of Bill 2 is a concrete indication, Mr. Speaker, that our party will replace 

the dictatorial approach with one involving dialogue, negotiation and bargaining. Bill 2 destroyed 

collective bargaining and in the process accentuated the very problem it was designed to solve. You 

can’t give orders and dictate the individual lives of people like a general can command an army. The 

main thrust of present and future legislation in this area, Mr. Speaker, will restore once again free 

collective bargaining. And I see involved in this three basic criteria: the right of labor to organize for the 

purposes of collective bargaining, the actual guarantee of collective bargaining, and when all else fails, 

Mr. Speaker, the working man is no better off than a slave if he cannot withdraw his services. But when 

all the mechanisms of negotiations are functioning properly, the use of the latter will be limited or 

virtually non-existent. And, Mr. Speaker, in looking back to the years 1944-1964, permit me to say how 

proud that I am of the record of our party in the field of progressive labor legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — Prior to 1944 labor legislation in existence was administered by a branch of another 

department. In recognition of the rights of working men and women in this Province, and to help insure 

these rights would be safeguarded, a separate Department of Labour was established. By 1964 some of 

the most advanced labor legislation on the statute books of any province in Canada was to be found in 

Saskatchewan. May I enumerate, Mr. Speaker, the firsts for labor in Saskatchewan. 

 

The first province to give civil servants the right to bargain collectively. The first province to pass the 

Bill of Rights in 1947 which pioneered the field of fair employment practices in Canada. Among the 

rights guaranteed by this Bill, and subsequently by The Fair Employment Practices Bill, is the right to 

employment of all persons without discrimination based on race, creed, color or national origin. The first 

province to make statutory provisions for two weeks annual vacation with pay were other firsts. I 

mention these points not only as a reminder but to provide an indication of what people in our province 

can once again expect in the future. 

 

Let me digress, Mr. Speaker, very briefly, to an area I feel quite strongly about. I believe MLAs should 

become more competent, professional and assume more responsibilities in their roles as elected 

representatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — There are obviously many ramifications and implications entailed in this changing role 

and I don’t propose to go into them now. I believe, however, changes in this direction would serve to 

enhance the prestige and the effectiveness of the Legislature and the total legislative process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

42 

 

Mr. Dyck: — I could go on and on enumerating and expanding the plans of the present Government in 

the areas that I have mentioned and in the areas I have not touched upon. We have in the world today, 

Mr. Speaker, achieved a high level of technology and a level of accumulated knowledge never before 

achieved in the history of man, and the level of technology and the quantity of human knowledge is 

expanding at a frightening rate. But we must learn how to harness, control, and direct both in order to 

know enough now to produce sufficient goods and services to provide a high standard of living for all 

people in our province and, indeed, throughout the word, and the task and the challenge before us today 

is the destruction of poverty within our midst and the assumption of some responsibility for the 

eradication of poverty throughout the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — And in this fight, let me say, Mr. Speaker, how pleased I am to be on the team with 

Premier Allan Blakeney as leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — He has demonstrated beyond the doubt his resourcefulness, his political skill and shrewd 

political judgment. He has proven his ability outside the Chamber as a legal advisor to the Minister in 

the portfolios in Education, Health and finally Provincial Treasurer. On June 23rd, he proved his ability 

as the Leader of our province by obtaining the endorsation of a large majority of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to thank the many people of Saskatoon City Park 

constituency who worked so tirelessly and painstakingly for me during the recent election. Over the 

years I have been involved in a number of different capacities in a number of different elections, both 

Provincial and Federal. But never have I been associated with an election campaign when there was 

such a large involvement and participation of people from all walks of life; working people, professional 

people, housewives and young people. I am proud and pleased to be associated with these fine men and 

women. I am proud and pleased to represent them in this Assembly 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I look for innovative, exciting and new legislation 

originating from our side of the House in the immediate years ahead and it couldn’t happen to a better 

province — the Province of Saskatchewan, a province in which I am happy to have been raised. We 

have many wonderful people in our province, hard-working people, and honest people. We have miles 

of rolling prairie, beautiful lakes and forests in the North. We have numerous fine towns and villages, 

many of 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

43 

 

which are very vibrant and alive and which will insist on remaining viable rural communities in the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — We have a tremendous resource potential, Mr. Speaker, and we live in an era of rising 

expectations and our people are becoming more and more concerned with not just the quantity of goods 

and services available to them but the quality of that which they have about them. And, Mr. Speaker, 

because of our high level of technology and vast amount of accumulated knowledge, it is possible to rise 

to yet undefined heights, the quantity and quality of our life and therein, Mr. Speaker, lies our challenge. 

I am confident that this Government is equal to the task. 

 

I, therefore, consider it a privilege to move, seconded by the Hon. Member from Yorkton (Mr. Carlson), 

that this Humble Address be presented to His Honour The Lieutenant-Governor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I. Carlson (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I should like to add my congratulations to you 

upon your election as the Speaker of this Assembly. I am sure that you will carry out your duties 

adequately and fairly, as I understand you have done in the past. 

 

Secondly, may I consider it a great honor that my maiden speech is to second the Address-in-Reply to 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — I am grateful, Mr. Speaker, for being granted this opportunity. I say that this 

opportunity is a great honor for me because this is the very beginning of a new era in the history of 

Saskatchewan, an era that has been determined by the people of Saskatchewan and will affect the very 

way of life of all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

On June 23, 1971, the people of Saskatchewan spoke out loud and clear. They have spoken for a New 

Deal for the people of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — They want a deal whereby everyone will have an equal opportunity and where the 

people who are a part of this society will reap the benefits of our vast resources and treasuries. A logical 

question that one might ask is, “Why have the citizens of Saskatchewan spoken so loudly and so 

clearly?” There are many reasons for this but I shall deal with only a few. 

 

At this time I want to turn to a few comments about my constituency of Yorkton which I think would be 

very close to an average constituency in this Province of Saskatchewan. We have the City of Yorkton 

which is similar in many respects to any of the urban ridings. It comprises some two-thirds of the 

provincial riding of Yorkton. We have the many smaller towns and, 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

44 

 

of course, the numerous farms throughout the area which makes it also comparable to any of the rural 

ridings. 

 

I think of the various groups of people whom I talked to before the election campaign, during the 

campaign and, of course, since June 23rd. I think also of their reasons for speaking out so loudly and 

clearly on the 23rd of June. 

 

First, there are the farmers who are the very backbone of our economy. These people — as I am sure we 

are all aware are in real, drastic trouble both financially and socially. They realize that the future looked 

even worse than the present under the rule of the two Liberal Governments, two Liberal Governments 

that spoke about the participatory democracy but who failed to listen and to communicate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — To illustrate the financial crisis the farmers are in, let me point to the Dominion Bureau 

of Statistics’ records which show that in the period from 1968 to 1970, Saskatchewan’s net farm income 

has dropped by 56.2 per cent. Indeed, they are in trouble. 

 

The farmers spoke against the former Provincial Government that was elected on a promise to reduce 

taxes but in fact caused property taxes to increase two and threefold. They spoke out against the 

government that encouraged diversification of agriculture which actually forced the individual farmers 

to become specialists in their field but made no plans for the future when the results of this 

diversification resulted in over production and lower prices. They spoke out against the government that 

arbitrarily closed small rural hospitals, that imposed stringent pupil-teacher ratios, which forced many 

classrooms — and indeed some entire schools — to close down. The farmers also spoke out against the 

Federal Liberal Government which has fostered reduced rural post office services, allowed the reduction 

in railway services, and is considering a drastic cut in grainhandling facilities. Here I refer naturally to 

the proposed cutback of grain delivery points from 1,000 to approximately 100 in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. The farmers also spoke out very clearly against the Task Force Report . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — . . . the report which clearly recommends the elimination of two-thirds of the farming 

population of Saskatchewan. All this they recommend in the name of economic efficiency. 

 

I should like to commend this Government for taking immediate action to protect farmers who are 

unable to pay their debts, from seizure of their farm lands and machinery. I know of one case in my 

constituency of a farmer who has lost his tractor and his truck because he was unable to make his full 

payments. But the bank doesn’t consider that his granaries are full of grain, neither do they consider that 

he must have this equipment in a very few weeks to begin his harvesting operations. 

 

Let me turn now to some of the other programs that are needed to keep agriculture viable, and to 

preserve our rural society. One of the most important steps is the establishment 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

45 

 

of the Land Bank Commission. This is a proposal that we made prior to the election campaign. It is 

important to most farmers but especially important for two groups of farmers. First of all, it is important 

to the older farmers who are ready to retire but who do not have enough cash to buy a home in a local 

town, village or city to retire. Many of these people have lived on low incomes all their life. Their 

personal savings have been reinvested in their farms and now these very people who have built our 

province must liquidate their assets in order to retire in dignity. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, you realize the 

problem they’re up against in these times of poor agricultural economy. They just cannot get reasonable 

prices for their farms. There are some farmers who would be prepared to buy them but cannot raise the 

money. So the Land Bank Commission becomes very important to this group of people. 

 

The second group of people I refer to are the young farmers, the young farmer who wants to be 

established on his own or wants to expand his farming operation. Through the Land Bank Commission 

he could use any capital that he has or that he can acquire to purchase machinery or livestock and then 

rent the land from the Land Bank Commission. Once he has established himself, if things go well a few 

years from now, he gets established and has a little money on hand, he can then make arrangements to 

purchase the farm. 

 

I must say that this has proven to be a very attractive policy and one which I have been asked about 

many times during the election campaign and especially since June 23rd. 

 

Let me turn now, Mr. Speaker, to another factor that is causing great concern to our farmers. That is the 

skyrocketing costs of production and, more specifically, the cost of farm machinery. Again the farmers 

were disillusioned by a Federal Government that appointed a commission to investigate the whole 

question of farm machinery costs, services and repairs for machinery but that is unwilling to act on the 

recommendation of the commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — The Barber Commission presented a very clear picture of how the farmers in Canada 

had been taken advantage of by the multi-national farm corporations. But still we have no action. 

 

The farmers were also disillusioned by the Provincial Liberal Government which had posed as the friend 

of the farmer but at the same time abolished The Agriculture Machinery Administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — The Agriculture Machinery Administration was supplying a service to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan and indeed to all farmers all over North America. 

 

I remember well how the Government assured the public that any necessary testing would be handled by 

the Agriculture Engineering Department at the University of Saskatchewan. I was attending university at 

the time that the AMA was abolished and a few months after it was abolished I went over to the 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

46 

 

Agriculture Engineering Department and did a little snooping around and I asked, “How many machines 

have been tested here?” I was told they had tested two machines for one company. Mr. Speaker, this 

says to me if they are testing machines for a machine company, only that information that is beneficial 

to the machine company would then be released. I believe that the AMA is another program that we 

must reinstate to help our farmers make intelligent decisions when purchasing new equipment. 

 

Let me also say that it is not just the farmers who are concerned about the state of agriculture. I have had 

many businessmen from the City of Yorkton tell me in various ways that agriculture must be given top 

priority in order once again to get the economy of Saskatchewan on a good sound foundation. 

 

I want to add that it is not only the Province of Saskatchewan’s economy that is at stake, but indeed the 

economy of all of Canada. If we have a viable agricultural economy, we shall have a much stronger 

economy throughout the country. We have witnessed massive layoffs in some of our eastern industrial 

cities where farm machinery is being manufactured. These slumps in the economy don’t just happen and 

they are not necessary. We must change our priorities. And I should hope that the Federal Liberal 

Government would give some thoughts changing their priorities after listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan on June 23rd. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Another group of citizens who spoke out on the 23rd of June were the pioneers of our 

province. They spoke against higher costs of living, higher taxes and deterrent fees. Most of these 

people find themselves living on fixed incomes that are actually becoming smaller and smaller. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I should like to commend this Government for proposing legislation that will 

abolish deterrent fees and also abolish medical care and hospital care premiums for our senior citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — To many of these senior citizens the health costs have taken up a large portion of their 

annual budget. 

 

May I also give this Government credit for introducing legislation to reverse the regressive legislation 

passed by the former Liberal Government which placed unreasonable burdens on the families of 

mentally retarded patients. It was unfair because it placed a burden on mentally ill patients that was not 

also placed on physically ill people. Secondly, it was unfair because it affected only those patients who 

were placed in the Provincial institutions such as we have at Prince Albert, North Battleford, Moose Jaw 

and Weyburn, but a patient who was admitted to the psychiatric wing at a hospital in Regina or 

Saskatoon, or like we have in the City of Yorkton, was not affected. They were in a general hospital and 

their care was covered by Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. 

 

Another small group of people who spoke out very loudly and very clearly on June 23rd are the hotel 

owners. They spoke out against the arrogance of the former Government. Again, I 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

47 

 

want to refer to a specific case in my constituency. A young couple own and run a hotel in a small town 

not too far from Yorkton and to the best of my knowledge, this man has always been a supporter of the 

Liberal Party. But that has all changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — It changed at the Hotel Keepers’ Association Convention last spring here in the City of 

Regina. He was pointing out that he was no longer able to make a decent standard of living as a result of 

higher taxes and reduced revenue. He was pleading his case to the convention. But he received a very 

typical Liberal answer. He was told, “You’re probably running a dirty hotel.” Needless to say, that was 

enough to make any man reconsider his political affiliation. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Either that or clean up his hotel! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — This man came to me election night very enthusiastic because the Government had 

changed and he said to me, “I don’t expect miracles from you people but I expect you to listen.” I am 

glad to say that this Government is prepared to listen to these people, as indicated in the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

There are two other groups of people that I want also to talk about, these are the ones who are working 

and the ones who are not working because they cannot find jobs. They were disillusioned by the two 

Liberal Governments who said that they were prepared to accept six per cent unemployment to fight 

inflation. They also said that no group of working people were allowed to get an increase in salaries of 

over six per cent, regardless of how low their wages were. To these people it didn’t make sense that for 

some of them they could get more cash income on welfare than working eight hours a day, people like 

the hospital workers, people who work in nursing homes, farm laborers and many others. And I agree, 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make sense. In addition to this, many of these people have lost their rights to free 

collective bargaining. These people also could see that it would take a new government with new 

priorities to restore their voice in society. I am very, very proud indeed of this new Government that is 

taking action to repeal The Essential Services Emergency Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — I mentioned the many people whom we have in our province who cannot find 

employment. These circumstances are tragic and wasteful. Unemployment is tragic because it deprives a 

worker of the right to make a living for himself and his family. Unemployment is wasteful because 

society loses the productive capacity of our people’s energies and skills. Canada has the highest rate of 

unemployment of any industrialized country in the world and according to the Economic Council of 

Canada, we lose over $6 billion per year of productivity due to the unemployment. You can well 

imagine that this means to the country as well as the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We in Saskatchewan have suffered from mass unemployment which was created by the Liberal 

Government in their fight against 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

48 

 

inflation. Yet we all remember the Provincial Liberals’ election platform of 1964 to create 80,000 new 

jobs. What has, in fact, happened? I am sure you are all aware that we’ve lost in the neighborhood of 

100,000 people in the last seven years. In fact, last year alone, Mr. Speaker, 30,000 left the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign our party committed itself to initiate job-creating projects. 

Once again the Government has realized the urgency of the situation and has taken action to create job 

opportunities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Again, I should like to refer to a specific case in my own constituency. The previous 

government had started the construction of a provincial government building in Yorkton but once again 

they were not prepared to communicate but only to dictate. The law profession of Saskatchewan did not 

want to include the Court House in the provincial building along with the other government offices and 

the liquor store. In fact, I am told, Mr. Speaker, even the former Attorney General (Mr. Heald) 

disapproved but was overruled. During the election campaign, the Hon. Premier, Mr. Blakeney, when he 

was in Yorkton committed our party when elected as the Government to re-negotiate the financial deal 

imposed on the city by the former Government. I shall deal with the finances later but the point I am 

making now is that the Government has listened to the Bar Association and has agreed to build the new 

provincial building as well as renovate the old Court House, which is an indication of the Government’s 

willingness to listen and also willingness to create more job opportunities for the people in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — I mentioned a moment ago the financial deal that was forced upon the City of Yorkton 

by the former Government. I believe this is noteworthy and I want to elaborate somewhat at this time. 

 

The former Cabinet was planning a meeting in the city of Yorkton and apparently just a few days prior 

to the meeting, decided that they really should have some major announcement to make at the Cabinet 

meeting in Yorkton. They contacted the City Council and told them, “If you supply the land, we’ll build 

a building. You’ve got 48 hours to make up your mind.” The City Council did in fact make up its mind 

in 48 hours and it arranged to purchase land at the cost of $186,287.51. By the time the contractor 

moved in this June to start the excavation for the building, due to added costs of interest on money, costs 

of removing buildings from the property, and also the value of some city assets on the property, the total 

cost to the city has now risen tot $201,038.98. And in return for this, the former Provincial Government 

said, “We’ll give you the old Land Titles Office.” But a former colleague of some of yours who is now 

sitting on City Council — and I refer to Alex Kuziak — fought this in City Council, he fought it with the 

Provincial Government, and eventually the Province said, “Okay, we’ll give you also the old Court 

House, we’ll give you the old liquor store and we will give you an old weigh scale.” 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

49 

 

The value of this property as assessed by an independent assessor equalled $165,000. They were getting 

$165,000 book value property for $201,000 worth of land. Mr. Blakeney said that we would reconsider 

this deal and in fact the Government has reconsidered it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — The City Council admitted that the Court House was of no value to the City of Yorkton 

because of its type of construction and because of its location in the city and through negotiations, the 

Province has agreed to repurchase this Court House back from the city at a cost of $85,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — This says two things. First of all, it puts the Court House in a separate building from 

the provincial building as the judiciary of this Province has indicated they want and also it has got the 

city of Yorkton off the hook from this financial Liberal deal that was forced upon by the former 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Once again I want to say that this is another example of this Government’s willingness 

to listen to people. 

 

Once again I want to re-emphasize that the people of this Province have spoken loud and clear to every 

one of us sitting here in this Chamber, regardless of which side of the House we are sitting on, we must 

realize that the people have spoken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — I think it’s fair to make some fundamental changes in our society and we must fulfil 

the wishes of the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — If we fail, there is no one to blame but ourselves. We must not break faith with the 

people of the Province. We can make some changes but we must change our philosophy and develop 

new priorities. One of these priorities must be to put people before money. We must plan our economy 

and plan our society so that the people of Saskatchewan will reap the benefits. 

 

I believe that when the people of the Yorkton constituency elected me as their representative, they were 

asking for some very basic changes. The Speech from the Throne indicates that this Government is 

prepared to listen to the people and is prepared to make some fundamental changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — This new government under the leadership of Allan Blakeney is truly a government of 

the people for the people. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

50 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, this Government offers a New Deal for people of Saskatchewan. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in seconding the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — We are a little thin in bench strikes but we are moving 

up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should first like to congratulate the member for Saskatoon City Park (Mr. Dyck) and the 

member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson) on their initial efforts in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I hope that neither of the two Members are too disillusioned when the truth sets in. The 

Member from City Park may have a great Utopia that will come. I could remind him that that same 

Utopia was planned back in 1944 and the monuments of that Utopia are still scattered throughout the 

province — the box factory, the woollen mills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I have great sympathy for any unsuspecting citizen carried away by the new Socialist 

Utopia who might invest his life savings in the great development he talked about. I am afraid nothing 

has changed, although you have multiplied your Members on that side of the House, you still can’t run a 

peanut stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now I should like to especially congratulate the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson). 

He has every right to be very proud. $80,000 they have already paid for him and it is only a month old. 

Now at that rate that’s about $3.6 million from the entire 45 of you. I don’t know if the people of 

Saskatchewan can afford many members like the Member for Yorkton. But anyway I shall congratulate 

him and Alec Kuziak for being able to negotiate a deal like that. There is an old saying, “Get the 

Government when they haven’t really wakened up yet,” and I think you have succeeded. I congratulate 

you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Bitter grapes! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, I’m not bitter. I just think he made an excellent deal. I was congratulating him. You 

should try one for Saskatoon, Mr. Member. 

 

I think one question we should ask ourselves at the beginning of this debate is: is this Session really 

necessary? I say that the answer is, No. This Session is a grandstand play 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

51 

 

by the Socialist Government and it could be costing the people of this Province over $6,000 a day. Let’s 

look at the Throne speech to see if we really needed to squander this money, money of the taxpayers, on 

this phony Session. Of course the Government said they want to remove the utilization fees on the 

Medical Care Plan and the Hospitalization Plan. Well let’s be very clear, they didn’t need to call a 

Special Session of the Legislature to do this. It could have been done any day of a Cabinet meeting. In 

fact, for over a month, the NDP Government have been forcing the people to pay utilization fees under 

the false pretences that a session was really necessary to remove them. Now, Mr. Speaker, if the 

Government intends to stop charging people over 65 years old medical and hospital premiums, even the 

wealthy people, and I know these people in various parts of Saskatchewan. The wealthy people will 

thank them. But they intend to do this. Again, this could have been done by regulation by Cabinet. If the 

NDP want to stop collecting from the estates of the mentally ill all they had to do was stop. A normal 

session next year could have regularized this policy. 

 

The Act concerning the payment of hog premiums — it is already going to be retroactive. It could have 

been passed next January and still have been retroactive to January 1971. 

 

Now, the legislation to protect the farmers unable to pay their debts is a new one. It was never 

mentioned to us in any of the talks or letters concerning this Session. As for repeal of Bill 2, the Premier 

himself said that it was not necessary at this time, it could only be activated by the Cabinet and that his 

Cabinet had no intention of taking such an action. 

 

And there is the paragraph about the lack of jobs. Mr. Speaker, that is just so much sanctimonious 

garbage. The NDP are chasing out job-producing industries out of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, here we have the rather sorry spectacle of this much publicized new Deal, 

this new political party, indulging in petty politics at the taxpayer’s expense, firing defenceless civil 

servants and breaking their campaign promises before the ink was dry on their oaths of office. This 

useless Session will cost the people of the Province over $100,000. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Don’t prolong it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I thought you would say that, I was hoping you would say that. “Don’t prolong it,” says 

the great new warrior, the Attorney General. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Wouldn’t they love that. That’s what they wanted us to do. But I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ll tell you, Mr. A.G. why we were going to prolong it, why we wouldn’t let you and your 

horde of new MLAs steamroller this Opposition. I’ll tell you why. Ever since the election the new 

Premier has been playing fast and loose with the Opposition in regard to this Special Session. First they 

announced there will be one. Then he changed his mind and then I guess someone put some pressure on 

him, then he gave in as he seems to do regularly lately and 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

52 

 

the Session was on again. It began to look after utilization fees, medicare and hospital premiums. Then 

the list of new Bills began to grow until we were told about five of them. Then the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour summoned fearless Little Allan and ordered him to repeal Bill 2. And of course he 

agreed to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You back benchers shouldn’t laugh, you weren’t at that meeting. If you are real lucky 

he will tell you about it as you go along. 

 

We were still prepared . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I saw them all coming out. You weren’t there either. 

 

We were still prepared to agree to bypass most of the normal legislation safeguards because we had been 

informed of the Government’s plans and the Bills were relatively simple and straightforward. Then on 

July 27, the day after I had been chosen as Leader of the Opposition, I received a letter form the Premier 

asking me to concur with the so-called agreement made with Mr. Thatcher. I have a copy of the letter 

here and I will table it. It lists eight issues to be dealt with by this Session. We have been aware of all 

this legislation. While we were convinced that the Session wasn’t necessary, we were prepared to go 

along with the new government. However, on page 2 of the letter, the first paragraph reads as follows, 

and I quote: 

 

It is possible that the additional legislation could be introduced in which case I will inform you of the 

nature of the proposed legislation. 

 

Now there is nothing wrong with that if it were a normal session if we were discussing a normal session. 

But when you consider Mr. Blakeney’s next request, the whole thing, Mr. Speaker, becomes incredible. 

This letter goes on to say that in return the Premier asked me to indicate to him as quickly as possible if 

we would be prepared to waiver certain rules, namely, to waive the Throne Speech Debate and get this, 

to consent to proceed through all readings of a Bill on the same day. In short, the NDP refused to tell us 

what legislation and there lies the difference, Mr. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow). If you would keep 

your mouth closed for awhile and your ears open — I see you haven’t changed by assuming office — 

you might learn what I am talking about. In short, the NDP refused to tell us what legislation they were 

planning but wanted us to agree, in advance, to waive our rights and allow them to railroad anything 

they wanted through this House. Mr. Speaker, we may be a few in number but we will not be pushed 

around by those Socialists opposite no matter how much they plan or how much they speak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Pushed by the people, Davey. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yeah, we got a little nudge, Dick, I will admit to that. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

53 

 

When I look over at you my faith in humanity escapes me but I am sure it will come back. Let me give 

you one example of what they are trying to steamroller through this Legislature. The Throne Speech 

says legislation will be introduced to protect farmers unable to pay their debts from seizure of their farm 

land and their machinery. Good, fine. All of us in this House know that the farmers are facing serious 

problems and that they need protection. Now incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you what we did about 

it. We passed legislation that protects farmers from seizure of their machinery if they apply to the courts 

for their help. I will tell you something else, the Land Contract Action Act has for years protected all 

citizens of Saskatchewan from seizure of land and machinery. But if they are not, if they are not doing 

this, then let the government tell us and tell the public. 

 

If those Acts have developed shortcomings or are proven to have shortcomings, Mr. Premier, point them 

out to us and we will give you our full support, but as far as I can find out, you haven’t even had the 

courtesy, for example, to consult the Saskatchewan Implement Dealers Association. I phoned them this 

morning and they were very concerned about this legislation and most anxious to discuss it. Why 

shouldn’t they be? It could put them out of business. This could put the implement dealers out of 

business and it was your Party, Mr. Premier, that promised to help out the small businessman. This 

proposed Bill could have the most serious consequences. To ask us to allow you to push a Bill like this 

through in one day, is unbelievable. Mr. Speaker, make no mistake that is exactly what the NDP 

government had in mind when the Premier wrote me asking me for a blank cheque on any legislation 

that he might choose to put before this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In a Press report of July 27, Mr. Blakeney is quoted as saying that his letter to me was 

the same as the one sent earlier by Mr. Romanow to Mr. Thatcher. That is exactly what the press report 

said . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Thatcher never received a letter from Mr. Romanow, and his office 

never received a letter from Mr. Romanow. The truth is, there never was a letter from Mr. Romanow. 

And the Premier did tell me that, I agree, that’s my source of information, also I checked the former 

Premier’s office. I just want to point this out because I haven’t seen any retraction from the Premier. I 

haven’t seen him get up and say, “I was misquoted,” because the impression that he left was that I had or 

that our caucus had reneged on a deal that had been made between Mr. Romanow and the late Mr. 

Thatcher. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They tried to leave that impression but there never was any such deal. You sent him 

eight pieces of legislation and you told him as far as we know, that’s all there was. Then 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

54 

 

Mr. Blakeney got up in front of that press and said, “We sent him a letter, Mr. Romanow sent him a 

letter.” They never sent him a letter, all we know is that there were to be eight pieces of legislation. Then 

I got a letter from Mr. Blakeney and he said there will be eight pieces of legislation and there might be 

something else when we make up our mind. The Speech from the Throne contained a piece of 

legislation about which we had never heard anything. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell the truth! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, it is only common decency to fully inform the Opposition of all Bills and 

issues to be brought before a special session. If, and I emphasize if, the Government wants to short-cut 

the normal democratic safeguards built into our legislative process, this was not done, and as a result we 

were insisting on judging each Bill on its merits. Some, like the removal of utilization fees, we will be 

prepared to waive the normal time requirements, others we will oppose or amend them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to take a moment in this debate to talk about our former leader, talk about the 

role our party will play in this House and across the province. Members on both sides of the House and 

people from all walks of life throughout the province have paid sincere tributes to Ross Thatcher these 

last few days. His courage, his energy and his devotion to our nation and province have been recognized 

and justifiably praised. Today, I want to recall another aspect of Ross Thatcher’s career and that was his 

ability and style as a debater in this Legislature. He was a fighter, he asked no quarter and he gave none. 

When he stood in his place, it was to deliver a hard-hitting down to earth speech. This quality was never 

more apparent than when he led us in Opposition from 1960 to 1964. It was his energy, his driving, 

fighting, hammering criticism in this legislature that led to the defeat of the Socialist Government in 

1964. Well Mr. Speaker, we don’t have another Ross Thatcher on this side of the House, but we do have 

his example and his memory and we have 14 enthusiastic Members who have dedicated themselves to 

give this Government the most responsible and the toughest opposition ever given in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That is the first priority of our Liberal Caucus, to keep that Government honest and to 

never let you, the Government, forget or the public, the unbelievable promises upon which you rode into 

office and to expense the inevitable blunders that you are now making and that you will continue to 

make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I promise you and that last individual who blundered out there, and all the other 45 

members, as well the people of Saskatchewan that our 14 Liberal members will work and we will fight 

and we will blow it just as we did in 1960, 1961 and 1962 until we finally defeated you in 1964. In fact, 

we will carry out to the best of our abilities the traditional functions of the Opposition: (1) we’ll criticize 

your legislation; (2) we shall endeavor to offer constructive alternatives; (3) we will act as financial 

watchdogs for the taxpayers. At the same time, we will work with the thousands of other Liberal Party 

members in Saskatchewan to rebuild our 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

55 

 

party. 

 

One month ago we suffered a most decisive defeat at the polls, we must and we will, examine into the 

reasons for our defeat and then bring our policies and our programs into line with the desires of the 

majority of the people of this Province. At the same time, we caution our friends in the NDP not to take 

too much comfort from our political set-back. I should point out that we still have a strong well-

organized political party and that we received 43 per cent of the vote. I suppose Mr. Blakeney could be 

forgiven, some of those other choice Members that he has chosen to sit on the front benches, I suppose 

they could be forgiven that when they look along across here at our small group they suffer from a slight 

case of over-confidence. I suggest before they become too smug, Mr. Blakeney take a look behind him 

at all those 44 happy faces, each one of them convince he belongs in the Cabinet. Each one is confident 

that it is only a matter of time until he is called to the front benches to sit in splendor with Allan’s 

chosen few like Eiling, Everett, and all the rest of them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about Henry. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, Henry, I don’t know. I don’t know if Henry has that much hope or not. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He didn’t even get to be a Legislative Secretary. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No! I find that incredible, that a man with his record wouldn’t even be given one of 

those party hack jobs. 

 

Then there are all those promises they made. First there are the ones that the official party made, then 

there are ones the candidates made back home in the constituencies. The promises made by the official 

party would cost over $1 billion. I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t added up the local bribes yet, but 

as a special service to the Government we will table our findings. 

 

Do you know, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen to little Allan and his brave new world when most 

of those new members wake up to the truth that they are doomed to spend all of their short political lives 

languishing unseen and unheard on the back benches? What will happen when they find out that those 

fearless fighters on the front bench can’t even keep their own promises, never mind the ones you all 

made to the folks back home? You know, Mr. Speaker, I think we already know what will happen. In 

fact it has already begun. They will form little rump groups, they will hold special meetings and they 

will make independent pressure groups, threatening the Government, pointing out their sins of omission. 

In fact I have a press release here to the Leader-Post, July 23rd: 

 

Wafflers tell Blakeney to take over the pulp mill. 

 

I can see the head Wafflers out there organizing a meeting right now. The story goes on here to tell how 

John Richards, the lecturer from Saskatoon, the MLA from up there, along with Don Mitchell, the well-

known Waffler, demanded that the Government kick Mr. Landegger out of Saskatchewan with no 

compensation and then grab the Prince Albert pulp mill. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

56 

 

Well, we all know that Mr. Blakeney has got lots of problems. We know that Mr. Blakeney is up to his 

armpits in pulp mills and iron mines, union pressures and men and women who are out of work. And we 

must appreciate what a trying time this is for the new Government and the new Premier. If he pleases the 

Unions he makes the Wafflers unhappy. If he gets jobs for the unemployed, he upsets the ecologists. 

That’s why we, in the Opposition, have been leaving him alone. We are really trying to help him out. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, along comes John Richards, a Member of Allan’s own party, a fellow MLA 

and spoils everything by demanding that the Premier make a decision and keep his promise to throw out 

the Doré Lake Pulp Mill and take over the one at Prince Albert. You know, Mr. Speaker, I’d call this 

base ingratitude, because the Premier had only recently made Mr. Richards a Legislative Secretary. I 

don’t know whether it was either Health or Welfare, but he made him a Legislative Secretary, it was a 

fact of life. In fairness to the new member form Saskatoon, it is just possible that Mr. Richards might 

have remembered that Premier Blakeney called his position, the position he now holds, one of the most 

useless jobs in the world, only fit for political hacks, when he introduced the same job six or seven years 

ago. But anyway, he shakes his head. I don’t know whether he is trying to wake up or if he is denying 

what I said. We’ve got the quotes, Mr. Premier, and you will get them quoted back to you before this 

Session is over. How you would have the unmitigated gall to resurrect Legislative Secretaries the good 

Lord Himself doesn’t know, but never mind, we will remind all of you of what you said. 

 

However, in fairness, we see the pattern already emerging. We see, Mr. Speaker, the ranks of the NDP 

Socialists, and I predict that the new Government has within its ranks the seeds of its own destruction. 

Mr. Premier, your impossible promises, and your unmanageable Wafflers, will turn your dream of a 

New Deal into a nightmare and I tell you the rot has already set in. Not satisfied, for example, with 

newspaper threats, the Wafflers are putting out open letters for NDP MLAs demanding socialization of 

the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Liberal MLAs too. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, they hit them all. And I understand, Mr. Premier, the Wafflers will rally at Fort 

Qu’Appelle this Saturday. I can tell you the saying of Chairman Mao will get a good workout this 

weekend out there. I can also tell you, Mr. Premier, that the people of this Province are watching you. If 

you buckle under the pressure of these extreme radicals, Saskatchewan will go down the drain in the 

next four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am going to tell you something else, if Premier Blakeney resists the Wafflers the NDP 

will be split from top to bottom and we will flush the whole mess down the drain four years from now in 

the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, here he is. I am sorry, 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

57 

 

the future Minister of Industry for the new NDP Socialist Government was out when I made mention of 

him. I am glad he is back in his place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for a minute or two to some of the promises made by the Socialists 

during the election campaign. First, a pledge made by Mr. Blakeney and the NDP to the civil servants. 

For seven years our friends opposite lectured us regarding justice and fair play to civil servants. Why, 

they said, as long as a man is qualified and doing a good job he should have job security regardless of 

political conviction and regardless of which political party is in office. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, “hear, hear” he says. There, there! But he’s here, here and a lot of civil servants 

that had the guts to be Liberals are there, there! They are not here anymore. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — During the recent campaign our new Premier went on record as saying that if he was 

ever the head of the government no public servant need fear for his job. As reported in the Leader-Post, 

June 22nd, Mr. Blakeney promised there would be no purge in the Civil Service. I quote, “There will be 

no firing.” That’s what Mr. Blakeney said, “No firing.” Mr. Speaker, that promise to the civil servants 

has been broken already. We are seeing the start of a witch hunt, I predict, the likes we haven’t seen 

since you people took over in 1944. 

 

You said that later in this debate, or later in this Session, you would answer the charge made by Mr. 

Lane about firing the students and don’t think we won’t give you those names. Because it is a fact and 

no matter how much you wiggle and waggle you can’t get out of it. And I say that the man that will 

direct this attack will be the Premier himself. He has already forgotten his promise. 

 

Let’s take one example, Jack Weymark, the Deputy Minister of Natural Resources. He was a respected 

civil servant and he never worked at any time for the Liberal Party. His only shortcoming might have 

been that he was once a business partner of our former Premier, Mr. Thatcher. Hardly grounds for 

dismissal I would say. 

 

Another dismissal in the Department of Natural Resources was that of the Assistant Deputy Minister, 

Robert Beeson. He was not an Order-in-Council appointment, he was a qualified public civil servant, he 

applied for the job, he met all the academic and administrative qualifications and he received the 

position. Now I’ll admit . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . an O.C. appointment. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He wasn’t an O.C. appointment. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Oh, yes, he was. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, no, he wasn’t. He obtained his job through the normal civil service competition. I 

didn’t say it wasn’t an Order-in-Council appointment. I said he applied for a job . . . 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

58 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Why bother? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Blakeney, when those braying jackasses behind you get finished laughing, I’ll 

point out to you that it is possible to qualify as a civil servant and it can still be an Order-in-Council 

appointment. Why bother? Well, I don’t know why bother, I am just telling you a fact of life. If you 

don’t know it, you had better look into it and find out. But there is one point, he did work for me as my 

executive assistant. Again, maybe that is why he was dismissed. 

 

Let’s take a look at some more of the Department of Natural Resources. They fired a girl in the 

Department of Natural Resources and they fired a clerk up in the city of Prince Albert. Neither the 

Premier (Mr. Blakeney) nor the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer) had the decency to call in, 

or to talk and explain to, either the Deputy Minister or his Assistant as to why they were being fired and 

neither one of them were given reasonable compensation fitting for the job that they had. 

 

You know it is also curious who the great new Minister of Natural Resources selected to replace these 

two people. The new Deputy Minister is a Mr. Art Hartwell. He came to the Government recommended 

by Clarence Fines, Mrs. Louise Lucas, the former CCF MP and the not forgettable Mr. Joe Phelps of the 

famous CCF of many, may years ago. Who took Mr. Beeson’s place? Well, if you don’t know I’ll tell 

you, Mr. Premier, Martin Semchuk, former NDP MLA and full-time party hack. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’ve got to be kidding, Dave. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — There, Mr. Speaker, are two outstanding appointments, the non-partisan individuals. 

Their qualifications — defeated NDP candidates. The appointments are a disgrace to this Government. 

 

This Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer) does not stop at senior civil servants. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How is he doing? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I don’t know, he better ask you how he is doing. You’d fire him tomorrow if you could, 

but you can’t. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many did you fire? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Sure we fired some, sure we fired some, but we are not the sanctimonious NDP that sat 

on this side of the House, for seven years, and wrung their hands like Uriah Heep and said, “We would 

never do that, we wouldn’t fire people,” and then they get in here and they start the day after they are in. 

I am pointing out to the people of the Province once again — your sanctimonious talk when you were in 

Opposition, the pious garbage you spread all over this province and your actual actions now that you 

have seized the reins of power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

59 

 

Mr. Steuart: — But that’s not the end. The Attorney General, Mr. Romanow, saw fit to dismiss Mr. 

Bernie Bierschenko, an outstanding and hardworking member of the Saskatchewan Insurance Office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I haven’t finished yet. Last week — I have another one for you, where is the Minister 

of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood). Take a look into this one Mr. Minister of Municipal Affairs. Mr. Ivan 

Maitland, just an ordinary ferry operator, was fired. He operated the Riverhurst ferry in the Morse 

constituency. Maybe he was hired by the Premier or a recommendation by the former Premier might 

have had something to do with that. I can also tell you something else. Other civil servants have been 

intimidated and it would appear that after this Session — I predict this — there will be a wholesale 

firing in this Government from Deputy Ministers down to the lowest clerks. I can tell you something 

else. We are compiling a full list of political firings and it will be presented later in this Session. I’ll 

bring it up now to warn the Government that we intend to hold them publicly responsible for their 

actions in firing defenseless people for political revenge. And that is exactly what they are doing. 

 

Let’s take another look at the promises made across this province. This concerns education. It has to do 

with the Minister of Education and the pupil-teacher ratio. Now, you know, Mr. Speaker, I am sure I 

don’t have to tell the members opposite that the great majority of teachers in Saskatchewan came out 

openly in the last election and they supported the NDP Socialists. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I’ll tell you why in a minute. If you are a teacher I hope you can learn it and I shall say 

it simply so you can all learn it. Unfortunately the ratio of teachers on this side and pupils on that side 

are a little higher than I really like. But a great majority of teachers supported the NDP led by many in 

the Teachers’ Federation itself, they worked all day and night for our defeat. Now let me make it crystal 

clear, I recognize that this was their democratic right. I don’t question the rights of any teacher or 

anyone else to take whatever political stand they see fit. In fact, I welcome their involvement in politics 

and I only wish that it had been on our side. But why, why did so many teachers take such a strong stand 

against the Liberals and for the NDP Socialists in the last election? 

 

I believe there were two basic reasons — wage guidelines and the pupil-teacher ratio. The teachers 

believed that we had been too tough on wage increases and by insisting on increasing the number of 

students per teacher they believe we caused many problems in education and cost many teachers their 

jobs. Now another complaint that I ran into in many parts of the province was the fact that our Minister 

of Education, Dr. McIsaac, was not a teacher. Oh, they said he was a fine man but he is not one of us. 

“How can he understand our problems,” they said, “the problems of a teacher when he is not a 

professional teacher 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

60 

 

like we are.” These then were their complaints against our Government and, of course, the NDP 

capitalized on this discontent and again that is natural and reasonable. But, Mr. Speaker, what is not 

natural and reasonable is what they have done to those same teachers in the five weeks since the 

election. The NDP candidate said to each teacher, elect us and we shall take off the guidelines in wage 

increases, the sky is the limit. They said, elect us and we shall reserve the Liberal policy of increasing 

the number of students per teacher. They said, elect us Socialists and we promise we shall give you a 

professional teacher as Minister of Education. Well, it didn‘t take the NDP long to kick their good 

friends, the teachers right square in the teeth. First, they chose the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy as Minister of 

Education, and I am sure he is a fine man. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — But I understand that this MacMurchy is either a full-time farmer and a part-time 

political worker, or a full-time political worker and a part-time farmer. I don’t know which. But let me 

make it very clear, I think both of those professions are admirable. I don’t have any complaint about 

them. There is nothing wrong with these and I don’t complain but by no stretch of the imagination could 

Mr. MacMurchy be called a teacher. Now it couldn’t have been because Mr. Blakeney didn’t have any 

other choice because I am informed that there are 14 or 15 teachers sitting as NDP MLAs and one of 

them even has some university teaching experience. Not much, but some. Now what a slap in the face it 

was to all those teachers in this House and to the hundreds of teachers across the province who worked 

so hard and believed so blindly that the NDP would give them one of their own as Minister. My God, 

Mr. Speaker, they end up with a trustee. Or just an ordinary man like Mr. McIsaac, but a trustee — right 

out of the enemy camp! Oh, Mr. Blakeney, that is one time when you showed either unbelievable 

stupidity or fantastic courage — only time will tell. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not all, that is not all. What was one of the Minister’s few first acts when he said he 

couldn’t change the pupil-teacher ratio at this time of the year. Always that little wiggling characteristic 

and that’s going to be the great hallmark of this Government. Make a statement and wiggle out of it. 

Make another one and barge out of it. Those voters have sure got you fellows up a tree, haven’t they? 

They’ll have you down in awhile. Why couldn’t he do it? Not because you didn’t have any money. I’ll 

remind you I left you fellows $90 million. $90 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — So when anybody comes to this Government and they want a hospital, or a school, or a 

road, or the teachers want a raise, or these civil servants, all the Canadian Union of Public Employees, 

who got the new catch-up program, when they came to you, let there be no mistake, you’ve got the 

money, Allan. You can tell them any other reason, but you’ve got the money. Unless you have hidden it 

or lost it, unless you’re lost it in five weeks — but when I left there it was 100 per cent. $90 million! 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I issue a challenge to the teachers of Saskatchewan, to all those teachers who helped 

elect the Socialist NDP Members and how they worked day and night, I suggest to them that I am sure 

they don’t like this set-up. I suggest 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

61 

 

that they will do like Eiling Kramer did when he was left out of the Cabinet — stalk out and raise 

bloody murder. What happened? Back in he came two days later, little Allan weakened. I suggest you do 

like the Labor Unions did when Allan got up and said, “We won’t change Bill 2, that doesn’t need to be 

repealed.” They demanded and they pounded the table. What happened? Little Allan weakened. I 

suggest they take a page out of their book. Follow the Wafflers. It sounds like a song. Follow the 

Wafflers! It is easy to do this. Print pamphlets, write open letters and hold public meetings and really put 

on the pressure. And I guarantee you, once again, little Allan will weaken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Do all those things to teach us and you will get what you want. He will weaken. That is 

his track record. Premier for five weeks and five times in five weeks he has been faced with decision, 

five times he has made one decision and reversed himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I intend to go in more detail into the government’s failure to hold out any hope for the 

unemployed and for the underemployed, so I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READING 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 2 — An Act to provide for the 

Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is the traditional Bill to postpone the tabling of documents. Members will be 

aware that in many of the statutes that are on our statute books, there are provisions which provide that 

annual reports and the like shall be tabled within the first 10 or 15 days, as the case may be, of the 

regular sessions which have been traditionally held in the winter, in February. They have no real 

application to the special session held in July. It has been the custom to move a Bill of this nature and I 

move second reading Bill No. 2. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 3 — An Act to 

amend the Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I want first of all to congratulate you on the appointment of Speaker of this 

Legislature. All of us, I am sure, know of your long experience in this Legislature, the respect that you 

hold for the tradition of democracy and the respect and the high esteem that you hold for this 

Legislature. I am sure that you will preside over the proceedings in fairness in justice. I extend to you 

my very sincere congratulations on this very high and important appointment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I also express my commendation to our 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

62 

 

Leader and Premier since this is my first opportunity to take part in the debate in this first Session. 

 

The Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) has conducted an outstanding campaign in the last few 

months. It was his tremendous and dynamic leadership that brought to Saskatchewan one of the greatest 

victories for the people of Saskatchewan that we have seen in modern history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I congratulate him on the campaign he conducted. I congratulate him on the leadership 

that he has given. I congratulate him on his ideas and the leadership that he will provide in this 

Legislature and to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also extended my sincere congratulations to all the members in this Legislature who were elected and 

were victorious . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I must remind the Minister that on second reading of a Bill we must stick 

to the principles of the Bill and not to general statements of congratulations. I know that the Chair likes 

to allow some latitude but we must stick to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I intend to get to it very soon. Mr. Speaker, I thought that I should open 

the speech in this form since it is the first time that I take time in debate here. Also, if you permit me, 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to express my deepest sympathies to the families of those members who are no 

longer with us. In particular my sympathy goes out to the family of the former Premier of the Province, 

who passed away so suddenly and untimely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill that I am about to introduce has two very important provisions in it. Both of them 

can be summarized very briefly. 

 

One amendment which will be effective as of August 1, 1971, removes the authority of the Lieutenant-

Governor-in-Council to prescribe amounts that hospitals and physiotherapists may charge patients for 

services that they have received. In other words, it takes the deterrent fee principle out of the statute. 

 

The other amendment will provide the authority, effective as of January 1, 1972, for residents of 

Saskatchewan who are 65 years of age and over to receive medical and hospital services completely free 

of charge. Both of these amendments were commitments the new Democratic Party made to the people 

of Saskatchewan during the election and pre-election campaign. We are acting as quickly as possible to 

implement the pledges that we made to the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me deal with the hospital deterrent fee first. This amendment is of such importance that 

I feel I must provide the Members of the House with some of the background information which made it 

necessary for us, or made it necessary, first of all, for us to strongly oppose the introduction of those fees 

and when we were not successful in preventing their introduction, to continually keep the injustice of 

deterrent fees of the former Liberal Government and in front of 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

63 

 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t need to remind the Hon. Members Opposite what the reaction of the people of Saskatchewan to 

deterrent fees has been. It seems to me that they spoke out most eloquently on this matter on June 23rd. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, this amendment is one of the first in our plan to develop a 

comprehensive health services program for the citizens of Saskatchewan. It will be one step towards 

restoring Saskatchewan to the position of health care leadership which it held seven years ago. 

 

To do this, we must first of all, rebuild what seven years of Liberal Government has destroyed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to serve notice that this amendment is just a beginning of the rebuilding program 

and the rebuilding process. In speaking in support of this amendment, I should like the members seated 

here today, to think back to that “Black Friday” of March 1, 1968, on the date on which the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Government introduced their nefarious deterrent fee program. Two weeks later 

when I took part in the debate, on the deterrent fees, I quoted from the preamble to the constitution of 

the World Health Organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I felt that it was an appropriate quotation, at that time, to start the discussion on the 

proposed changes. I had hoped that the discussion would have ended in the Government withdrawing 

the deterrent fee amendment. In spite of our reasonable and logical objections, the amendments were 

passed. Deterrent fees were introduced in spite of the objections from groups representing every 

segment of our society, including the young people, senior citizens, labor groups, farm groups, church 

groups, citizen groups, doctors and nurses and many others. 

 

It is generally known that I opposed the deterrent fee principle as part of any public health scheme long 

before I became a member of this Legislature. So, today, as I move second reading to this Bill, which 

will remove this tax on the sick, from our provincial statues effect August 1st. I do it with a deep feeling 

of profound satisfaction. Permit me, again, to quote from the preamble from the Constitution of the 

World Health Organization: 

 

Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of 

disease or infirmity. Health of all people is fundamental to the obtaining of peace and security and is 

dependent upon the fullest co-operation of the individual and the state. The achievement of any state, 

in the promotion and protection of health, is of value to all. Unequal development in different 

countries in the promotion of health and control of disease especially communicable disease, is a 

common danger. 

 

The extension to all people of the benefits of medical, physiological and related knowledge, is 

essential to the fullest attainment of health. Informed opinion and active co-operation on the part of the 

public are of utmost 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

64 

 

importance in the improvement of the health of the people. Governments have their responsibility for 

the health of their people which can be fulfilled only by the provision of adequate health care and 

social measures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, deterrent fees are repugnant to and in violation of practically every principle contained in 

the preamble of the World Health Organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to a pamphlet, distributed by the Liberals to each householder, deterrent fees — 

they call them utilization fees — were introduced for three basic reasons. I bring particularly to the 

attention to the Hon. Members Opposite, this was the leaflet that they printed and distributed by the 

thousands to the people of Saskatchewan, trying to sell the deterrent fee principle to the public. 

 

They said that there were three basic reasons why they were introducing them. The Liberals said: 1. It is 

desirable to eliminate the incidence of trivial and unnecessary demands on publicly supported health 

services. 2. The Liberals said that the Government wishes to reduce public costs of medical care and 

hospital services. 3. The Liberals said that government believes direct patient financial participation will 

encourage responsible use of the service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s have a look at each of these reasons and see if they can survive any objective scrutiny. 

First of all they say it is desirable to eliminate the incidence of trivial and unnecessary demands on 

publicly supported health services. 

 

Now back in 1968 when the deterrent fee program was under debate, we asked the Liberals to come 

forward with proof of abuses they have said existed. We have been waiting for over three years and we 

are still waiting, Mr. Speaker, for the Liberals to produce that evidence of abuse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — All we have ever heard were statements such as these: “Everyone knows there are 

abuses.” This was the statement of the Liberals, or statements something to this effect: “Why, just the 

other day I was talking to a fellow and he told me that a friend of his mother-in-law was admitted to a 

hospital for a couple of days just so that she could have a rest.” 

 

Did they name names, Mr. Speaker? Did they provide the dates? Of course not, Mr. Speaker. Did they 

provide any evidence of any study in depth that had been made, or undertaken by qualified people, 

which would indicate if there were any abuses, and if so, what was the extent of the abuses? Of course 

not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Hon. Member for Regina Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) who was then the Minister of Health, in 

speaking in support of the 1968 amendment, said that because there is no demand control, there is no 

patient resistance to doctor over-utilization. He argued that utilization fees would deter people from 

making unnecessary and frivolous demands for services. This, in turn, implied that the average citizen is 

in a position to judge, in every situation, whether or not he should seek the advice or 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

65 

 

care of his doctor. The physician, as well as the patient, has a responsibility to ensure that his services 

are wisely used. 

 

Deterrent charges, if they are to succeed in achieving their intended effect, also produce the opposite 

effect, Mr. Speaker. They lead to under-utilization, by discouraging patients from seeking advice in the 

early stage of illness when symptoms may appear inconsequential. 

 

It is well known that early detection of illness and the prompt introduction of effective treatment, often 

prevents complications and chronic disability later on. Thus, parents for example, should be encouraged 

and not deterred form seeking prompt advice and care for their children whose illnesses are usually 

acute and of short duration. 

 

Similarly in the case of the aged people, among whom chronic disease is more prevalent and often starts 

more insidiously at an early stage. It is not logical nor sound from the health point to view to deter care 

in the early stages of chronic illness, nor to cover all costs once the disease has become chronic. 

 

I am not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that there have not been any abuses, but I am suggesting that there are 

better ways for dealing with a proper and effective use of health plans which can be encouraged in other 

more positive ways, of greater importance of achieving this result is the education of the public to 

appreciate the full responsibilities, but also the limitations of medical services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t go after a mosquito with a shotgun. You don’t penalize the 

whole province for the indiscretion of a few people. When deterrent fees were introduced the Liberals 

said that they would review their effectiveness and if they didn’t appear to be working, they would 

abolish them. Of course, to the Liberals, this only meant one thing: could they reduce the cost of hospital 

and medical care to the public purse. If they could do that, the often disastrous consequences to the 

economic position of thousands of Saskatchewan people was of no concern to the Liberals at all. 

 

Members of the former Government were fond of saying, “Utilization fees are working and our plans 

are being used in a more responsible manner.” How did they determine that the plans were being used in 

a more responsible manner? Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that they determined this the same way they 

determined that the plans were being abused. This time somebody told them that he had been talking to 

a friend of his mother-in-law and since deterrent fees were introduce, she hadn’t been able to get into the 

hospital for a rest. 

 

In the 1971 pre-election leaflet — I have it here with me, Mr. Speaker, somewhere — the Liberals 

distributed these leaflets in large numbers. They said the alarming increase and the demand for health 

services appears to have slowed down. Mr. Speaker, take note of the word “appears” to have slowed 

down. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that that particular leaflet was being distributed by the Liberals in 

every committee room . . . 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

66 

 

Mr. MacPherson: — Can we get you one Walter? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Oh, I found one! And these were the leaflets that were printed at public expense, 

public money was being used by the Liberals . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — . . . to finance their election campaign and to distort their story about the insidious 

deterrent fees, Mr. Speaker. I can find no evidence that any study in depth was ever done to learn about 

the effects of deterrent fees on the health of the Saskatchewan citizen. Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggested 

several years ago — in fact it was on March 11, 1969 — that an examination be made of this. I 

introduced in the Legislature a resolution which was seconded by the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw 

South (Mr. Snyder) which read this way, quote: 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the establishment of a 

commission to examine health programs in Saskatchewan and elsewhere with the view to determining 

the cost of such programs and various methods of financing them; 2. The number, ages and status of 

persons who are deterred by utilization fees from seeking health services. 3. Methods of organizing 

health services which will control costs without placing obstacles in the way of obtaining needed 

services and at the same time make possible an improvement in the quality of health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did the Liberal Government do? It moved an amendment to the resolution 

commending the Government of Canada for establishing a Federal-Provincial study on the cost of health 

services in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Federal Government finally got around to establishing such a 

committee but how in Heaven’s name could such a committee be expected to determine the number, the 

age and the economic status of persons in Saskatchewan who did not seek the health services they 

required because of deterrent fees? Mr. Speaker, this should have been then the former Government’s 

first step if they really wanted to know whether deterrent fees were working and how they were 

working. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — If the Members of the former government did, where did they get their information 

that the deterrent fees were working? There doesn’t seem to be any evidence that they made any careful 

assessment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since I became Minister of Health, I have been informed by the officials of the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan that they have been unable to demonstrate any saving resulting 

from the deterrent fee program. Oh, they have been saving money, Mr. Speaker, but the savings have 

been to the consolidated fund. In 1970 total deterrent fees for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

were in the neighborhood of $4.5 million. This was the amount deducted from the budget of our 

Saskatchewan hospitals, the great bulk of which had to be paid 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

67 

 

by the sick people of the province. From their viewpoint this was bad enough but it can’t even be said 

that the Government saved an equivalent amount of money. When you consider such offsetting 

decreases as the loss in Federal reimbursements, allowances for bad debts, an increase in payments on 

behalf of The Saskatchewan Assistance Plan beneficiaries, the net saving through the consolidated fund 

would be only somewhere in the order of $2.5 million. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the sick people of 

the province paid out the greater part of $4.5 million to save the consolidated fund $2.5 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the few Liberals remaining in this House may still not be convinced that bringing in 

deterrent fees was a pretty stupid way to run a health service. We have done just about everything 

possible to illustrate that from any point of view, whether social or economic, deterrent fees are 

disastrous. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, they have been a political disaster for the Liberal Party in this 

Province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — . . . and I trust that this lesson will not be totally lost on the few Hon. Members who 

are sitting opposite to us. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No Saskatchewan resident can be safe with the Liberals anywhere! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, let us look at a few of the Saskatchewan hospital statistics that gave us 

some additional information as to whether or not deterrent fees had been working. Let me quote just a 

few. 

 

In 1963 the average length of stay in hospitals was 9.4 days. In 1970 the figure remained the same — 

still 9.4 days. 

 

In other words, there is no statistical evidence that deterrent fees have contributed to a drop in the 

average length of stay of patients in our general hospitals. How about the average number of separations 

per 1,000 population? In 1963 the figure was 216. In 1968, the year the tax on the sick was introduced, 

the comparable figure was 208. In 1970, Mr. Speaker, the figure went way up — 222. No evidence here 

of deterrent fees working, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1963 the number of patient days per 1,000 population was 2,072. In 1968 it dropped to 1,957 but in 

1970 the comparable figure is 2,049. Again, Mr. Speaker, no evidence of deterrent fees working. The 

reason for all this, of course, is that the sick people in this Province have continued to rely on the 

professional advice of their doctors in respect to their admission and discharge from hospitals. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, the second basic reason for the introduction of deterrent fees was to reduce 

public costs of medical care and hospital services. Mr. Speaker, the Liberals came through in fine style 

on this one as well. Since the introduction of the medical and hospital deterrent fees, they have reduced 

public costs by transferring responsibility to the public in excess of $21 million. The sad story that goes 

along with 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

68 

 

this is that over the same period of time, the province lost in excess of $4.2 in federal cost-sharing 

because of this transfer of responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the point needs repeating. Since 1968, April 15th of that year, the general public 

had to pay out $21 million in deterrent fees and in the same period of time the province lost over $4.2 

million in Federal cost-sharing. In any man’s language $4.2 million does not come in the category of 

peanuts. We remember the fate of C.D. Howe who said, “What’s a million?” And now we have seen 

what appeared to the people who say, “That’s only $4 million.” This is what our Liberal friends gave up 

for the privilege of taxing the sick people of our province. 

 

The third basic reason for introducing deterrent fees was that the Liberals believed that direct patient 

participation, financial participation, would encourage the more responsible use by the people of the 

service. The Liberals would have us believe the majority of our citizens enjoy going to the hospital or 

that they enjoy half a morning or an afternoon in the office waiting to see a doctor Mr. Speaker, it is my 

belief that 99.9 per cent of our citizens would be delighted never to have a visit a doctor or ever have to 

be admitted to the hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, from my own personal point of view, a visit to the drugstore to pickup a 

prescription after visiting the doctor is quite enough to deter me from any frivolous visits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberals are often fond of saying that those who use the service should pay for the 

service. This kind of thinking puts medical and hospital care in the same kind of a class as a fishing 

licence. Few people object to paying a fishing licence when they want to go fishing. They understand 

that they have made a personal decision to go fishing and therefore they do not object to the price of a 

licence which will help to pay for the cost of stocking our lakes. But no one makes a personal decision 

that way in respect of medical care when it comes to the members of their family or themselves when 

they get sick. 

 

The Liberals tried to make a great deal out of the fact that no one suffers financially because the 

government pays the fees on behalf of persons on the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. What about the 

groups just above the welfare plan level? There are many thousands of these people, Mr. Speaker, who 

are required to pay the deterrent fees — the old age pensioners, the young people who are just getting 

started or a man who just found his first job, the couple with a large family — these are the people who 

suffer because of the deterrent fees. These are the people who are deterred from going to see the doctor 

when medical attention is required. It should not be necessary that the poor and those people on welfare 

should suffer the most. No one has bothered to find out how many mothers have used money set aside 

for milk in order that they could take their youngster to see the doctor. No one has bothered to find out 

what hardship they do to the elderly couple when one of them as to go in a hospital for a month and it 

takes almost the entire Old Age Pension cheque to pay the deterrent fee. Don’t tell me there are no 

financial 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

69 

 

hardships associated with deterrent fees. They may not be hardships to many of the people living in the 

Whitmore Park constituency or Albert Park constituency, but they are hardships to vast majorities to the 

people living in Regina North East and Regina North West . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — . . . and the Riversdale constituency, this I know. 

 

In speaking, Mr. Speaker, in debate on the matter way back in April of 1968, I quoted a statement made 

by Sir Winston Churchill back in 1944. He was not known to be a Socialist — as I am sure you’ll all 

agree. I think the statement is worth repeating. He said this: 

 

Disease must be attacked whether it appears in the poorest or richest man or woman simply on the 

grounds that it is an enemy and everybody in the country, irrespective of means, age or occupation, 

shall have equal opportunity to benefit from the best and most up-to-date medical and allied services 

available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, deterrent fees deny equal opportunity to health care. They deter the poor. It is class 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. Deterrent fees are a regressive tax and have no place in an enlightened society. 

Our citizens cannot continue to be denied access to hospital and medical care treatment because of 

inability to pay a fee every time they need a service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not all Liberals are in favor of deterrent fees. May I take just a few minutes to quote from 

an item that appeared in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on April 2, 1971. The item was under the heading, 

“Munro criticizes utilization fees.” I quote in part: 

 

Health Minister John Munro said Thursday he would like to discourage the imposition of deterrent or 

utilization fees under provincial and medical care insurance programs. Studies of the practice in force 

in Saskatchewan and Alberta have indicated that these have no effect on the use of hospital beds or 

calls on doctors’ services. Mr. Munro said that in discussions with the provinces he has tried to 

discourage imposition of such fees and that he personally believes they inhibit access to health 

services by the individual. 

 

We give credit to Mr. Munro for the view, Mr. Speaker, but he obviously didn’t have too much success 

with his Liberal friends in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May I also inform this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, that Alberta has now eliminated both hospital and 

medical care deterrent fees as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would have been possible to abolish deterrent fees by amending the regulation as the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) has stated. However, we are so firmly opposed to the principle of 

deterrent fees that we want to take the authority for such charges right out of the law. We should have 

liked, Mr. Speaker, to make the change earlier but it was 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

70 

 

not possible to do this for a number of reasons. First of all, in addition to the legal work involved in 

changing the acts, a change of this proportion requires many administrative adjustments to the 

processing system of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and the Medical Care Insurance Plan as 

well. I also felt that it was proper for me to meet with a number of professional and administrative 

organizations, such as the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 

the Cancer Commission, the Saskatchewan Hospital Association, and the Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Commission, to inform them in advance of the action we propose to take. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that I had cordial meetings with each of the organizations that I have 

mentioned. May I also report that not a single group objects to it or opposes our proposal for the removal 

of deterrent fees. In fact, in each case they welcomed it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: —Mr. Speaker, I now want to make a few comments on the second amendment which 

when passed will mean that citizens of Saskatchewan who are 65 years of age and over will no longer 

have to pay the joint hospital and medical care tax. Not all the details have been worked out to this point 

but generally speaking, if a citizen was 65 years of age as of June 23 of 1971 from paying the 1972 tax. 

The Hon. Member asked, why the 23rd. It is a very significant date in the history of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — If a citizen will reach the age of 65 at any time after June 23 or at any time during the 

calendar year, 1972, he will also be exempt from payment of the tax in 1972. Proof of age may be 

required. Newcomers to the province will have to register with a plan and be required to submit 

acceptable proof of their age at their time of registration. We will make this process and procedure as 

easy as possible. This amendment we are proposing will affect approximately 93,000 Saskatchewan 

residents or 10 per cent of Saskatchewan population. It will cost about $3 million. Mr. Speaker, we are 

proud of the contribution the older citizens of Saskatchewan have made to the development of our 

province. These people were deeply involved and committed throughout their lives to work for the 

building of a greater and a better Saskatchewan. Many of these people were hit hard by the economic 

depression of the ’30s. Many lost their homes and their life savings. Many of these people are living on 

small pensions and we feel most emphatically that along with abolishing deterrent fees we must also 

arrange that these people will have free medical and hospital care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — This will be a major step forward to improving their living conditions and their quality 

of life. Mr. Speaker, this is just one more link in a long and continuing chain of events in which the new 

Democratic Party which I represent has worked 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

71 

 

in the interests of the senior citizens of this country. May I remind the Members in the House that early 

in 1927 the representatives of labor in the House of Commons, led by Mr. J.S. Woodsworth, used their 

influence to convince the Liberal Government of Prime Minister McKenzie King of the need for old age 

pension legislation. We believed at that time, as we do today, that these people to whom our country 

owes so much have a right to live in dignity and in comfort. At that time, Mr. Speaker, the labor 

members held the balance of power in the House of Commons. Mr. Woodsworth told Mr. King that as 

one of the conditions which Mr. King received the support of his party he must introduce legislation 

which would provide pensions for senior citizens. Mr. King may have been a spiritualist but he was first 

of all a realist. Thanks to the persuasive powers of Mr. Woodsworth and his colleagues in the House of 

Commons in 1927, the senior citizens in this country have enjoyed the benefits of a monthly pension 

cheque ever since that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: —Mr. Speaker, shortly after I became Minister of Health, I asked my officials in the 

Department to review the terms and conditions of our cost-sharing arrangements with the Federal 

Government to see if this change in legislation for the over 65 age group would prejudice in any way our 

claims for financial participation under the Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Services Act and The 

Medical Care Act. They concluded this would not. However, to ensure that our interpretation of the 

agreement was the same as that of the Federal government, I wrote to the Hon. John Munro, Minister of 

National Health and Welfare, and informed him of our proposed action. I asked him to confirm the 

conclusions we had reached in respect of cost-sharing. Mr. Speaker, I should like to take time for a 

second to read the reply I received from the Hon. John Munro. He says this: 

 

Thank you for your letter of July 5 advising me of a specific change which you propose to make to 

your legislation to exclude all persons age 65 and over in the province from payment of the medical 

care premium and The Hospitalization Act. Subject to review of the specific amendments and 

assuming that such exemptions from payment of premiums will not exclude this group of persons 

from being insured residents with the same entitlement to benefits as those residents who pay the 

premiums, your proposal to exempt all residents age 65 and over from payment of this joint tax would 

not jeopardize our sharing arrangements under the Hospital Insurance and Medical Care Program. 

 

Such a change, Mr. Speaker, would however require amendment to schedule D of our agreement under 

The Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Act and this administrative matter can be handled after the 

applicable legislative amendments have been put into effect. I am pleased to have this assurance from 

the Federal Minister of Health and Welfare. 

 

I shall conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that a little over three years ago when the Liberals moved 

second reading to deterrent fees, I said at that time that they had just played a funeral march for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the name of the song you hear being played throughout this 

Province today is “Hallelujah, Happy Days are Here Again.” 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

72 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — It has been a great Homecoming ’71, Mr. Speaker. I move that the Bill be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, as you well know under the rules normal 

courtesy calls that we be allowed to look over the Minister’s remarks after he has made them on second 

reading of a Bill. But in order to speed up the process of the House as we are anxious to do, I shall 

consider his remarks and make a few of my own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say very briefly what we feel our position is as far as utilization fees are 

concerned. The Liberal Government when it was in office, Mr. Speaker, made an honest attempt at 

controlling the costs of medical care and hospitalization. I disagree very much with what the Hon. 

Minister has said when he said that the $180 limitation that was put on, including both the hospital and 

the office calls, were a tremendous hardship on very many people. That speaker well knew, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister well knew many people who are on social welfare or who are unable to pay their 

deterrent fees had them paid for them. It is a gross exaggeration to say to this House that it was a 

tremendous hardship imposed on the people of Saskatchewan. $180 is still not that tremendous amount 

of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be asking the question of the Minister — I wish he was in his seat and I hope that 

one of the Cabinet will pass it on to him – as to what the cost of medical care and hospitalization was in 

1964 and what it is currently today because we feel that the astronomical rise that has taken place in the 

cost of health care in Saskatchewan will show that the problems that they are encountering have not 

gone away and that they will continue for a long time to come, Mr. Speaker. We are most interested in 

their effort to control the skyrocketing cost of health care in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Deterrent fees don’t. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We shall be very interested, Mr. Attorney General to find out what does do it and 

we shall be watching for your solutions with a great deal of interest as will all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to support the taking off of the utilization fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We are going to support the taking off of utilization fees for the obvious reason 

that we put forth what was an honest presentation and an honest attempt at controlling health costs. It is 

obvious the people of Saskatchewan did not agree with that approach and therefore we are very willing 

to find out what the new Government’s approach will be and we are willing to let them go ahead and do 

it. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Bound by the wishes of the people. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

73 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — “Bound by the wishes of the people,” the Minister of Education says, Mr. Speaker, 

and we are most delighted to have them put forth their attempt and we shall watch with great interest in 

the next four years as to how the increased costs of health care financed because, Mr. Speaker, as I have 

said, we made what we considered to be a very honest attempt at controlling these costs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, after saying a few words about utilization fees and our attempt at controlling health 

costs which will be dealt with at more length by a number of my colleagues, I want to deal substantially 

with the second aspect of the Bill and that is taking off of the premium as far as hospitalization is 

concerned. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that another Bill is coming forward to take off 

the costs of the medical care premium and this one has strictly to do with hospitalization so I shall 

continue my remarks in regard to hospitalization only. 

 

The Bill, Mr. Speaker, has a substantial number of weaknesses. The first one, Mr. Speaker, is that a 

substantial number of families in this province with the breadwinner over 65 will receive no benefit if 

the wife is under 65 and there is another dependent in the family. I have already come across many 

people in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, who have brought to may attention that the wife is about 

63 or 64 and she will not qualify, Mr. Speaker, for any benefit under this Act. If by chance, Mr. Speaker, 

the husband happens to be 65 and the wife happens to be 50 there is a fair chance that there may be a 

dependent in the family or two or three, Mr. Speaker. Then, Mr. Speaker, we have the breadwinner in 

the family who gets the reduction but he will pay for both his wife and children in the family. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the very family that needs the help, the breadwinner is retired on a low income, has family 

responsibilities for both his wife and children, but his is right back to where it started, Mr. Speaker, and I 

may even make that prediction that he will shortly be worse off then ever before when the government 

opposite raises the premium. Now this is one particular group which I have great sorrow for. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to a great may speeches from the member for Regina North West — I believe it 

is Mr. Whelan — I haven’t quite got all the constituencies sorted out yet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I am waiting on a seating plan, fellows. 

 

But anyway he is to give a great number of speeches and I hope that under this Bill that he is going to 

get up and give a speech, the usual speech he used to give us, his concern for poor people which we all 

share in this House, the concern for people who need assistance, and I hope he will get up and tell us 

how this Bill is really going to help this man over 65 who has a substantial number of children. Maybe 

even the Minister will bring in an amendment to help the situation, Mr. Speaker. We are all hoping he 

will. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the question is, once the premiums are taken off, then we have the question of how 

this revenue is going to be raised. I must say that I am terribly fearful that 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

74 

 

the poor people of Saskatchewan through this sales tax — the farmers, the unionists, the people who are 

hard workers, and the families in this Province — are going to end up paying more sales tax, Mr. 

Speaker, for everyone over 65 regardless of whether they needed the help or not, maybe a little more 

income tax. Mr. Speaker, maybe a little higher premiums on the hospital tax. Mr. Speaker, this was a 

well calculated ploy before the election and I must admit it was very successful. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Right! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Brought out about five days before voting day or six possibly in the hope that the 

young people of Saskatchewan would not see through it because they are going to be the ones paying the 

bills. It was presented to the electorate and obviously accepted. But, Mr. Speaker, the young people in 

this Province should cry out in revolt against paying this substantial amount of increased taxation that 

they will be called on for so many people over 65 who are not in need of any help whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I am surprised, Mr. Speaker, at the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek), a Robin 

Hood in reverse I would almost call him, taking from the poor and giving to the rich across this 

Province. Mr. Speaker, he referred to his own constituency. Now we take a look around the City of 

Regina and we see many people in his constituency will need this type of assistance and then we take 

many people in Albert Park, Whitmore Park, many of the people in the southern part of Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, people on high incomes, the old age pensioner over 65. Maybe if they are farmers they have 

sold their land, Mr. Speaker, and are in a reasonably good financial position. They may be even 

receiving the Canada Pension Plan if they have contributed. Their family responsibilities are relatively 

low, Mr. Speaker, because their children are all grown up. They don’t have many expenses, over 65, Mr. 

Speaker, because they probably don’t drive the car quite to the same extent that they used to. Mr. 

Speaker, the towns of Saskatchewan are full of people over 65 who are well-to-do. They are well-to-do 

people and they do not ask, Mr. Speaker, this Government or any other government to tax their children 

so that they can have free hospitalization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, in my constituency the fathers and the mothers over 65 are not asking 

any government to take off the hospitalization premium and put it on the young people, their sons and 

daughters with families with high financial responsibility as far as education is concerned. They don’t 

expect their children to pay free hospitalization for them. 

 

To the Minister, Mr. Speaker, I wish to direct another question because I hope when he closes debate he 

will answer it and that is, that out of the 93,000 residents of Saskatchewan that are receiving assistance, 

how many, Mr. Speaker, are the people who are in dire need of assistance? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, in his previous speech the Minister got up and he told us about the 

people of his 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

75 

 

constituency and how they needed assistance and all of us on this side of the House will agree that there 

are many people in that constituency and many people all over this Province who need some assistance 

financially and they are over 65. 

 

Later on, Mr. Speaker, when we come to moving amendments in committee, I intend to suggest that we 

move an amendment allowing those people in Saskatchewan who receive the Old Age Supplement, free 

hospitalization. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Means test? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about the Means Test. I knew the 

Minister would bring that question up. The question is that we don’t need any Means Test. The 

information is on file. It is filed in Ottawa and the information is totally available. We need no Means 

Test whatsoever to pay free hospitalization to those people that need it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We are not against, on this side, those who need it. We are against passing out the 

cheques and taxing the people who can’t afford to pay increased taxation to so many who don’t need 

that type of help. 

 

Mr. Messer: — How about Homeowner Grants? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I should like to cover that, Mr. Speaker, but I think that you would rule me out of 

order. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Why don’t you remove it if you don’t like it? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that you may even qualify under this, although I haven’t 

checked your age. I have, Mr. Speaker, been taking a very good look, because during the election 

campaign as the promises come forth, I started taking a look at the words called ‘ability to pay’ which 

were used very widely by the members opposite and which we fully endorse as a fine way of increasing 

tax measures, because it certainly looked as if, if elected they would be required to increase those taxes. 

So I took a good look at those who had the ability to pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ability to pay is a great word because there are very few people who think they are in that 

group. But lo and behold it turned out what that there are not very many rich people in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, do you know how many there are? Do you know how many people in 

Saskatchewan really make over $10,000? 4.6 per cent. And I shouldn’t be at all surprised that a 

substantial number of the teacher representatives that we have on the other side have just learned that 

they fall in this very unkindly group as far as increased taxes are concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyway we have another group in the $8,000 to $10,000 and we have about 5.2 per cent of 

Saskatchewan people who are in this. So that makes a group of only 9.8 per cent of people in 

Saskatchewan who make over $80,000. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

76 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point is this: that we are going to be asked for increased taxation in the Province of 

Saskatchewan shortly to help a lot of people who don’t need help. We are going to endure the taxation 

put on many, many working people that do need help, and we, on this side, Mr. Speaker, are against that 

principle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I have already stated my intention when the Bill goes into committee. 

Now, I wish to give the substance of the motion that I shall present to the committee when the 

opportunity arises. It is this, that in this regard where one person of a married couple has attained the age 

of 65 and is eligible for old age security supplement, the couple and the immediate family thereof shall 

be entitled to receive benefits under this Act and there shall be no liability for payment of the tax. 

 

Now I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) will very closely consider this 

amendment when it comes up in Committee of the Whole. I am sure that the Minister of Health, after 

listening to him for seven years, is very much in favor of helping only those people who need help. We 

are convinced of that, those of us who may have sat here for seven years and have listened to his many, 

many speeches. He is against helping people who don’t need assistance. He is against taxing so many 

people that will be called on to pay the increased taxation for this $3 million exemption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time of adjournment is shortly upon us and we ask, Mr. Speaker, that because the 

Minister has only presented the second reading this afternoon, that in order to facilitate the opportunity 

to have more of our speakers on this side study what he has said, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. I am 

sorry, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask for 5:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. 

 

Mr. L. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, may I in one breath and in one sentence offer congratulations to 

yourself and to every elected member of the House, and in the same breath offer condolences to the 

bereaved family of the Hon. Mr. Thatcher. 

 

Now I want to spend a few brief minutes saying a few words on this Bill that was so ably introduced by 

the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). I feel that is one of the more important steps that are being taken 

by this Government to bring back to Saskatchewan a recognition of the more fundamental and the more 

important aspects of life and society. 

 

I think that the recognition of these principles adopted by the CCF Government years ago is now 

demonstrated by the fact that since that time practically all of Canada and now most of the North 

American continent have adopted similar types of legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — I think there was another important aspect of the 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

77 

 

original Medicare Plan that people appreciated and really like. This was the particular clause whereby 

you paid while you were well and benefited when you were sick. Two very important human aspects — 

pay while you are well so that you may benefit when you are sick and not earning. 

 

These were some of the fundamental principles that were recognized and was written into the Act as it 

was. Deterrent fees and utilization fees certainly destroyed this principle. They destroyed it totally and 

completely. No one has ever convinced me that there was any human justification for placing a tax on 

any human being when he was sick and unfortunate enough not to be able to earn or even to take care of 

himself. No one has ever convinced me that where more money was needed, and we were not able to 

provide the services with the premium rates that were in existence, that you would correct any 

deficiencies, if there was a deficiency in the first place, by taxing a man when he is flat on his back. No 

one has ever convinced me of this. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Are you bringing out the violins? 

 

Mr. Larson: — Yes, I could play an even better tune than that Davey. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: —It has often been said that society and people are judged by the way that they look after 

their aged and infirm. I think this is a very fair judgment. I think it is a judgment that will measure the 

morale and the human values of any society. 

 

Now the Bill before us goes a long way, in my opinion, to justify that judgment. I think that if we really 

and sincerely believe what so many of us like to say, like to parrot, like to mouth, then it is incumbent on 

us that we prove it by our actions. 

 

This Bill proves that this Government means what it says, that it is taking immediate steps — after only 

a very few weeks in office, a few weeks that in many respects have been very hectic from more points of 

view than one. And yet during this time, this Government has seen fit to bring forth this kind of 

legislation and this kind of return and restoration of a human and social principle that was recognized all 

over Canada and was destroyed in the Province of Saskatchewan by the former Liberal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — I could say a great deal more along the same line with regard to deterrent fees. There 

will be much more said. But I think the loudest voice, and the voice that was heard most clearly and 

most distinctly, was the voice of the people of Saskatchewan June 23rd. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that there is anyone in this Assembly who can speak with 

a more forceful, a more 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

78 

 

eloquent, and a more meaningful voice than the people of Saskatchewan did. 

 

When I look across the way, after the fuss and after all the eulogies that were made with regard to 

deterrent fees and their benefits and their needs, we see the results. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to spend a few minutes on Section 3(a) of this Bill which deals with the relief of 

premiums for people over 65 years of age. 

 

I think, again, that this is setting a precedent. I think, again, that this is recognizing a human and a social 

value. After all, the people 65 and over have been, to a very large extent, responsible for having laid the 

foundation, for having worked and sacrificed for many of the things that we in Saskatchewan enjoy 

today, including medical care and so on. I think it is fitting that a society should recognize these people. 

I think it is fitting that we should, at a very early stage, say to them, “Thank you, thank you, for your 

contribution!” This is just one small way, Mr. Speaker, that we can say thank you and say it in a 

meaningful fashion. That there won’t be some loopholes and some discrepancies, no one doubts. Any 

progressive legislation, any progressive move is bound to create a certain amount of loopholes. 

 

A good government as it goes along will correct these. But in the establishment of the principle 

sometimes risks have to be taken and sometimes you have to do things that later must be corrected. But 

the fundamental principle is that you do start, and that you do lay the foundation, and that you don’t 

criticize before you have reasons to criticize. And when you do criticize, you criticize constructively. 

 

I think the thought of placing money and other obstacles before the value, the principle and the needs of 

these people of 65 and over, is morally wrong. I am very proud that this Government and the Party that I 

have the honor and the privilege of representing looks at these moral values and is prepared to correct 

any deficiency that may from time to time arise. 

 

I want to say that many of the senior citizens have found the premium to be an embarrassment, and to 

some extent, a burden to them. I have spoken to many who have been in the unfortunate position of 

having to do things that destroy their pride. It destroys some of the principle that they fought for and 

believed in all their life, by having to be reduced to a point where they are made feel that they are taking 

charity. This is not what these people want. This is not what they stand for. This is not what they 

sacrificed for and this is not what they built for. So I say, that removing of the embarrassment and the 

burden from them is going to go a long way towards giving them peace of mind, giving them some 

contentment, as well as a feeling of well-being and being necessary. 

 

I am sure that many of them will feel that we really belong to a society, and we really belong to people, 

who are prepared to make the kind of sacrifices that some of us will have to make in order to provide 

these people with the independence, and the self-assurance and the pride that this will give. 

 

I could go on in the same vein. I could go on for a considerable time, but I don’t think that it is really 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

79 

 

necessary, other than to say this is one of the tangible demonstrations of the difference between the two 

parties that prevail and exist in Saskatchewan and in this country. 

 

I don’t think at this time or any place has it ever been more adequately demonstrated that there is a basic 

difference — a very basic and a very fundamental difference. The people of Saskatchewan, fortunately, 

have the opportunity and the privilege of trying both of the philosophies. They have returned on June 

23rd to the one that they have found, in the past, to be worthwhile and they are prepared to go along 

with and to trust. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in supporting this Bill before the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, this is the first opportunity that I have had to 

participate in this theatrical production, sponsored or promoted by Mr. Allan Blakeney, directed by Mr. 

Roy Romanow, with the chorus line provided by the teachers, with the dialogue provided by the 

preachers and by the songsters made up by the Wafflers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that if there is ever an indication that this is a theatrical production, this 

whole Session, it is this Bill on utilization fees. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that occasionally when someone 

wants to do something, he likes to get patted on the back, he likes to get the opportunity to stand on his 

feet and get public acclaim. But never have I ever seen anything like this Session called to remove 

deterrent fees when it could have been done the day that the NDP took over the government by passing 

of an Order-in-Council. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, oh, there is the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). Look at them go. Well we 

want you to answer a few questions as well when we go into committee. First I want to say and reiterate 

what my colleague, Mr. Weatherald, the Member from Cannington has indicated, that this party as the 

Opposition in the House will support this Bill not necessarily because we like it, but because we have no 

choice, you happen to have 45 Members and we have 14. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — But I do want to say this, that because we shall support this Bill does not mean that 

we are not concerned about the implications of it, because when the window dressing is gone, when the 

trappings are finished, when the hail of my publicity is washed out the window, there are going to be 

many implications for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things that does concern me is that the Government on that side of the House has now agreed 

in principle to throw out the principle of selectivity and to establish the principle of universality in all 

welfare and health benefits in this Province and perhaps to establish that principle across Canada. 

Whether they realize it or not, Mr. Speaker, there is only so much money in Canada for welfare, there is 

only so much 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

80 

 

money in Saskatchewan for health and it is important that that money be directed to those people who 

need it. Perhaps rather than paying the medical care costs or premiums for people, who this winter, may 

be down in the hotels in Florida, lying on the beach or in the Waldorf Astoria in New York, or in 

California, or perhaps even in Europe, or Clarence Fines, in Fort Lauderdale. They should have sat down 

and looked at the needs of housing, they should have looked at the needs of native people, they should 

have looked and directed their attention to the real needs. Nobody questions, Mr. Speaker, the needs of 

assisting people who are in need or have a need in the payment of medicare premiums. 

 

The Liberal Government when they sat on that side of the House inaugurated the first medical indigency 

program in Canada, whereby a person that was on a marginal income could apply for a health card and 

have all his health benefits paid for, his utilization fees and so forth. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that principle 

should have been extended, but what we are concerned about is what is going to happen as a result of 

this legislation to the young person, the man who is starting off in life with three or four children who is 

making $3,000 or $4,000 a year and in all that period of his life he needs more help and more financial 

assistance than at any other time when his family responsibilities are completed. As my colleague from 

Cannington pointed out, if the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) had really wanted to help those people 

who were in need he would have selected those people over 65 that had a family, that had dependents, 

instead of that he ignored them, Mr. Speaker, completely ignored them. It is possible for a man at 65 

years of age to still have six and seven dependents, and yet he says oh, no, the man who has reached 

retirement, who has a wife, who has six or seven dependents, will have to pay his won medical care 

premium for his wife and all his dependents. But the man who has retired at 65 or 66, 67, and has no 

financial liability, who has now a pension plan, who now has the Canada Pension Plan, who perhaps has 

all kinds of assets, who has a pension that looks after him very comfortably that he will not have to pay 

his premiums. 

 

We are going to take one stand on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we are going to insist that they 

continue to keep up with their promises and their platform. I want to read one that was made by the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

An NDP government would abolish all medical and hospital premiums for persons 65 years of age, 

starting January 1 1972, Party leader Allan Blakeney said here Friday night. 

 

Everyone 65 years or over in Saskatchewan will receive medical coverage free as a matter of right. We 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, is it free? Is it free to the man 25 years of age with seven children, is it free to the 

man 35 with eight children. 

 

He described the policy as a centerpiece of what he called his bill of retirement rights. More details 

will be announced in the campaign later he said. But Mr. Blakeney also promised, and this is the key, 

“that his party would abolish all deterrent fees and would include the cost of Level III Nursing Care 

under Medicare,” he goes on. In answer to a question from the audience, Mr. Blakeney said he would 

hope to be able to provide the extra service and at least hold the line on the present medicare fee of 

$72 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

81 

 

per family and perhaps eventually reduce it to the 1964 level of $52. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we intend to see that they keep that promise and that it is a fact and not a promise, that if it 

was a bribe, we intend to see that they fulfil that bribe. You know, Mr. Speaker, that is only the first step 

in perhaps making Saskatchewan the welfare state. 

 

All of us know what the welfare state has done to Uruguay, Sweden, to Scandinavian countries. We 

know what it has done to Britain, France. Look at this, “Why put up with the high cost of drugs, start a 

drug care program, vote Mike Feschuk.” Mrs. Henry is ill and so is Saskatchewan Medicare Plan. Then 

look at what the NDP in Alberta said, not only did they eliminate them from 65 years of age — here is 

their program. I have to put my glasses on so I can find it . . . 

 

An. Hon. Member: — He is getting old! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — . . . When I ended up getting glasses, and had I waited three months I should have 

got them free from the Socialists. 

 

But the NDP in Alberta say, oh no, we will eliminate all medicare premiums. So all I am saying, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the only point that we want to make here this evening, is that we want to be absolutely 

certain that they do keep the head tax at $72 so that the young people in Saskatchewan don’t pay the bill. 

We are also going to watch with care that they don’t do what they did in the Province of Manitoba. You 

know what they did there? They reduced it from $200 or $250 or whatever it was to $100 

approximately. Then they turned around and they increased income tax form 33 to 39 per cent, they 

raised the corporation tax from 11 to 13 per cent . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — . . . what they had better realize, Mr. Speaker, is that the major feeling facing 

Canada today is unemployment. If you look at that Throne Speech they did nothing about it. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is going to be interesting in this House is that when that chorus starts 

from the other side, they intend to drown out the truth, and we want to hear you, from now on we’ll be 

the cheer leaders, just keep speaking. 

 

All I am saying, Mr. Speaker, the Province of Manitoba became the highest taxed province in the 

Dominion of Canada eight months after the NDP became the Government. We are going to do all that 

we can to prevent, that by give-aways, by Socialism, by drug programs, Level III nursing care, you 

name it, that the Province of Saskatchewan is not to become the highest taxed province in Canada. We 

hope that they will maintain their promise of a head tax of $72 and that we look forward to the 1st of 

November when that head tax is reviewed that it goes down to $52. We want to ensure that 

Saskatchewan doesn’t take the road to become the greatest welfare state in the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Oliver (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

82 

 

a privilege to speak on behalf of the people of my constituency, the constituency of Shaunavon . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That would be a change for the people of Shaunavon! 

 

Mr. Oliver: — . . . and so the people of Saskatchewan in general who made it possible for them to sit on 

the Government side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Oliver: — This particular Bill that is before us now is one of the most important pieces of 

legislation to come before this Session, in my opinion. It will have far-reaching effects on the lives of 

many of our senior citizens. During the campaign I was really shocked to find people, especially old 

people who were really living under poverty stricken conditions, really bad. Some pensioners stated that 

they were so poor that they had to skip a meal to provide money enough for small expenses, and the 

small expenses that were really bothering them were the deterrent fees. 

 

The financial commitments are heavy upon these people. The Hon. Member from Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald) stated that the small towns and villages are just full of wealthy senior citizens. I should like 

to know where these small towns and villages are, they sure aren’t in the southwest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Oliver: — Now these old folks planned their retirement, 10, 15 or 20 years ago and at that time the 

cost of living was lower. During their productive years of life they produced enough wealth to care for 

themselves providing the cost of living had remained static. But unfortunately, the cost of living has 

been going up at an alarming rate, in fact it has risen about 3 per cent since the 1st of January this year. 

Now this same Hon. Member also stated, he didn’t think the senior citizens would want their children to 

be taxed to provide free medicare for them, I believe this is true. But what parent would want his child to 

go without something, even the smallest pleasure just to give dear old dad some comfort, not very many 

parents would do that. But all too often, youth are neglectful of their parents and all too often and also 

too late they begin to realize how important their parents are and how much they have sacrificed just so 

the children would not have to work as hard as they did. They want a better life for their children. I 

doubt if there are any young people who would really seriously object to paying a little more taxation if 

indeed this need arises, to make mom’s and dad’s life a little easier financially. 

 

People of my generation often forget just what it was like for our parents to raise a family during the 

depression years of the ’30s. Although when I was out on the campaign, I found that it was being argued 

by a number of young couples who have young families and who were unemployed, that there was little 

difference during the last seven years. Many of them said, in discussing the province’s economy and the 

economic conditions brought on by the previous Government, “What is the difference 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

83 

 

between the conditions that prevailed during the ‘Dirty Thirties’ and the last seven years under the 

Liberals and the leadership of ‘pulp mill Davey?” By the way I should like to congratulate him on a very 

fine leadership campaign speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Oliver: — It is true that there have been many abuses in the medicare and in going to doctors and 

so forth. But let’s look at the patients who are going. Who are these that are abusing the services? Now 

going to the doctor has never been a joyous occasion for me, and I am sure it isn’t for the majority of 

people. However, there are a few people who are continually running to the doctor over various petty 

ailments. I strongly doubt if their ailments are of a physical nature, they are of a mental nature. But they 

are still sick, they need help. If they were properly treated that abuse would soon end. Doctors in my 

constituency tell me that people are staying away from the clinics and the doctors until their ailment is in 

an advanced stage. In the case of cancer it is often too late sometimes, but there is much needless pain 

and suffering not to mention the mental anguish and the financial cost involved later. 

 

To sum up, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned about our people and to me this is only one of the many 

ways that we are going to help them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill as has been pointed out is a rather interesting one 

from a number of viewpoints. Firstly, in that it doesn’t need to be brought before the House at all to 

bring about the changes that will result from enacting this legislation. As a matter of fact this Bill, like 

the entire Session, Mr. Speaker, is nothing really more than window-dressing for the NDP Members 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — On one hand, they are saving the poor people over 65, the sick, the ill and so on, 

money by this legislation and at the same time spending needless thousands of taxpayers’ dollars by the 

expense of this particular Session that we are now sitting in. 

 

Now, the NDP, of course, are used to putting political expediency before political responsibility so it 

doesn’t really come as a surprise as far as we are concerned. They are abolishing a very small fee really, 

presently paid by the recipients of hospital care. A fee that in most cases doesn’t amount to more than 5 

or 6 per cent of the cost of medical care, the cost of hospitalization, a fee that, of course, has an annual 

family limit in total of $180 as the price — and I suggest it is a pretty small price — for the quality of 

care that the Minister was talking about and I know he is genuinely concerned about that when he 

introduced the Bill, a fee that is already paid by the Government of Saskatchewan if the patient is 

financially unable to meet it. This fee is a practice in health care, Mr. Speaker, that is employed by other 

responsible governments in other Canadian provinces and other countries of the world, including some 

countries governed by Socialist administrations, 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

84 

 

but responsible Socialist administrations that have had some common sense and experience in 

government and experience in operating an overall comprehensive health care plan. 

 

The Minister said in his remarks this afternoon, I believe I quote him correctly, “that utilization fees 

have been a financial disaster.” Now it is true, and I’ll be the first to admit that they have been a political 

disaster, but certainly I don’t say and I don’t think that he can document the case that they have been in 

any way a financial disaster to anyone in this Province in the course and period of time in which they 

have been in operation. 

 

I have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, when we look at another plan, an insurance plan, the automobile 

accident insurance plan, a plan that was introduced by the Members opposite when they were the 

Government and has been with us for many, many years. This is a plan with $200 deduction and it has 

worked well. It has worked well for I have never heard them complain or consider here the financial 

disaster of $200 for the unfortunate individual who happens to have a car accident, an auto accident or 

be involved in one. I have never heard a word or an outcry in this particular respect. We have the same 

principle applying here, the very same principle applying in this particular Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us also proposes to abolish the payment of premiums by certain 

individuals over age 65. This again was an election promise of the NDP and one that obviously proved 

very popular, so that, so that Bill 3 again marks the fulfilling of the first of the NDP election promises. 

And in this sense, I am glad to see it because in education and in other areas, they have reneged on so 

many to-date that we are rather pleased to see this one implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — It’s a welcome change, Mr. Speaker, to see them bringing about the fulfilment of one 

of those promises. 

 

In fulfilling this promise they are demonstrating the characteristic that I am sure will characterize future 

welfare changes and welfare legislation that they may bring in, and that is the principle referred to by the 

Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), the old principle of universality — everybody over 65 gets it 

whether or not he is in need of this kind of assistance in foregoing the payment of the premium. 

 

It has been pointed out by the member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), my seatmate and the Member 

for Milestone that there are many people over age 65 who can use the help and we certainly support 

removing the premiums for those people. But there are also many people over 65, Mr. Speaker, who are 

well-to-do enough that they can well afford to pay the premium themselves, despite the fact — as I 

listened to the member for Canora — these are people that got along in this Province in this life and got 

along well under governments of all stripes, did not particularly get there by any government aid of any 

kind and I don’t believe really want that kind of aid or assistance right now. 

 

The Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla), as I recall, talked of saying thank you to all of those people over 

65 — I wonder 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

85 

 

about the group with a spouse who happens to be under 65 or who happens to have dependents. Surely, I 

think Mr. Speaker, the member for Canora is sincere — and I’ve heard him in the House before — I 

believe that he is — all of those people over 65 deserve the same kind of sincere thank you. 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I am wondering if the Hon. Member is referring to 

me as the Member for Canora or is he referring to Mr. Larson as the Member for Pelly? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the Member for Canora has not spoken on this debate. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker. The Member is quite right. It was the Member for Pelly (Mr. 

Larson) whom I was referring to who spoke earlier in this debate, the Member for Pelly. I can’t believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that . . . 

 

An. Hon. Member: — . . . road map! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — We need a road map, yes! In a day or two we will probably get some of the haze of 

faces sorted out, Mr. Speaker. I hope you would facilitate some direction over here and give us a seating 

plan so that we will know where some of these fellows sit and where they come from. 

 

I can’t believe that the Minster, who introduced this Bill this afternoon, intends to overlook those people 

over 65 who happen to have a spouse or dependents under 65 and surely he’ll want to give them the 

same “kind of contentment, the same kind of well-being,” that the member for Pelly referred to so 

eloquently, and save them the “financial embarrassment,” I believe he mentioned, “of paying the 

premium,” and again, I quote the Member for Pelly in this respect. 

 

I hope sincerely, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister — and I know he is sincerely interested in and always 

has been during his time in this House — in health care for the people of the Province. I hope he will 

consider amending this legislation when we get in Committee to bring about that particular effect and 

action. 

 

I suggest, too, Mr. Speaker, that the passing of this Bill — and I don’t have the confidence in the 

Opposition that my seatmate the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) has — this Bill is the first of 

many that will place a much heavier load on them with the young family, the 25 to 45 year-old age 

bracket in this Province. And I predict that it’s only the beginning of a series of hastily conceived give-

away promises as they get close to election day in the course of the campaign that’s going to cost that 

age bracket in this Province millions and millions of dollars. Give-aways to the young, give-aways to the 

old — there is no other area left but the in between 25 to 45-year old man with a family. And God 

knows it costs more and more today than it ever did to raise a family. Bills and taxes are high enough 

now but I predict, Mr. Speaker, that it will not take four years, it will only take one year for that 

particular age bracket in this Province to become the most highly taxed group of people, not only in 

Saskatchewan but in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

86 

 

Mr. J. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should very much like to participate in this 

debate on second reading of this Bill. I intend to devote the major part of my comments to the question 

of utilization fees, therefore, I shall begin with a very brief comment on the other aspect of the Bill 

relating to the removal of the premium on those over 65. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, technically the premium, as a flat tax of so many dollars per year, is a regressive tax. 

It constitutes higher proportion of a low than of a high income. And, notwithstanding the heartfelt 

comments of the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) about the wealthy people over 65, 

statistically those in that age bracket are among the poorest in any age bracket and therefore the removal 

of the premium on those over 65 years of age is a small, and I emphasize the word “small”, step in the 

direction of having a more just, a more equitable tax system. 

 

Perhaps more important, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill indicates a direction which this Government 

intends to take — a direction involving more thought and concern for old people. For surely, Mr. 

Speaker, the treatment of old people in all Capitalist societies is one of the major condemnations of these 

societies. I have no desire to return us to an idyllic pre-Capitalist past because there was no such thing, 

but some of the more primitive people have been a great deal more humane in their treatment of old 

people than we, who are anxious to shove them into nursing homes and forget them. There are some 

good nursing homes but many of them are merely modern-day death houses. 

 

And when you hear the comments of the people on the other side of the House who seek to defend the 

deterrent fee as a principle which is embodied in the Automobile Insurance Plan, as if cars and people 

are analogous things, one begins to realize the very sad state to which our society has sunk when we 

begin to think . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Richards: — . . . of the treatment of our body and the maintenance of our health as being analogous 

to the treatment and maintenance of our health of our cars. 

 

Now, to return to the question of utilization fees. A utilization fee is a price and if you will bear with me, 

Mr. Speaker, I shall outline three very elementary points from my Economics 101 Class with respect to 

the price system. Prices are supposed to do three things, Mr. Speaker. First, they are supposed to allocate 

economic goods — and health services are certainly one example of an economic good. Prices allocate 

according to the criterion of ability to pay. Secondly, prices are supposed to allocate resources used in 

production of goods and services. One blatant example of the effectiveness of the price system in doing 

that is to be seen in the number of very wealthy backstreet abortionists who will perform their duties of 

backstreet abortions because there is a demand, because people are willing to pay the price. Incidentally, 

I hope that before four years are up, this Government will have been able to play its part in getting rid of 

any federal laws opposing abortion. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

87 

 

The third function which the price system plays, of course, is that it distributes income among those who 

are involved in the provision of goods and services. Prices, in the form of wages received by the poorest 

of hospital workers and in the form of the fees of the wealthiest of specialist physicians, are the 

mechanism whereby income earned in the provision of health services is distributed. 

 

Now, in the provision of health services, we have learned from bitter experience that the price system 

must go. In fact, this is one of the first areas of our economic life that we have learned needs an element 

of Socialism. Now, why must the price system go? Well, to put it into one sentence which is true but 

trite — health services must be allocated on a basis of need and not on a basis of ability to pay. 

However, I am quite willing to admit, Mr. Speaker, that if we are to do away with the price system, if we 

are to do away with the price system as a means of allocating particular health services, we must replace 

it with some other system which can perform better the functions which were performed, however 

badly, by the price system. We must decide, if we are going to do away with the inequities of the price 

system, how we are going to allocate health services among the people of the province, how are we 

going to allocate the productive resources that we have available through the budget in the provision of 

new health services. We’re going to have to decide what will be the relative income shares, the income 

received by various people participating in the process of producing health care. One of the great 

injustices which exists at the moment is, of course, the shockingly low wages received by public health 

employees. 

 

Now, the utilization fee was an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to introduce through the back door a kind of ghost 

of the price system. We had succeeded in getting rid of it in 1962; and we were introducing its shadow 

in the utilization fee. Mr. Speaker, I have a certain grudging admiration of the previous administration 

for having seen fit to introduce the utilization fee. Certainly, as the Liberals are the first to admit, it was 

not a politically popular move to undertake and it obviously indicates that their government — and I am 

quite willing to admit it — had a good deal more on its mind than simple political pragmatism. 

 

The previous administration, was convinced that the use of the price system, the use of cost accounting, 

the use of the deterrent effect of ability to pay — even in a modified form of the deterrent fee — was in 

some sense a just act to do. Ad to some extent I think we should give them credit. But now let us come 

back and again begin to analyze why we on this side of the House opposed the deterrent fee and I trust 

that when we have finished this debate, Mr. Speaker, we shall have laid to rest one of the topics of 

political conversation with which the Saskatchewan public must surely be very tired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Richards: — The deterrent fee is but one small question in the whole complex arena of questions 

that must be faced with respect to health care. I want to outline very briefly what are our arguments in 

opposition to it and hope that we can, as quickly as possible, spend our time on other means more 

important, because much larger, questions. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

88 

 

Now, the first argument in opposition to it is the question of whom did it hit. The Hon. Minister of 

Public Health (Mr. Smishek) made reference to the absence of detailed studies having been done to 

show what had been the effect of the deterrent fee. Let me quote from one study which has just become 

available, a study done by a former colleague of mine at the University of Saskatchewan — Dr. Beck, 

entitled An Analysis of the Demand for Physicians’ Services in Saskatchewan. To quote from him on 

page 154: 

 

In general the greatest reduction of health services (this is after the imposition of the utilization fee, 

Mr. Speaker) occurred among large families and among those families whose head was in the upper 

age classes. The utilization fee resulted in reduced services to the aged and large families. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, it deterred the people whom it should not deter. It deterred those with large 

families, the plight of whom has been sorely lamented by those on the other side of the House. It 

deterred the aged whom we are trying to help. These are the kind of details of the operation of the 

deterrent fee which surely should suggest that it is not performing the function which with a certain 

sincerity, I believed the former administration was intending it to perform — namely the control of 

costs, the allocation of health services in a rational manner. 

 

The second argument, of course, is a very simple one about lost cost-sharing funds of at least $1.3 

annually due to the imposition of the deterrent fee. The third argument against the deterrent fee is that it 

resulted in a great deal of bureaucratic inefficiency because it involved a great deal of paper work for a 

very small sum in each individual case. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, having presented the arguments against, we should come back to the one argument 

which stands in favor of the deterrent fee, namely, the argument that it might prevent the frivolous use of 

health services. In other words, provide a more rational allocation of health services. As we have seen, 

Mr. Speaker, it has not done that; it has deterred those whom it should not deter and it has not deterred 

those whom the doctor might consider to be frivolous users of the service, such as the neurotic middle 

aged housewife who descends upon him regularly. These people do not consider their attendance to the 

doctor to be frivolous and therefore $1.50 does not deter them. 

 

I should like to terminate my comments at this stage. We have succeeded in a good number of things, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to health services. It is a great pleasure to see the correlation between income 

and use of health services decline since the imposition of medical care in 1962. This is an indication that 

income is becoming a decreasingly important variable in access to health services. I would insist, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are other barriers besides money to the acquiring of adequate health services. There 

remain important barriers in the form of the geographical maldistribution of health services. There 

remain important other kinds of barriers in terms of bureaucracy, in terms of people’s ignorance about 

what is available and what should be available. These kinds of barriers it will be, I trust, the duty and the 

privilege of this Government to abolish in the next four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

89 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — My first words in this Assembly must be to 

congratulate you on your election to the highest office of the Legislature, that of the Speaker, a position 

which you occupy with distinction. I am particularly proud to congratulate you in this way because 

while I am the MLA for Last Mountain constituency, I am resident in Wadena constituency, even 

though it would appear that Semans is a great distance from Wadena. I was very pleased to support you, 

not only in 1967, but in the election this last June. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — I am pleased and I am proud to speak on behalf of the senior citizens of this 

Province. I am proud of the senior citizens of this Province unlike the member for Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald) who said he felt sorry for the senior citizens. I am proud of the senior citizens of 

Saskatchewan because they built this Province and I was proud to visit them during the campaign and in 

periods before. In the campaign, when they asked me, “Are you really going to remove deterrent fees, 

are you really going to take off the premiums,” I was proud to say, “Yes, we are. Yes we are and 

immediately after we take office.” We are doing that at this time. 

 

I am proud too, to be able to speak in support of this Bill, for this is an outstanding piece of legislation of 

benefit to a class of people who are often hard-pressed to maintain a dignified standard of living. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — It is to me a first indication of how the New Democratic Party will give priority to 

people as the government of this Province. Now, the abolition of the head tax for health plans on senior 

citizens puts into practice a key principle of the philosophy of our party and of our government, the 

principle of taxation by ability to pay. Flat-rate taxes are generally bad taxes because they take the same 

bite out of a small income as they do out of a large one. They are inconsistent with fair and just taxation 

practice and must be eliminated in all possible cases. A large percentage, indeed the vast majority of 

people over 65, are living on pensions or on other fixed incomes and are thus more heavily penalized by 

flat taxes such as the health premium. I believe the measures contained in this Bill will help to some 

extent at least to ease the burden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction of this legislation by our New Democratic Government stands in sharp 

contrast to the actions of the former Government. A very small remnant of which now occupies the 

wide-open spaces to your left. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — In 1964 the Liberal Party had barely warmed the seats of office when it began to 

introduce a series of aggressive and backward measures which brought increasing hardship to those over 

65. First of all, they abolished the division of services for the aged, they fired its director, they jumped 

its plans to 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

90 

 

bring help to our elderly people. Next they jacked up the head tax from $52 to $72. Now I am a poor 

mathematician but that seems to be an increase of 40 per cent. Then they brought in deterrent fees — the 

notorious, hideous tax on the sick and one of their most repugnant Acts. I recall just a year ago at their 

convention where members of the party brought forward a resolution calling for the removal of these 

fees for at least the senior citizens and how one of their leading Cabinet Ministers entered the debate to 

prevent the deterrent fees from being removed. They slashed grants to senior citizens’ homes thereby 

hiking the rent and forcing many older people to apply for welfare. They welched on their promise to 

establish a drug-care program allowing the drug companies to continue to gouge the sick. While all this 

was going on the little man who is now leading the Members opposite was managing the finances of our 

Province in such a way that property taxes per person rose over 50 per cent forcing many retired people 

to abandon their homes which they loved so dearly. New Democrats have already, in this Session, taken 

a number of important steps toward building a concern for people into the policies of the Government. 

We intend to continue with new programs designed to benefit Saskatchewan people. It is to be hoped 

that progressive legislation such as the Bill now before us will not be compromised in its effort by any 

alteration such as that proposed in the speech this afternoon by the Member for Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — The idea of a Means Test! For that is what the member was talking about. That is 

a poor and petty adjustment that comes awkwardly from the mouths of the Liberals from the old 

government. Why do members opposite talk of a Means Test for senior citizens when they are prepared 

to give away literally million of dollars of public funds to such needy individuals as Carl Landegger? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — This proposal in inconsistent with their actions of office. As recently as four 

months ago, another example of the old Liberal attitude of Socialism of the rich and Free Enterprise for 

the rest. Mr. Speaker, as I have stated, the principle of this Bill is an excellent one. It is a principle to 

which the New Democratic Government will adhere and one which will reappear again and again in 

other legislation as we move to enact the New Deal for people. I would urge all Members of this 

Assembly to give this Bill their full support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, on this my first occasion in rising in 

this sitting of the Legislative Assembly, I should like to add my congratulation to those of other 

Members, to you, Sir, on the high office of the Speaker. I am certain you will bring dignity and fair play 

to the occupancy of that Chair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1968, the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan introduced hospitalization utilization 

fees, as we termed them, costing $2.50 per day, subject to some maximum stipulations. 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

91 

 

The Government of that day argued that hospital and health services were being over-utilized and 

therefore as a means of controlling rising costs, the fees were necessary. The New Democrats, who then 

sat in Opposition argued, that the imposition of the daily fee represented a “tax upon the sick” and could 

not be logically justified. We are all aware that costs are rising. Inflationary factors have been apparent 

throughout the entire period since World War II and have been increased through the impact of conflicts 

in countries like Korea and Vietnam and through the enormous world-wide expenditures for military 

hardware in what historians are pleased to term the cold war. Mr. Speaker, control of costs is a major 

problem for every government, for every city council, for every rural municipality, for every farm, for 

every business operation and for every citizen in this Province. Saskatchewan spends very large sums on 

health care of its citizens and the people of Saskatchewan may be assured that this Government and will 

continue to be concerned about the control of those costs. 

 

However, our approach is quite different to that of the preceding Liberal government and this Bill is 

primary evidence of that fact. Perhaps I could relate a brief story to the Members on the opposite side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, to illustrate my point. This is a biblical story called, “The Story of the Good 

Samaritan.” You will recall that story without me relating it in detail. But there were significant 

participants in that story. The first group can be classified as the “The Robbers” The robbers had a part 

to play in that story and they have a part to play in the world in which we live today. They have a very 

simple motto — “What’s’ yours is mine and I’ll take it.” The second group in that story were the “Priest 

and the Levite,” or those who passed by on the other side. They had a very simple motto and their motto 

was, “What’s mine is mine and I’ll keep it.” The good Samaritan was the third participant in that story 

and he proved by his actions that he had a very simple motto and one that I contend is badly needed in 

the world in which we live today. His motto was “What’s mine is mine but I’m willing to share it.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Members of the Opposition do not realize that that does not destroy a person’s 

individuality and that is the kind of thing we need an increasing amount of in the world today. We do 

not believe on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that the person who is suffering from physical or 

mental disability or illness should be called upon to shoulder an extra burden and particularly while that 

condition applies. Recovery from illness is much more likely to be improved if the patient does not carry 

the extra burden of financial worries while he is ill. This in itself, Mr. Speaker, can be a means of 

decreasing overall health costs. 

 

I imagine most Members are aware that hospitalization expenditures are the major portion of our overall 

health costs. Hospital costs have risen very rapidly. I understand in the hospitals in Saskatoon, public 

ward rates are now up to $50 and $60 per day. To control those costs is important. Indeed it is 

imperative. And how can we make progress in this direction? In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, we may well 

pay a good deal more 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

92 

 

attention to the opinions of medical personnel participating in community health clinics like they have in 

Prince Albert — perhaps the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) has heard of that one, and also in 

Saskatoon, Regina, Eston and many other locations. I know my experience with the community clinic in 

Saskatoon clearly indicates the medical personnel are dedicated to the “preventative medicine approach” 

and are intent on keeping their patients out of hospitals, the very place where we, as a Province, are 

incurring our major costs in relation to health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Robbins: — I might say, Mr. Speaker, I have never been able to understand that line of thinking 

which says, “charge a person who is ill an extra fee to deter him from going to the hospital or when he 

or she finds himself or herself in need of hospital treatment, levy a utilization fee because of the use of 

that facility.” One does not check into a hospital and out of a hospital like he does into or out of a hotel 

or motel. One goes to hospital if the doctor admits you; one leaves that hospital only if the doctor 

discharges you. I suppose it could be argued with some validity that there is reason to say that there are 

persons who do use medical services to excess. As previous speakers have intimated these people are 

not well, they suffer from a neurotic condition. I suppose if one used that argument in terms of doctor 

services, even if one felt it had some validity — and I do not really believe that that contention is a valid 

one — you simply cannot use that approach when you think in terms of hospital services. I again stress, 

only the doctor admits you, only the doctor discharges you. There can be no logic and no reason in 

arguing that you should attempt to deter an individual from going to the hospital and this is the basic 

thing that is being removed from this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly agree with the intent of Bill 3 which removes the 

deterrent fee for hospital services. In my opinion it should never have been enacted in 1968 when it was 

and I am pleased to see the Government provide it with an early demise and a decent burial in this the 

First Session of the Seventeenth Legislature. I support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that the Member for 

Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) isn’t in his place — I think that is the right one. I do hope the 

Opposition gets a chart of the Government Members because we are having a little difficulty; it must be 

relatively easy for you, but it is difficult for us because there are so many of you, but I will first refer to 

the Member for Saskatoon University as I found what he had to say very interesting. He presented a 

logical case against utilization fees, whether you agree with the individual — he is coming in now and I 

am pleased to see he is coming in. I was just addressing some remarks to the Member for Saskatoon 

University. I found his talk very interesting. It was different. Whether one agreed with him or not, it was 

a refreshing change from the 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

93 

 

usual bleeding-heart approach that we have come to expect from the NDP Members opposite whenever 

they talk about health care or welfare problems. He also, I think, put his finger on a very real problem 

and that is, how any government today allocates health care or any other service that is expected of a 

modern government and still controls the cost. 

 

The last Member who rose talked about the same thing. He said we put deterrent fees on the wrong 

people. People don’t put themselves in the hospital and take themselves out. If he had much to do with 

hospitals and I am sure the Minister of Health will find this out if he doesn’t know it already, this is only 

partially true, unfortunately people do insist on staying in the hospital. They do go in early and our 

hospitals are organized in a very peculiar way. You’ve got a real problem, I know it and recognize it, 

and I am sure Mr. Blakeney recognizes it. If your Government can find some way, some better way of 

controlling costs and I am sure there is a better way than utilization fees. If you can find that way and 

make such a breakthrough and still allocate these health services to the people who really need them and 

control costs, let me tell you that this side of the House would be the first to congratulate you and the 

first to support you. 

 

This is a real problem and make no mistake about it. You go into any hospital in this Province, Saturday 

morning, Saturday night, Sunday, Monday, Saturday afternoon, many of them are almost deserted. The 

central core of our hospitals are the operating rooms, the laboratories, etc. For some reason we have 

agreed in this Province, your Government first and ours, that they should not operate on a full time 

capacity. Maybe your Government now will change it. We operate our hospitals on about a four and 

one-half day week or a four day week. 

 

With the rapidly escalating health costs that we all face all over this nation, something has to change. 

Let’s not kid ourselves, as a Government or as the Opposition, that every dollar that is spent on health or 

education is a sacred dollar or necessarily a good dollar. You know it, I’m sure, and if you don’t know 

you will find it out. In the sacred name of health, welfare and education, there are literally millions of 

dollars being wasted and it is a disgrace. If you could find some way of stemming the flow of these 

wasted dollars, you would make a breakthrough and we will support you. 

 

You look at the hospitals today. You show me how many people are treated in the foyers and the 

boardrooms of all these hospitals. I remember when they built the new Victoria Union Hospital in Prince 

Albert — and I happened to be the Minister of Health — I was told over and over again this is a bare 

bones hospital. “Oh, if you cut another dollar out of this a year you haven’t got a humanitarian bone in 

your body and it is just bare bones.” I remember walking into the opening, I just about disappeared in 

the carpet — of course I’m not very big. It was a beautiful foyer. I said, “If this is bare bones, God help 

us if you had really spent the money.” I have never seen anybody treated out there in that beautiful 

foyer. I don’t know what good it is. I don’t know whether it is necessary or not. But I’ve said this before, 

if someone came down and looked at our society here in Saskatchewan and in many places in Canada, 

they would say that we must have rather peculiar priorities. 

 

You look at our schools today, under us and under you, 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

94 

 

mansions, palaces. I never heard of a beautiful school educating a child yet. Sure, the facilities in it are 

good but I am talking about the buildings. Take a look at our hospitals. I remember opening a hospital in 

Rosetown and the hospital closed up was built to last of the next 200 years. We closed it up because it 

was that the public demanded it. 

 

The same thing in our schools, our hospitals, our public building generally. I sometimes begin to think, 

when I was in Government, when I was the Minister of Health and when I was the Treasurer, “your 

Treasurer is your watchdog.” Somebody said, “Well Davey is the Minister of Finance and when he 

leaves the Provincial Treasury taxes will go up 400 per cent to 500 per cent in the municipalities.” But I 

am going to tell you something, it is easy to spend money for a new government. It is easy to please the 

people. It is great to take the so-called tax off the sick and the poor and the old aged. But I am going to 

tell you something else, somebody of that side of the House, somebody in this society of ours, better 

give a priority to that dollar. Somebody once said, “You know, the Lord must love the poor people, he 

made so many of them.” I am going to tell you as a slightly retired tax collector, that the tax collector, 

and that’s the new tax collector over there, loves the poor people, because make no mistake, they really 

pay the taxes. That’s who will really carry the burden. Now it’s been said here, and I will repeat it, we 

put on utilization fees not because we had any illusion that they were popular but in an effort to make 

the use of these great services more responsible on behalf of the patients, the hospitals and the doctors. 

Make no mistake, we recognized then and we recognize now that it was a blunt instrument. We knew 

then that it wasn’t the best of all possible methods. We had studied the experiences in Swift Current 

where the utilization went down and then it started to come back up again. You will find when you study 

the chart that the same thing can happen. 

 

Now there may be a better way. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, and the Members of this House, that the 

cost of health in this nation has doubled within the last few years. The Economic Council of Canada has 

stated and it didn’t state this lightly, that if we don’t do something about the cost of education and of 

health, it could — this is of course ridiculous — but it could consume the entire gross national product 

in the year 2000. And the Federal Government has warned us when we were the Government and they 

will warn you that they intend, and I believe them, and I don’t’ care what government is down there, 

they intend to put a stop on these open-ended deals they have in regard to post-secondary education, 

health and welfare. And when this happens it will hurt all the provinces and it will hurt us here in 

Saskatchewan. I hope, I said this when I was on that side of the House and I’ll say it now in support of 

the problems you’ll have, that if and when they do this that they do, in fact, take into consideration the 

hard fact that we in this Province did try to control costs. Whether we were right or whether we were 

wrong, obviously in these cases, the people of Saskatchewan have said, “You were wrong.” Let me tell 

you, the people of this Province, what we did sincerely. What we did we knew we did in the face of 

courting political disaster and we found political disaster. But we still did it, and we did it because the 

man who sat there and who would have sat here, had he lived, had a very strong conviction that was 

backed by most of these people, all of these people, the people that sat on 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

95 

 

our side of the House, that it was the responsibility of the Government to take those difficult decisions 

when we knew that the costs of theses services were literally, literally running away with the tax burden 

of the people. No one likes to put taxes on. I sat over there and I brought in more taxes one year that we 

had seen up to that point and it didn’t make me popular. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I can remember, the Members on our side said, “We’re behind you Dave.” And I 

looked around and I didn’t realize how far behind me they were. But I want to say this, we might have 

been defeated but if you think we are going to stand up here — we are going to support this because the 

people have told us they want us to support it — but as far as we are concerned utilization fees in this 

Province are a dead issue. Mr. Robbins said that and I agree with him. He said that to the University in 

Saskatoon, it’s finished, it’s over. We are going to vote for it. You can laugh at us, you can ridicule us, 

you can do anything you want. That’s your privilege, I wouldn’t take it away from you for one minute, 

we would be doing the same thing if we were over there and if there were 14 or 15 of you sitting there. 

That’s natural and we expect it but again I want to emphasize, while you are taking these off and it’s the 

popular thing to do — you promised to do it and you are doing it — you had better start looking for 

some other way to control these costs or it will wreck the economy of this Province. You can’t find 

enough money, the people haven’t got enough money. Let’s not kid ourselves, you are going to take it 

from the rich. There weren’t that many when we left office and there weren’t that many when we came 

into office and there won’t be that many when you leave office. Where will you get it? You will get it 

where every tax collector gets the money — from the ordinary people, the working people. Let’s not fall 

into this trap of saying that if we can somehow get the money from Ottawa that it doesn’t really count. 

Because, after all, I still hope we are all Canadians, there is still only one taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a serious problem. You are taking a very historic and a very serious step. You are 

going to have to replace this income — $7.5 million or it might be $8 or $9 million, I don’t really know. 

We’ve estimated it at something between $7 and $8 million, it might even be more than that. Now, 

you’ll pick up some of the money and the added money you will earn on the agreement between the 

government of Saskatchewan and Ottawa on some new tax-sharing plan. I hope you do, we are all 

citizens of this Province. You still won’t get enough. And I predict here today if you don’t change your 

attitude about bringing industry, then you are going to have no place to get it outside the pockets of the 

working people that now live in this Province. Let’s not kid ourselves, let’s not disillusion ourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We have to get diversification in this Province. We’ve got to bring industry in. We 

have to got to bring more people in to try and share this tax load if we want, as a Government and as an 

Opposition, to continue to give the people of this Province the kind of services they expect and the kind 

of services they 



 

July 29, 1971 

 

 

96 

 

look forward to. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where you’ll get the money. If you follow through with the 

promises you have made, I predict tonight that the people of Saskatchewan, in four years, will be the 

highest taxed people anywhere in Canada and in any time in our history. I predict here tonight that you 

may have to do something about the premiums — $72. It is now about the lowest in Canada, it was $72 

when we came into office. You have said you’ll reduce it. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It was $52 . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It was $72 when we came into office. Oh, you reduced it just before the election but 

you always do that. You used to put it down before an election and then put it right back up after the 

election. The people will remember that. It’s much lower today in Saskatchewan than it is over in the 

great Utopia, Manitoba. Lower than it was in British Columbia, lower than Ontario. You’ve got another 

tiger by the tail. Look at all the other health plan promises that you have made. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we will support this legislation but let the Government be under no illusion, we are 

here to remind you day in and day out, month in and month out, of those fantastic promises you made; 

not only in the field of health but in the field of education, about the tax burden that you are going to 

take off the people. You better believe it! Four years from now when you answer the people it may, and 

I think it will be, a different story. 

 

We will support this legislation, of course, we will support it. And as far as we are concerned, as I said, 

when we are elected again, as we will be in four years, utilization fees are finished. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I almost forgot the last of my most important lines. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:20 o’clock p.m. 

 

 


