




















































Hansard: March 23, 1971


1164 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

26th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 23, 1971 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

Introduction of NDP Youth 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords) — Mr. Speaker, this is possibly a privilege but I’m going to ask for it. 

I have seven guests immediately to my left in the gallery. They are members of the New Democratic 

Youth Club of North Battleford. Two of them are my daughters. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Correction Re: Effective Date on Quality Premium Hogs 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Minister of Agriculture) — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

wish to announce that the $2 quality premium on hogs comes into effect on April 1st and continues for 

the fiscal year ending March, 1972. A recent advertisement said the policy was in effect for the calendar 

year. This was an error. It is in effect for the fiscal year. It starts with hogs marketed April 1st. I wish to 

draw that to the attention of the Members of this House. 

 

Saskatchewan House Designated as Historical Site 

 

Mr. Grant: (Minister of Public Works) — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to announce a Cabinet 

decision to designate Saskatchewan House as a historical site. It is the Government’s hope that 

preservation and restoration of this symbolic landmark will serve to remind Saskatchewan people of our 

growth from a territory to a province. Built in 1891, Saskatchewan House was first used as the official 

residence of the viceregal representative of the North West Territories. Lieutenant-Governor Joseph 

Royal was the first resident as the representative of the Territories and the last was Lieutenant-Governor 

E.A. Forget in 1904. But the Hon. Mr. Forget continued residence as the first viceregal representative of 

the Province of Saskatchewan after the province was formed in 1905. During the next 44 years, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan House was used as the official residence and was the scene of almost every 

major social event in our province. In 1939 when King George VI and Queen Elizabeth visited our 

province they stayed there. Use of the official residence was discontinued at Saskatchewan House in 

1945 when Lieutenant-Governor A.P. McNab’s term expired. Since then it has been maintained as a 

cultural centre and more recently as a school. Cabinet plans call for phasing out of the school and 

restoring the centre’s core of the building to its original state. There is a group of local citizens headed 

by Mr. Stinson and Mrs. Ruth Hunt who will immediately become involved in the restoration and 

refurnishing. Our plans also call for housing such groups as the Plains Historical Museum and the 

Historical Society using the area in the structure which was erected in 1928. The south wing of 

Saskatchewan House will continue to be used as a theatre 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1165 

 

for the re-enactment of the Trial of Louis Riel until such time as another use is found for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the Government’s hope that the building and the grounds will eventually become one 

of the major tourist attractions in the city of Regina and in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Messer: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, a comment in regard to the Minister of Agriculture’s 

announcement. I’m certain all farmers, at least hog producers in the Province of Saskatchewan, will 

welcome the incentive program especially at a time when the prices of pork are at somewhat of a 

depressed state. I’m sure he already knows that the Federal Government’s plan came to an end on 

December 31 . I wonder if they could give consideration to making it retroactive to the end of the 

calendar year so that relief could be supplied to that three months’ time that there was no incentive 

program to producers? 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Minister of Agriculture) — It will be as I announced in the Legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan: (Regina North West) — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to hear the announcement from the 

Hon. Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) regarding Saskatchewan House in my constituency. I think 

that it is a very excellent location for a historical site. I’m sure the people in my constituency will 

approve wholeheartedly. I should like to see the classes that are being held there continued elsewhere. 

I’m sure that it will be one of the major tourist attractions of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan Annual Report 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek: (Regina North East) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder 

whether I can ask the Minister of Public Health when we can expect the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan Annual Report to be tabled in the Legislature? I have talked to him privately about it. I think the 

end of the fiscal year is due. I know he has got until March 31st but I would hope that the report will 

come down before. 

 

Mr. Grant: (Minister of Public Works) — Mr. Speaker, it is in the printer’s hands and it will be tabled 

in time. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister told me that it has been in the printer’s hands for the last 

couple of weeks. 

 

Mr. Grant: (Minister of Public Works) — Mr. Speaker, I told him that last week. The question was 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1166 

directed to me last week and I said, “It’s in the printer’s hands.” Now let’s not stretch it out to two 

weeks. 

 

WELCOME TO GUESTS 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to draw the attention of all Hon. Members the following group situated in the 

gallery: from the constituency of Souris-Estevan represented by Mr. MacDougall, 20 members of the 

Columbia Squires Lodge from Estevan under the direction of Mr. D. Cootes. I’m sure all Members 

would wish to them an extremely warm welcome and to all those other visitors who are in our gallery 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 5 — Prairie Grains Cash Receipts Stabilization Program 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey) moved, seconded by Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): 

 

That this Assembly is of the opinion that the proposed Prairie Grains Cash Receipts Stabilization 

Program does not provide Saskatchewan farmers with a minimum acceptable net income that would 

have continuing relation to cost of production; 

 

And that this Assembly favors a program based on a minimum guarantee of net income that is flexible 

enough to provide for sound land practices and that gives incentives to the Federal Government to 

reduce costs of farm inputs for western grain producers. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all Members of this Assembly will agree with me that present day 

agriculture in the Province of Saskatchewan is confronted with numerous problems. One of the major 

problems is the income that farmers receive in regard to their cost of production. This is not a new 

situation to farmers in Saskatchewan or the Prairie Provinces. It is, however, a very serious problem to 

the farmer in this province. I say this is due to the fact that he is in the process of adjusting to a different 

type of agricultural climate which in itself presents some major problems for him to contend with. 

During this period of adjustment he is also confronted with a situation which allows him less net income 

than he was receiving in years past. The net incomes of years past being greater than those now were not 

really sufficient at that time to assure farmers of a continuing viable enterprise. 

 

I’m certain that all Members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, are aware of the economic situation that is 

now confronting farmers in Saskatchewan. However, Mr. Speaker, for the records of this House, I 

should like to give you some indications of the present and past income situations of farmers in this 

province. 

 

According to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics’ figures, total farm cash receipts in 1964 were $838 

million; in 1965 they had increased to $888 million; in 1966 they had further 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1167 

 

increased to $950 million; in 1967 they reached a peak of some $977 million or nearly a billion dollars 

farm cash receipts intake. In 1968 the trend began to reverse and the income dropped to $898 million; in 

1969, $722 million; in 1970 it had dropped further to $684 million. It is obvious from these figures, Mr. 

Speaker, that farm cash receipts in 1964 increased by about $150 million to a peak in 1967. However, 

since that time cash receipts have dropped from that peak of $977 million or nearly a billion dollar 

figure to a low of $684 million in 1970. A reduction in farm cash receipts of nearly $300 million. 

 

During this period of falling farm cash receipts we have seen accompanying it, the costs of farming 

operations, the inputs that farmers purchase and need steadily continuing to rise in price. Therefore, in a 

nutshell, the cost of farming operations has increased in the last three years while the gross cash farm 

receipts have decreased. This means that the net realized income to farmers has shrunk drastically. 

Realized net income according to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics’ figures for the same period of time, 

1964 to 1970, are: 1964 — $450 million; 1965 — $458 million; 1966 — $464 million; 1967 — $483 

million, the peak; 1968 — $367 million; 1969 — $194 million; 1970 — an estimated $150 million. 

Taking the gross farm receipts of 1964 of $838 million and comparing them to the net realized farm 

income of 1964 of $450 million, we find that this is slightly over 50 per cent of the total cash receipts to 

farmers. 

 

However, when we compare the 1970 farm cash receipts of $680 million to the 1970 net income of $150 

million, we find that this percentage has shrunk to 22 per cent of the farm cash receipts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all Members of the Assembly can realize just how serious a situation this is 

for the farmer in Saskatchewan. The percentage reduction of net compounded by the fact that total farm 

cash receipts have been reduced significantly since the mid-sixties shows that if this continues farmers 

will virtually be unable to continue operations in this province. 

 

The major reason for this chronic condition is that farmers and western provincial governments have not 

been able to impress upon the Federal Government and the Federal Department of Agriculture the 

seriousness of this problem so that the Federal Government would make some sincere attempts to deal 

with and adjust these problems. 

 

Due to lack of action, there is not nor has there been an effective Canadian policy for agriculture for 

farmers in general. It is due to the absence of such policy that we are, as farmers, in a situation of 

chronic instability with the agricultural sector of the economy now in a serious decline. Farmers have 

been asked by higher levels of government, both Provincial and Federal, to make major adjustments at a 

time when their cash position was short and capital requirements large. 

 

Government should have shown responsibility to help meet this cash shortage and assist with the 

difficult adjustments that had to take place.  This assistance was not provided to a great enough degree 

to offset the shortages of capital to farmers. However, farmers did remarkably well in response to 

changing economic conditions; western farmers made some dramatic adjustments, most within the past 

several years. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1168 

In the Province of Saskatchewan we have seen the farmer adjust his wheat acreage significantly. We 

have seen the Saskatchewan farmer adjust and increase the forage acreage in order to offset taking land 

out of grain production, wheat production in particular. We’ve seen some extensive adjustment in regard 

to diversification into the livestock industry in this province. But in spite of these kinds of adjustments, 

the net income to farmers has dropped most seriously as I have pointed out. 

 

During this time, as I have already stated, there was the longer run cost price squeeze which farmers 

have had to contend with. During the period of 1961 to 1968 the prices of goods and services used by 

farmers increased by some 35 per cent while the prices received for farm products sold by farmers 

increased overall by only five per cent. Rather than seeing a corrective measure in this cost price 

squeeze, we see it worsening this year. In order to alleviate these pressing financial problems of farmers 

and provide some long run adjustment policies for agriculture, we have seen the Federal Government 

table the Task Force on Agriculture Report. 

 

I think it is an accepted fact that, in principle, the farmers of Saskatchewan are against such Task Force 

proposals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — From the Task Force proposals we have seen the development of the subsequent 

announcement of a grain stabilization program. This program is also, in principle, unacceptable to the 

farmers and those who have had some opportunity to research its proposals. Such farmer organizations 

as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool have expressed doubts about the stabilization program. 

 

In the Western Producer we find the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool stating, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has serious doubts about the value of the grain stabilization program as 

outlined by Otto Lang, Minister responsible to Parliament for the operation of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. 

 

The article further states that on November 30th, Pool delegates at their annual meeting stated that under 

the aspects of the federal plan some long standing Government support programs such as the Temporary 

Wheat Reserves Act would be dropped. In the same article, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Turner stated: 

 

The Pool meeting felt that Lang’s ideas meant less Government commitment to agriculture and that 

this is unacceptable at a time when continued extensive Government involvement is essential. 

 

Another objective was that the three per cent was too high a contribution for farmers to make to any 

stabilization fund. Granted there has been some adjustment and changes made in the first announcement 

of the stabilization plan. The payments that farmers are to contribute have dropped from three per cent to 

two per cent. We have not yet, to date, seen the changes nor the guidelines of the renovated program 

which is to be legislated shortly. We, however, do not foresee significant changes that 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1169 

 

will be beneficial to the farmer. We in the New Democratic Party therefore believe that a more practical 

program would be a net income program that would have some continuing relation to cost of production 

which would be based on a minimum guarantee of net income that is flexible enough to provide for 

sound land practices and would give incentives to the Federal Government to reduce costs of farm inputs 

for western grain producers. In order to bring forward the benefits of such a proposal, I should like to 

discuss and compare the proposal that we are making to this Assembly in relation to the proposals of the 

stabilization of Mr. Lang’s. 

 

We in the New Democratic Party particularly welcome any commitment from the Federal Government 

to western grain producers which is of a long term nature. We however do not agree with the formula for 

assistance, if indeed any real assistance will be provided by Mr. Lang’s proposals. According to the 

statements Mr. Lang has made, the plan will provide for Federal contributions toward market research 

and development. We also welcome that research and development. He also states that producers will be 

provided with more up-to-date market information by means of early announcement of prices and quotas 

for western farmers. This will definitely be of great assistance to farmers in planning their production in 

the spring. 

 

We are, however, most critical in areas where the farmers will lose the support programs that they have 

now and have had in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Two of these areas would be the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act, which may well have 

by now served the purpose but should not be discontinued until it can be replaced with a commitment by 

the Federal Government for the financing of a normal carryover of all grains. 

 

We are most critical of the intentions to carry forward the losses on pools from one crop year to the next. 

They will now be deducted directly from the stabilization rather than be carried forward, which is a 

direct cost to the farmer because his contributions make up half of that stabilization fund. We believe, as 

most farmers do, that losses on pools should be borne by the Federal Treasury. 

 

After some careful scrutiny and analysis of the proposed Prairie Grains Cash Receipts Stabilization 

Program, many have found that the plan would not accomplish what western farmers have been led to 

expect from it, mainly that it will not ensure income stability and security. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Preserve the family farm! 

 

Mr. Messer: — In depth research, study and analysis by the Government of Manitoba has also brought 

forward evidence that shows: (1) that it is impossible to estimate either the long or short run cost of such 

a plan; (2) that it is impossible to predict whether any real benefits would ever flow from it; (3) that the 

specific example provided by the grains group is inadequate and that conclusions which might be drawn 

from them are not 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1170 

reliable; (4) that it would pose major problems of administration. 

 

We, therefore, are encouraging a plan such as a net income stabilization plan put forward by that 

Government in Manitoba. This plan would: (1) guarantee net income on a basic quantity of production 

without in the least diminishing incentives for efficiency or production . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — . . . (2) it would be flexible among different crops thus stimulating sound land practices; 

(3) it would have built-in incentives for the Federal Government to take measures that would reduce the 

cost of farm inputs in western grain production. 

 

This plan would provide, as I have stated, a net income guarantee to grain producers on a basic quantity 

of production or on a basic acreage. The plan would not be detrimental to efficient practices or 

destructive of initiative. In fact, it would be exactly the opposite. The plan would be conducive to sound 

land uses practised by providing for flexibility among crops. The plan would be incorporated in such a 

way that it would be of direct financial interest to the Government of Canada to take effective measures 

to reduce the cost of inputs to prairie producers. 

 

The need for working on a net income basis can easily be demonstrated. In the period of 1949 to 1952 

average farm expenses per cultivated acre on the Prairies was $8.92 per acre. In the period from 1966 to 

1969 those costs had increased to $16.40 per acre. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thanks to the Liberal Party! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Gross marketings per acre in 1949 to 1952 period were $14.35 per acre. They were 

$13.03 in 1966 to 1969. If the marketing figures are corrected for the fact that large stocks of grain are 

stored on farms or fed to livestock, the average revenue per acre in the early 1950s was $20.16 per acre 

and in the latter 1960s about $22.30. Hence, farm expenses per acre increased by 43 per cent, farm 

revenue per acre by just over 10 per cent, in spite of the fact that the latter period includes the best year 

on record, 1966. 

 

The net income stabilization plan would guarantee to prairie grain producers a net income value per 

cultivated acre expressed through the prices for grains up to a basic quantity of production. The main 

features of such a plan would be the varying levels of support for both price and quantity of grain 

covered. The factors determining variation would be the change in production cost saving operating 

expenses, total volumes of markets, acres planted to various crops and the prices obtained from 

commercial marketings. 

 

The objective of this program would be to guarantee through price supports a predetermined net income 

on a given amount of land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1171 

 

Mr. Messer: — This will be necessary because it will be impossible for the Federal Government to 

provide unlimited guarantees. In order to do these things, it would be necessary to establish annually a 

standard of average cost of production per acre of cultivated land. Along with this, it would also be 

necessary to establish an average annual revenue per cultivated acre from marketings of the major crops. 

 

When the difference between revenue and expenditure was less than the predetermined net income 

figure, the stabilization fund would make up the difference to the given amount of land which had been 

set down. The provision of such a plan is much more practical in application and more meaningful in 

assistance than the Lang proposals. Granted, it is obvious such a plan is not capable of taking into 

account individual circumstances of farmers but would work at prairie averages. However, working with 

average statements is consistent with prevailing attitudes which state that providing income security to 

individuals takes away the urge for greater efficiency. By using averages both extremes are given fair 

consideration by the plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — A farmer with low operating costs, higher than the predetermined average, has a net 

income higher than the guaranteed level. A farmer with high operating costs, higher than the 

predetermined average, has a net income lower than the guaranteed level. 

 

In summing up, Mr. Speaker, I want to give this Assembly an example of how such a program would 

work in the crop year 1969-70. Using the crop wheat as an example, on an average in the Prairie 

Provinces it cost $17.67 per acre to produce wheat. Using a figure of $10 per acre net income — and I 

say here that this is not necessarily the figure we in the New Democratic Party are suggesting but 

because it is not an unrealistic figure — a farmer would have a gross receipt of $27.67 per acre to 

achieve his $10 net income. In the 1969-70 crop year the average yield of wheat after allowing for 

summerfallow was 14.8 bushels per acre for the three Prairie Provinces. 

 

At 14.8 bushels per acre a farmer would have to receive $1.87 per bushel in order to gross $27.67. If a 

limit of 500 acres was used with an average of 14.8 bushels per acre he would have to produce 7,400 

bushels of wheat. 7,400 bushels of wheat at $1.87 per bushel would give the farmer gross receipts of 

$13,838. Expenses at the predetermined average of $17.67 per acre on 500 acres, which is not 

necessarily the predetermined acreage but only an example, it would amount to $8,835. Deducting 

expenses from the gross of $13,838, he would have a net income of $5,003. 

 

Assuming the farmer’s wheat was No. 1 wheat and the price of No. 1 wheat in the crop year of 1969-70 

being $1.81 ¾ per bushel, the plan would have to make up the other 6 ¼ cents or, in this particular 

farmer’s case, contribute $462.66 to him in order to guarantee him that net income. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Good plan, eh, Doug? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Such a program would give 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1172 

real and meaningful assistance and would not have the shortcomings of the Lang stabilization proposals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Such a program, as I stated earlier, would guarantee net income on a basic quantity of 

production with diminishing incentives for efficiency of production. It would be flexible among crops 

thus stimulating sound land use practices. It would have built-in incentives for the Federal Government 

to take measures that would reduce the cost of farm inputs to western grain producers. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) move: 

 

That this Assembly is of the opinion that the proposed Prairie Grains Cash Receipts Stabilization 

Program does not provide Saskatchewan farmers with a minimum acceptable net income that would 

have continuing relation to cost of production; 

 

And that this Assembly favours a program based on a minimum guarantee of net income that is 

flexible enough to provide for sound land practices and that gives incentives to the Federal 

Government to reduce costs of farm inputs for western grain producers. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk: (Melville) — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a number of comments on this 

Resolution. First I want to say that I think, in my estimation and in the estimation of all the Members on 

this side of the House, that this is one of the most important Resolutions presented to this House to date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I think, along with the freight rate Resolution and other resolutions pertaining to 

agriculture, this one is the most important. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I say that the issue is “Agriculture” in 

Saskatchewan today and nothing else. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — It’s not pulp mills or anything of that sort but it is agriculture and this is the issue 

that we are going to be faced with going into the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I listened with a great deal of interest to my colleague from Kelsey (Mr. Messer) 

and the reason I listened very closely is because I’m a farmer as many other people are . . . 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1173 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — . . . and many businesses which make their living off the farmers. They either make 

it or they go broke and therefore I don’t think there will be any hesitation on the part of any Member 

sitting in this House, be he a farmer or a businessman, who will not vote for this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — He told us very clearly, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Kelsey did, what the problem 

is and the problem is, Mr. Speaker, that the net income is not enough to warrant a good, strong, solid, 

agricultural farming industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — And that is the crux of the farmers’ dilemma and the basic problem of all. The 

prairie economy has been sliding downhill, particularly in the last number of years, like greased 

lightning. It’s taken its toll of businesses, it’s taking its toll on rural communities, it’s taking its toll of 

the whole of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that the prairie debt even as much as two 

years ago was over $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, speaks quite loudly what difficulty the prairie people are in. 

Today it’s probably reaching the two and one quarter billion dollar mark. 

 

Yes, these are disastrous times, not to mention the debts that are incurred by the farmers in the buying of 

their machinery and buying of many other things necessary to run a farm. Yes, it has been said before, 

many times, Liberal times are hard times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — To me it is difficult to understand that so many people, particularly the people to 

your right, Mr. Speaker, do not realize that. Well, as I said before, there are the millions of dollars for 

subsidies for the auto industry, for the railroad industry, etc., but when it comes to helping out the 

farmers — and may I say before any criticism is voiced that the $100 million will be very acceptable 

and appreciated by the farmers — but I say, we in Saskatchewan here, the Provincial Government, 

should be doing just a little more than what we are doing in helping the farming industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the greatest single factor as pointed out by the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) for the 

depressed state of agriculture in Saskatchewan today is the very simple fact that net income to farmers 

has been going down, drastically down, even when sales have increased and prices have at times 

remained fairly steady. But the cost of production has been skyrocketing up and up and up. And why is 

this so, we have often asked ourselves? First, because we have had little control over the prices of the 

products we sell or no control at all. And no control at all on the prices of the goods and services that we 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1174 

buy, Mr. Speaker. Through the Wheat Board we are controlled on the prices of grains we sell. But at the 

other end, the things we buy, machinery, money, and all the sundry that goes with it, we are at the mercy 

of forces beyond our control. The farmers have been milked and bilked for all they’re worth. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — By the Liberal Party! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — And the only solution, Mr. Speaker, which has been suggested many times before 

is price controls at certain levels but failing this, the Federal Government has the responsibility for 

legislating assistance to keep the agricultural industry strong. At no time has it become as evident as in 

the past two years that if the agricultural economy suffers, the whole country suffers. We in the New 

Democratic Party say that a stabilization program is a must but the basic principle of the program must 

be built around realized farm net income, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It has been stated many times in this Legislature in the last few weeks that from a high realized net 

income of roughly $450 million in 1964 to a plunging drop of net return of $150 million in 1970 has 

spelled fear of total bankruptcy for thousands of farmers. In fact, many farmers have gone bankrupt and 

others are on the verge of going bankrupt. This is the road to agricultural oblivion, Mr. Speaker, and this 

is death to the Saskatchewan rural economy. 

 

You and I know, Mr. Speaker, that no business, large or small, agricultural or industrial, can exist if the 

expense of operation goes up higher and higher — up over 80 per cent in the last decade, Mr. Speaker 

— while the sales income plunges down or remains at a fixed level. This is the state that Saskatchewan 

farmers are in today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the reason that if some long term agricultural stabilization program based on the principle of 

minimum guaranteed income as proposed by my hon. friend from Kelsey does not become a reality 

today and now, then the final disintegration and breakdown of our Saskatchewan farming industry is 

inevitable. It will continue in the disappearance of our viable family farms and inevitable bankruptcy for 

most of these farmers. 

 

I agree with the Member for Kelsey that the Prairie Grains Cash Receipts Stabilization Program, as it is 

proposed today, is basically a shifty deal, a one-shot plug with no long term solutions or real teeth in the 

proposal backed by the Federal Treasury. And again I say that the $100 million will be welcome, very 

welcome by the farmers but that is not the answer, Mr. Speaker. This is not the long term answer for 

agriculture. It is simply a sedative that is going to tide over some of the farmers for one year and then we 

shall be back in the same rut that we were in before. 

 

I can’t help but comment, Mr. Speaker, that this attitude is so typically Liberal as to not seem to want to 

care. I just can’t understand that. Their interests just don’t seem to be with the farmer. It evidently points 

once again to their interest only in big corporate interests, big industrial agriculture and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague for Kelsey has documented with 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1175 

 

figures the seriousness of the cost price squeeze in agriculture. The fact that if this is allowed to continue 

it will mean driving thousands of farmers off the land much sooner than you think. The present 

stabilization plan, although an improvement over the one first announced, and in spite of the one to two 

ratio of farmer-government participation and a number of other changes, it still means less federal 

support for agriculture than is necessary to stabilize the agricultural industry, Mr. Speaker, to reverse the 

disastrous trend of obliterating two-thirds of the farming units in Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it has been said before that in the United States massive amounts of money 

have been invested to do such a job in an attempt to rectify this situation. I, for one, can’t see our Federal 

Government in conjunction with the Provincial Government doing less. Merely shifting that $45 million 

saved by the discontinuation of the Temporary Wheat Reserve Program is not really putting money into 

this fight, nor is the mere movement of other monies used for agricultural assistance purposes going to 

help very much. Real, cold, hard cash distributed to farmers on a production basis or on a basic acreage 

is the only answer. Mr. Speaker, I personally approve the latter because as I have indicated many times 

before, every effort possible must be made to save the one section and the one section and a half farmer, 

Mr. Speaker. The smaller farmers have proved in this last half of a decade that they are efficient, that 

they are the basis of community life and that given the minimum of assistance they are as economically 

viable as the large farms. But more so, Mr. Speaker, they are the fabric of the kind of society and 

community that we want in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — With the present Federal Government’s stabilization plan where money is being 

merely shifted with losses by the Pool being absorbed by the fund itself, the fund will be depleted by 

these losses, Mr. Speaker. This plan will not stabilize the agricultural industry. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it 

looks like a shifty manoeuvre by the Government to make a lot of noise and movement but the 

stabilization effect is highly improbable without further basic guarantees of real assistance tied to the 

principle of net income to the farms, Mr. Speaker. That is the principal reason for this Resolution, Mr. 

Speaker, that this Assembly favors a program on a minimum guarantee of net income. As I see it, that is 

our only hope for the farmers of Western Canada. I don’t think that so far in this debate anything has to 

be paid except, as I said a moment ago, by basic acreage. As one who believes in the small viable family 

farm concept, the Manitoba plan if establishing a standard annual cost of production per cultivated acre 

and making up the difference between revenue and expenditure up to a sum of about $10 per acre or a 

maximum of say 500 acres per farm, is in my humble opinion, the kind of a plan that I am willing to 

fight for. 

 

The whole world is in a stage of transition, Mr. Speaker. Technology has transformed ways of 

production in all industries. I believe that in the agricultural industry it is possible to keep production in 

the hands of the people, many people, if there is a will to do it and if people and governments really 

want to do it. To keep our great agricultural Province of Saskatchewan 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1176 

a place for people to live and work, basically as a rural community, I ask all the Members of this House 

to support this Resolution because only by the implementation of the basic farm net stabilization plan 

will our agricultural community in Saskatchewan be able to exist. Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, the 

alternative will be the large, corporate farms of tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow: (Saskatoon-Riversdale) — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to take part in this 

debate on this very important Resolution. I only wish that some of the big corporation friends of the 

Liberal Party opposite would see fit to take part in this debate as well. Members such as the Minister of 

Public Works (Mr. Coderre) who represents by and large an agricultural riding, I invite him to take part 

in the debate. I also invite the Hon. Member from Elrose (Mr. Leith) to take part in the debate and tell 

the people of Saskatchewan where he stands with respect to this very important Resolution. I am sure 

that the person who knows much about farming because he is so intimately involved, the Member for 

Regina South West (Mr. McPherson), will take part in this debate. Although I am afraid that the 

Member for Regina South West is likely to support the main thrust, the main theory behind the Federal 

Task Force which is the basis for the Liberal farm policy for the future — corporation farming. As my 

colleague, the Member from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) says, the Task Force report says, 

“Corporate farming being the final solution for the farmers of this province if the Liberal Party gets re-

elected provincially and federally next time round in Saskatchewan and Canada.” So I say, Mr. Speaker, 

this is an important Resolution. 

 

Although I don’t represent a farm riding, I know the importance of agriculture to the people of my 

community of Saskatoon. I know the importance of agriculture to the strength and viability of Saskatoon 

and the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) would also get up and take part in 

this debate if he only realized how important agriculture is for the city of Saskatoon and the other parts 

of our province. 

 

This is the most crucial issue that faces the people of Saskatchewan, the farming issue, which this 

Resolution places before you. We hear in this Legislature and outside, the Liberal Party trying 

continually to confuse, trying to throw up smoke screens about pulp mills and a variety of other issues to 

get them off the measly and paltry jobs that they have done in the agricultural area. But it’s not going to 

work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That attempt to get the people of Saskatchewan off the most important industry, 

farming, and to thinking of the pulp mill is not going to work. The average farmer in the Province of 

Saskatchewan knows that when the pulp mill faces him with the possibility of an encumbrance of 

$2,000 per every farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan, adding only to the debts that he already bears, 

he knows that it is a bogus issue because he is already saddled with hard pressed agricultural expenses. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1177 

 

Now it’s an important issue. It is the most important issue because we on this side of the House say that 

agriculture and the changes that it has undergone in the past two years and will be undergoing in the 

next two or three years under the Liberal Party, will means the change in the basic face of the Province 

of Saskatchewan, from a province based and rooted in the principles of the family farm to a province 

that is based and rooted in the principles of large corporate, vertically integrated farming. 

 

The issue is very clear cut for Members of the House with respect to the stabilization program proposed 

by the Hon. Otto Lang. Those who on the opposite side of the House speak in favor of the stabilization 

program, in effect, will be telling every family farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan that he is 

committed to the principle of vertically integrated, corporate farming structures for the province. Every 

Liberal Member who gets up and votes for the stabilization program of Otto Lang will be telling the 

farmers in his constituency that they are going along with the proposals of the Task Force on Agriculture 

proposed by the Liberal Party because this is the first step to implementing the proposals of the Task 

Force. The Task Force says two out of three of all farmers will be taken off the farms if the Liberals 

have their way within the next 20 years. Two out of three of all family farmers in the constituency of my 

friend from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) and the constituency of my friend from Bengough (Mr. Mitchell) 

and all the farming constituencies will be taken off their lands if these Federal Liberal Party Task Force 

proposals are implemented, if we allow the report to be implemented. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that this Federal Task Force report sets out at length, chapter after chapter, 

page after page, an absolute case for large corporation farming. It tells the Saskatchewan farmer that he 

has got to get more efficient when he is already one of the most efficient workers whom we have if not 

the most efficient. In 1961, the last President of the United States, John F. Kennedy, talking about the 

efficiency of the American agricultural industry, said that the American agricultural industry was the 

most efficient industry. It was true then; it is even more true today in 1971. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yet this Liberal Party program for farmers says that farmers in Canada and in the 

Province of Saskatchewan aren’t efficient enough. This Liberal Party policy based on the Task Force 

report says that the only way that farmers can get more efficient is if we take two out of three of all 

farmers off their farms and from their homes and on to the welfare roll of the large cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon. That’s what the Liberal Party is committed to. Quoting directly from the Task Force Report: 

“Corporations in farming financed by equity financing on the stock market.” That’s what they want, 

corporations listed on the stock market. What, in effect, will happen is that the farmers and the family 

farms of our province will become nothing more, nothing less than share croppers for large corporations. 

Large corporations that may not even be Canadian but may be foreign controlled. 

 

Well, how can they do this? How can the Liberal Party 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1178 

implement its scheme to get two out of three of every Saskatchewan farmer off the farms? Well, it can’t 

pass direct legislation saying that two out of three farmers are going to be forced off the land. Although I 

dare say that some of the bureaucrats in Ottawa, who govern the Liberal Party, would like to do that and 

they probably thought it feasible. Perhaps even some of them over there would even be thinking this. 

They can’t pass the direct legislation. They know that politically it would be suicide for them out here in 

Saskatchewan to say by direct legislation that two out of three of all farmers must go. So they can’t do it 

that way. 

 

How will they do it? Well, the way to do it, of course, is to start implementing a program like the 

stabilization program of Otto Lang. Of course, the forerunner of this operation was Operation LIFT. We 

all know Operation LIFT. Otto Lang at that stage of the game was already beginning to implement his 

grand design to take the family farmer off his farm by the limitations of LIFT. That great program that 

would have turned Saskatchewan into a dust bowl rather than a bread basket. That great program that 

was supported by the Hon. Member from Elrose (Mr. Leith). LIFT, that great program that was 

supported by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron), the Member from Maple Creek. That 

program that was supported by all of the Liberal Party Members opposite supporting Otto Lang last 

year. They were behind LIFT and I recall them getting up in this Legislature. I recall the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) telling the farmers of Saskatchewan that it was a good program. That was 

for about four days until the Premier got the sniff of the political winds and then he came back and said, 

“Well, maybe we’re not for it, we’ll see what happens.” 

 

So now the Minister of Immigration and Manpower, Mr. Lang, this corporation lawyer from Saskatoon, 

has another scheme. He has the stabilization program. They can’t do it by direct legislation so they are 

going to do it by their stabilization program. And how does this come about, Mr. Member from Elrose? 

I’ll tell you how you can get two out of three farmers off Saskatchewan farms. It’s like this. Firstly, you 

implement a program which induces the large farms to become larger. Secondly, you don’t help the 

farmer presently on the family farm in dealing with the cost squeeze. That’s how you do it. That’s what 

Operation LIFT did, it helped the larger farmer. No relief for the small half section and three quarter 

section farmer. Oh, no! And the installation of the stabilization program of Otto Lang is even a more 

devious and more serious way of doing precisely that. It’s not helping control the costs and at the same 

time it is inducing the large farmer to get larger, speeding up the day when the corporations are going to 

take over the Province of Saskatchewan’s farming. 

 

Now some Members opposite might say that’s a wrong interpretation of the program. Well, what does 

the program say? The Grains Receipt Stabilization Program is a plan, the Liberals will tell us, to buoy up 

the gross farming industry income in times of low income to the level of the last five year acreage. If, for 

instance, the Liberals say that cash receipts to farmers for the five or six grains that have been included 

in the plan are below the average of cash receipts for those grains in the most recent five years, then the 

Treasury puts in the difference and pays out to the individual farmers an amount based on their 

marketings. The fund of the Treasury from which this pay out 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1179 

 

will be made is composed of receipts of a three per cent check off on farmers’ deliveries and it becomes 

a consolidated fund. It is recommended here at three per cent or two per cent, even worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plan is not related to the individual operator’s fortunes, but rather to the gross farming 

situation in the farming industry as a whole. This agricultural stabilization program has no factor to 

relate it to costs and thus does nothing to assist the problems of the farmer with respect to the cost price 

squeeze. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I said there are two ways you could do this. You could motivate the large farmer to 

get larger. Secondly, you could squeeze off the small family farmer by implementing a program which 

was not going to ease his cost price burden and that’s what the Liberal Party has done in this agricultural 

stabilization program. Now, Mr. Speaker, under this plan the degree to which a farming operator 

participates in the plan or if he will benefit from the plan depends on the level of his grain marketings up 

to the $15,000 limit. Marketings depend on quotas, Mr. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane). 

Quotas depend on acreage. Thus farmers will be encouraged to expand and to acquire more land thereby 

becoming larger in order to qualify for the largest possible benefit under this plan squeezing off the 

family farmer. 

 

Let’s just go over that again, Mr. Member from Elrose, for your edification. If this plan is implemented, 

what will happen? Because marketings depend on quotas and quotas on acreage, farmers are encouraged 

by this plan to expand and to acquire more farming land to qualify for the largest benefit. This will 

squeeze off more of the family farmers and it moves in the direction of the large corporate holdings that 

the Task Force of the Liberal Party wants to have implemented in Saskatchewan. So, two things this 

plan does. If the Hon. Minister of Agriculture says that’s the wrong interpretation, I invite him to take 

part in this debate on this Resolution and tell the Members what is the right interpretation of the plan. I 

should be very much interested in hearing from the Minister of Agriculture about this plan because I 

don’t think the farmers have heard him speak once against the Federal Task Force proposals. I don’t 

think that the farmers have heard the Minister of Agriculture speak once against the agricultural 

stabilization program. In fact, I doubt if any Liberal Party Member sitting opposite or a candidate of a 

Liberal Party anywhere in Saskatchewan has spoken up against this program to take the family farmer 

from Saskatchewan. 

 

I should be very interested to hear the Minister of Agriculture and the Member from Elrose (Mr. Leith) 

and yes, even the Member from Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth), tell me that my interpretation of 

the stabilization program is wrong, that it is motivated to farms growing larger, and secondly, that the 

plan takes no account of the cost factor. The farmer is evermore caught in the cost price squeeze. That’s 

what this program does. That is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am saying to this Legislature and I am 

saying to the people of Saskatchewan, the stabilization program is the first major step of the Liberal 

Party to implement the Federal Task Force ideas on agriculture. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1180 

I say to the farmers of Saskatchewan, I say, in fact, to all the people of Saskatchewan, because we are 

tied up to the strength of the family farmers, I say that you have to fight this stabilization program with 

all that you have in you because it means the end of Saskatchewan otherwise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I know that Members throughout Saskatchewan of other political parties feel as I do. 

Members of the Conservative Party have been telling me privately that somebody has to stand up to 

protect the family farmer and they are thanking the New Democrats for doing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I know that Members of the Social Credit Party, such as it is, tell me as well, that we 

have to stand up against the Task Force Report. All the farmers, wherever I go to speak, say that. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of speaking in Kendal, the constituency of Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, 

two weeks ago. The constituency of Qu’Appelle-Wolseley is held by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane), Mr. Member from Regina South West (Mr. McPherson), just in case you didn’t know. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — I sure do! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Oh, I’m sorry, you do know. 

 

When I spoke at Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, when I spoke in this town of Kendal, I had at least four farmers 

come up to me and tell me that they are worried about the course that the Minister of Agriculture is 

taking with respect to agriculture. These four farmers were telling me that the Minister of Agriculture of 

Saskatchewan is silent in his opposition to the stabilization program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — These farmers were telling me, Mr. Member for Regina South West, that the 

Minister of Agriculture is in favor of the Federal Task Force Report on agriculture and they don’t like it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Why some of them even told me that they attended some of those 40 meetings that 

the Minister of Agriculture has been promoting among the farmers of this province to help sell the Task 

Force Report to them and they didn’t like that. They don’t know why it is that the Minister of 

Agriculture increases his agriculture budget by only $800,000 and remains silent on the stabilization 

program, yet will vote for $107 million for a foreign corporation on a pulp mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Farmers are confused and 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1181 

 

they don’t understand the Liberal Party’s position which tries to hasten the growth of the corporation 

farm in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members, I was aroused and I might say motivated to enter into this debate because 

of the words and the remarks made by the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) and the Member for 

Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk). The agricultural spokesman and critic on this side is a young and obviously 

thoughtful farmer who has come up with a positive program to assist farming people of Saskatchewan. 

 

All that this Resolution says, Mr. Speaker, is that rather than having a stabilization program that is tied 

to the gross overall farming industry, as the Lang proposal does, is to have a program that takes into 

account the interests of the individual farmers and not the overall industry. What this Resolution says is 

that the alternative to an agricultural stabilization program, the Lang proposal, that ties it to the overall 

economy, the alternative is to have a net income plan tied to the needs of the individual family farmers, 

the half section, three quarter section farmer in Saskatchewan, as opposed to the gross income plan that 

is tied to the industry. 

 

I ask the Members of this House, what is wrong with that Resolution? I ask the Liberals opposite, what 

is wrong with helping the small half section, three quarter section farmer? I ask the Liberal Party and the 

Members opposite to carefully consider the words said by the Member for Kelsey and those who will 

take part on this side, and to stand up and vote if they can, if the party machine will allow them to, to 

vote against the stabilization program and to vote for the family farms of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say that the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, if they vote against this Resolution, 

will show to all of the farmers of our province that they are out of step with the needs and tunes of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Those of us who are in daily contact with the Liberal Party opposite, which is now an old and failing 

Government, incapable and unable and unwilling to meet the challenges of today, know that it is out of 

step. We know that the Liberal Party opposite hasn’t even become aware of this most crucial problem of 

agriculture for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

If there is anything that is going to defeat the Liberal Party in this coming election, which I hope is soon, 

it will be the failure of the Liberals to speak up for the family farms. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I can tell the Members that it isn’t going to be the pulp mill. It isn’t going to be the 

fancy manoeuvrings of the Premier and of some of the Members come election time. It isn’t going to be 

McLaren’s Advertising, nor is it going to be Homecoming ’71, or Wilf Gardiner’s assistance to the 

Government opposite, but what is going to defeat the Government is their failure and their total lack of 

farming policy for the 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1182 

small farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — This is a Government of fat cats, indifferent people who know nothing about the 

farming problems and the needs of our province. This is a Government that is out of touch and out of 

tune and out of step with this modern day and Saskatchewan wants. This is a Government that will give 

millions to assist foreign operations and not a cent to help our young farmers to get into the agricultural 

business. 

 

I am still hoping though that the Whip of the Liberal Party when he takes part in this debate, I hope he 

will say that the wisdom of the plan as proposed in this Resolution by the Member for Kelsey (Mr. 

Messer) is good and he will vote for it. 

 

I close by saying that all you Liberal Members have a chance to show where you stand, you have a 

chance to say that there is at least some hope in a stabilization program of the kind proposed by the 

Member for Kelsey. I urge all Members of this Legislature to support this worthwhile Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned by Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife). 

 

Resolution No. 9 — Abolishment of Deterrent Fees 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East) moved, seconded by Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon-Riversdale) 

 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government to immediately abolish hospital and medical care 

deterrent fees because deterrent fees place an unfair burden on many citizens requiring health care, 

especially those least able to pay. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Deputy Leader, Mr. Romanow, has told us of how this Government has 

failed the farmers. The same story can be repeated of how they failed the wage earners. A more glaring 

story can be told of how they failed the total society and particularly the sick people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, three years ago when the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) moved 

second reading of Bill No. 39, amendments to The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act, which provided 

for the introduction of deterrent fees, he told the Legislature the reason that deterrent fees were being put 

into effect was because people were abusing our health services. He said and let me quote: 

 

In fact, indications are that the greatest abuse of health privileges is occurring in the use of hospital 

services. 

 

We said then as we say now, health services, in our opinion, 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1183 

 

shall not be considered privileges. They are the right of every citizen of this country. We said then as we 

say now, patients cannot be admitted into hospitals by themselves. They can only be admitted by a 

doctor and released by a doctor in case of hospital services. Therefore, if there is any abuse, it must rest 

with the physicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister’s answer at that time was, because there is no demand control there is no 

patient resistance to doctors’ over-utilization. Government Members argued that there were abuses. We 

asked them to produce evidence of abuse. They failed to do this in 1968. We asked them to produce 

evidence of abuse in 1969 and 1970 and again they failed to produce any evidence of abuse by patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we told this Government that we, too, were concerned and are concerned about the rising 

health costs. But we said emphatically that imposition of deterrent fees was the wrong way to control 

health costs. We proposed alternatives for the Government to consider. 

 

During the 1968 debate Government spokesmen indicated that after a reasonable trail period, if it was 

proven that deterrent fees didn’t control rising costs and that they created hardships, the Government 

would be prepared to reconsider its position. Mr. Speaker, three years is ample time to test a bad 

program. There is little doubt that deterrent fees have created hardships on the people especially those 

with low incomes and those least able to pay. They have failed to control costs but in fact have shifted a 

large share of the cost on to the individuals, on to the sick people and on to the municipalities and 

religious orders operating hospitals. The time is overdue for the Government now to do away with 

hospital and medical care deterrent fees. 

 

In 1969, Mr. Speaker, I proposed a resolution asking the Government to establish, and let me quote: 

 

A commission to examine health programs in Saskatchewan and elsewhere with the view to 

determining (a) the cost of such programs and the various methods of financing them; (b) the number, 

ages and economic status of persons who are deterred by utilization fees from seeking health services; 

(c) methods of organizing health services which will control costs without placing obstacles in the way 

of obtaining needed services and at the same time make possible an improvement in the quality of 

health services. 

 

Last year, I again introduced a resolution calling on the Government to consider restoring the plans to 

their original intent by abandoning deterrent fees and by abandoning its attempt to shift part of the 

hospital operating costs on to local ratepayers. 

 

In 1967, Mr. Speaker, the Medical Care Plan cost $26 million. This covered all costs, payments for 

medical services, administration, scholarships and bursaries. It was the last year medical care was free of 

deterrent fees. In 1970, the Medical Care Plan cost $33 million — an increase of $7 million — and in 

addition the sick people paid some $3 million in deterrent fees. The Government estimates that in 1971 

Medicare will cost about $2,250,000 more. With deterrent fees it will cost about 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1184 

$38.5 million, almost a 50 per cent increase in a period of four years. Outside of the plan, now paying 

only some costs of eye examinations, no new benefits have been added. In 1967 there were 873,000 

beneficiaries and in 1970 there were 894,000 — an increase of less than two and one-half per cent. 

 

In the case of the Hospitalization Plan, Mr. Speaker, in 1967 it cost $63.4 million, the last year it was 

free of deterrent fees. In 1969 it cost $74.6 million and on top of that we had deterrent fees. I can’t quote 

the 1970 figures because the Minister has yet to file the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan report. If 

one is to believe last year’s Estimates, the projected cost of the Hospital Services Plan for 1970 was to 

be about $83 million in deterrent fees. 

 

The Government estimates that the increased cost for 1971 will be close to $7.5 million more than it was 

in 1970. If my calculations are correct, the cost of the Plan in 1967 was $63.4 million and in 1971, with 

deterrent fees, it will cost about $95 million, a 50 per cent increase in a period of four years. 

 

No one will deny, Mr. Speaker, that these are extremely sharp increases. In 1968 I asked the 

Government to establish a commission which would examine and report on methods of organizing 

health services which would control costs and improve health services. The Government refused to take 

our advice. Mr. Speaker, let us look at another aspect of these rising costs in Hospitalization and 

Medicare and what has happened since the year 1964 and how this Government has shifted the cost on 

to the people. 

 

Under the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan the cost in 1964 for hospital premiums were $40 per 

family and $20 for a single person. This netted the Province $10.4 million. Out of consolidated revenues 

the Government put in $15.8 million and out of federal grants in the form of reimbursements which were 

about 44.5 per cent of the total cost, the Government received $21.4 million. The total cost of operating 

the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan was $48 million. No deterrent fees and no special hospital 

revenue tax imposed. 

 

Medicare costs in 1964, when the premiums were $12 for a family and $6 for a single person, netted the 

Province $3.4 million and out of provincial consolidated revenues the Province put in $19.7 million to 

pay for the cost of medical care. There was no federal cost sharing. There were no deterrent fees. All 

insured services were paid by the Medical Care Insurance in 1964 when the CCF administered the plan. 

The Medical Care Insurance fund had at that time an investment or surplus of $9.7 million. 

 

I invite the Members to examine the 1970 report and what do we find? The Medical Care Insurance fund 

has an overdraft of $106,000. In 1971, according to the Estimates, we can assume that Hospital Care 

premiums will bring to the Province about $12.6 million, perhaps somewhat less than last year because 

of the population exodus. Consolidated revenues as one looks at the Estimates will be about $32.4 

million. The Federal Government reimbursements will rise to 45.4 million — more than double the 

amount that was received in 1964. When we add the deterrent fees of about $4.5 million, we come up 

with a figure close to $95 million for SHSP. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1185 

 

In 1971, according to an examination of the Estimates, it would appear that the Medical Care premiums, 

providing they are not increased in the coming year, will raise about $5.6 million. That is a charge of 

$24 on a family and $12 on a single person. Out of consolidated revenues the Government will be 

putting in about $5.7 million but out of Federal grants and Federal reimbursements to support the 

Medical Care Plan, the Government expects to realize $24.5 million, more than the total Plan cost in 

1964. The $24.5 million that will be realized from the Federal Government will pay close to two-thirds 

of the cost of Medicare and then there will be a charge of $3 million in deterrent fees that the people will 

pay. The Plan total will be about $38.5 million or perhaps slightly more. 

 

In 1964, the CCF Government received only $21.4 million from the Federal Government towards the 

cost of SHSP, nothing towards Medicare. In the coming year, 1971, the Government will realize about 

$70 million from Federal grants towards the financing of these plans. But let us not be misled, Mr. 

Speaker, that Ottawa is giving this money to us on any kind of a gratis basis nor can we say that the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) or the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) are any kind of super 

negotiators. The facts are that Saskatchewan citizens are paying two per cent social development tax 

levied by the Federal Government and this is included in your income tax. The trouble with this tax is 

that it has a ceiling of $120 annually; what it does is impose a ceiling on the rich whereas the poor 

people have to pay their two per cent. 

 

In 1964 the CCF Government collected only $13.8 million in Hospital and Medical Care premium taxes. 

In 1971 the Liberal Government will collect over $18 million or about $4.5 million more. In 1964 the 

CCF Government paid $35.5 million out of consolidated revenues to finance Hospital and Medical Care 

plans. In 1971, according to my estimate, the Government will pay no more than $38 million out of 

consolidated revenues to finance these programs. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, in 1964 the CCF Government paid over $2 million to cover the cost of Hospital 

and Medical Care for public assistance cases. There were about 28,000 beneficiaries under that program. 

The number has risen to about 60,000 now. While the Government continues to cover these people, the 

cost is included in the already mentioned figures. In other words, they have shifted from the special 

program into the Hospital and Medical Care program. The Government provides no special funds under 

its Medical Services Division to take care of these people. In other words, when you look at the 

Estimates in the Budget, you will find that the Government is not spending a single penny more for 

hospital and medical care out of general revenues than was spent in 1964. Therefore, in terms of the 

direct cost to this Government, they have not provided any additional money at all for the upkeep and 

maintenance of Medical and Hospital Care plans. What they did, Mr. Speaker, they shifted the cost on to 

the individuals. They imposed a $7.5 million deterrent fee, they levied a special hospital tax on 

municipalities which nets about $500,000. I don’t quarrel with that particular tax assessment. Certainly, 

the people in municipalities who do not provide their own hospital services should make a contribution 

for the care of their people in other hospitals where they receive services. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1186 

Now this is not all, Mr. Speaker. We saw the Government, on taking office, within a matter of a few 

days, increase the Hospital and Medical Care premiums by 34 per cent, shifting the cost on to the 

individual. Then as I have already mentioned, was added this special tax that was levied by the Federal 

Government, the Social Development Tax. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Tell the whole story! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I intend to tell the whole story to the Hon. Member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have had is a series of successive changes. The election of the Liberal 

Government in 1964 resulted in Saskatchewan losing a large number of the most qualified public health 

servants, knowledgeable in the field of financing and economic planning and administration of public 

health. Some of these were fired, some were forced to quit, others resigned voluntarily because their 

advice and skills were not welcomed by the Government of the day. No one can count in dollars and 

cents how much this loss has meant to the Plans and to the people of Saskatchewan. During the 1965 

session, this Government’s first session, the hospital appeal board provisions under The Hospital 

Standards Act were repealed resulting in patients being denied the right of hospital care and treatment by 

doctors of their own choice. Payments for minor surgery in non-hospital facilities were discontinued 

thus leading the cost on to the Hospital Services Plan resulting in unnecessary use of our hospital beds. 

Payments for physiotherapy services under the Medical Care Insurance Commission were stopped on 

July 1, 1965, again loading additional costs on the Hospital Services Plan. Since 1964 we witnessed the 

closure of some ten small hospitals in the rural communities and others continue to be slated for closure. 

The cost of providing hospital and medical care for Saskatchewan Assistance Plan recipients, those in 

receipt of Old Age Security Supplemental Allowances, blind persons and others up to April 1, 1960 

came from the Medical Services Division and money was especially provided and voted for this 

purpose. Since this date the Government has shifted the cost of providing medical and hospital care 

directly to the Plan as I have already mentioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we see this increase in both the Medical and Hospital Services Plans one has to 

examine some of the reasons. I shall not deny that during this period there has been some improvement 

in the quality of care. To the extent that one can measure, it is, at this time, an unknown quantity. I 

concede that there has been some improvement, but for the employees who provide the service, 

particularly in the hospitals, though deterrent fees have been imposed, the cost has risen so sharply, we 

find that little has been done to improve their standard of living for the services they offer to the people 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, let me quote wage rates of a few of the hospitals in two or three 

classifications. I have before me a schedule of wages for certified nursing assistants. In the Estevan St. 

Joseph’s Hospital where there was a dispute a little more than a year ago, what are the rates? As of 

January 1, 1970 and the rates are still the same, it ranges from $319 as a starting rate and after four years 

of service climbs to a figure of $353. In the case of the Prince Albert Victoria Hospital, starting rate is 

$320 and a maximum after five years of $360. These are certified nursing assistants, professional people 

if you will. In the case 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1187 

 

of the Regina General Hospital, as of this year, $337 is the starting rate and the top rate is $371 per 

month. Nurses’ aids in Estevan start at $269 to a maximum rate after four years of $300. Prince Albert 

Victoria Hospital, $280 to start with, maximum rate after three years of service $300. The Regina 

General Hospital, $291 starting rate, a maximum rate after four years of service $337. Maids or 

domestics, Estevan, $267 to start, after four years of service a paltry $295. The same thing applies in the 

case of Prince Albert where the starting rate is $283, the maximum rate is $295. In our Regina General 

Hospital, $288 to start with, after three years of service, a miserable $318. Mr. Speaker, the average 

wage in the case of the Estevan Hospital for 1970 was a miserable $1.74 an hour. In the case of Prince 

Albert, a miserable $1.90 average per hour. Yet we pride ourselves that the average wage in the 

Province of Saskatchewan is something like $114 a week. Mr. Speaker, the hospital employees are at the 

bottom of the economic heap. Certainly these people, the employees employed in the hospitals, cannot 

be accused of raising the price of hospital care in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, as I look at the Budget that is proposed, I am afraid that the standard of 

living for the hospital workers is not going to be improved very substantially because of the amount that 

has been appropriated. Most of the hospitals are or will be in collective bargaining for new agreements 

this year. I am glad, Mr. Speaker, and welcome the Government’s announcement that they will remove 

the six per cent wage guideline ceiling. Mr. Speaker, I hope that in removing the six per cent ceiling the 

Government will get down to serious bargaining and will participate in hospital bargaining directly as 

they have in the case of negotiations with the nurses in this province. I hope that both the people from 

the Treasury Department and the Department of Public Health will enter into joint negotiations and will 

be participant in bargaining and that the Government and the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) will 

do everything possible to raise the wages for the hospital employees from the substandard level to a 

decent standard of living. They are entitled to this. For too many years they have been the victims of 

miserably poor wages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me make reference to some of the Liberal promises in respect of Hospital and Medical 

Care. What did they say in 1964 in their election propaganda and election program? The Liberals would 

maintain and improve health services. No suggestion of deterrent fees, no suggestion of undermining the 

services. They said they would maintain and improve it. They said that they would control costs. They 

said that they would apply new management techniques which would reduce the cost to the citizen and 

the cost to the province as a whole by implementing new methods of administration and thus save the 

people money and improve the quality of health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, seven years have proved that 

this has not been the case. Services have been undermined and at the same time costs have escalated a 

great deal. The only thing that has saved them is the increased amount of revenue that we have been 

receiving from the Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can recall that in 1964 the Liberal 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1188 

Government promised to introduce a drug plan. Nothing happened during their first term in office. 

During the 1967 election they promised to conduct a plebiscite. Now we are told that a plebiscite is not 

going to be conducted for a simple reason, the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) and this Government 

know that the cost of drugs has escalated astronomically and the people want some form of public 

protection in order to reduce their costs in the field of drug care. Mr. Speaker, we can recall if we go 

back to the debates in 1968 that during the session Government Members said that by introducing 

deterrent fees, costs would be reduced. Well, it is perhaps true that the cost to the Government has been 

reduced but the total cost to the people has increased astronomically. The fact is, that by imposing the 

deterrent fees which are $7.5 million or more, the Province of Saskatchewan is losing some $4 million 

in Federal grants and Federal reimbursements. If those deterrent fees were not imposed, Saskatchewan 

would realize this additional money and save the people directly this large amount of money. The 

Government also said that if there were hardships caused by the deterrent fees and if the costs were not 

controlled after a reasonable trial, they would be prepared to re-examine the program and take action to 

eliminate deterrent fees. Three years is long enough, as I said, to test a bad program and we say remove 

it and remove it now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is no question about hardships, Mr. Speaker. I have a copy of a bill that one of my constituents 

received. I have discussed this with the Minister already. She is a lady who was going blind. She went to 

see a specialist on referral and she got a bill for $25. It was for two services that were rendered. When 

she got a cheque after submitting to the Commission (remember that bill was $25), what did she get 

back? She got back $15.50. Not 85 per cent of the charge as she expected and which is supposed to be 

the case. I have taken it up with the Minister and what do we find? Here is what he says in his letter: 

 

In the particular case of your claim, the payment schedule provides that when a visual field 

examination is provided during a visit and is charged in addition to the visit, the appropriate fee for the 

examination is 50 per cent of the listed fee. Since the listed fee for this examination is $10, payment is 

based on 50 per cent of this amount of $5. Therefore, payment for this service was made at 85 per cent 

of the $5 ($4.25). 

 

The charge was $10, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not only deterrent fees. We find that in many cases the people 

are not getting a reimbursement of 85 per cent of the charges. I should suggest and urge the Minister that 

there be a re-examination of this policy and that people be reimbursed properly for the billed services 

they get. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me make reference to 1968 when we were led to believe and certainly the people were 

led to believe that those patients who had a cancerous condition would have no deterrent fees imposed 

on them. Let me refer to the 1968 debate where the Minister of Public Health on March 15, 1968 had 

this to say: 

 

With regard to cancer, utilization for cancer patients having physicians that attended them will be 

provided by the Government. In other words, cancer patients would not be responsible for picking up 

those utilization 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1189 

 

charges. These will be paid as they have been in the past, all costs by the Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly the people were led to believe that all costs would be paid by the Government as 

in the past. People were led to believe that while they were in the hospital or while they were attended 

by their physician that there would be no deterrent fees. I can draw the attention of this House to this 

example. Just last night a citizen in my constituency came to me to point out that in his case his wife had 

a cancerous condition. She had been operated on, has been in the hospital for well over two months and 

she has been charged with deterrent fees. Mr. Speaker, so commitments that were made back in 1968 

have proven to be commitments that the Government is not prepared to follow. Patients who are in the 

hospital because of cancer are being charge deterrent fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on many occasions we have heard Members of the Government attacking our public health 

services. They, like the Minister of Public Health speaking in Saskatoon about a year ago, have referred 

to the Medical Care Plan and the Hospital Services Plan as a “two-headed monster”. Well, Sir, you 

know there have been a lot of people who have looked at and studied public health services as opposed 

to private insurance health services. I want to draw the attention of the Minister and this House to an 

article that appeared in the New Statesman of July 17  of this year. The writer is Donald Gould and the 

article is headed “The Doctors’ Blind Spot.” Mr. Gould made an analysis of the National Health Service 

Plan in Britain. During his analysis he also made comparisons and made inquiries into the private plans. 

He discussed the National Health Service with a man by the name of Walter J. McCerney. He is the 

president of the Blue Cross organization in the United States. Mr. Gould said in the article that he 

expected this hard-headed man, vastly experienced in the vanities of doctors and of governments and of 

patients and the chief executive of the Principal Marketing Agency for private medicine in the land of 

private industry would denigrate the National Health Service in a few sharp sentences. But this is what 

Mr. McCerney had to say when he was being questioned: 

 

I am so impressed, I have got to say this, with the progress that has been made since 1948, that I find it 

very hard to be critical. I know how long it takes to effect a change on a country wide basis and 

tremendous strides have been made since the service started, particularly in the distribution of highly 

skilled men out into the provinces and throughout the country. When I look at the health of children as 

revealed by your compulsory physical examinations then I have got to say a hell of a good job has 

been done. 

 

This is what he has to say about the National Health Service. 

 

Mr. Gould then in this article makes reference to a study conducted by the office of Health Economics in 

Britain. The report draws together evidence accumulated in support of the almost self-evident thesis that 

a large part of this money is being squandered on inefficient practices. 

 

Recent studies have suggested, for example, that at least a quarter of the patients filling the beds of 

general hospitals would be just as well off at home and 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1190 

 probably more would be adequately cared for outside these costly institutions if a real effort was 

made to provide the means for the practice of modern medicine at the street level. 

 

The article continues: 

 

But that these and other badly needed refits, repairs and reforms require government action. They 

could neither be organized nor financed by any lesser organization or authority than the Government. 

Contrary-wise the mere existence of the National Health Service offers to the British doctors the 

opportunity of operating the finest system of medicare in the whole world but only if the silly fellows 

will learn to make the Government their instrument instead of treating it as a glowering and repressive 

boss. 

 

This is the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker. This is what we have been saying, that the time has come to 

reorganize and re-examine our health services. This is what I proposed, Mr. Speaker, two years ago 

when we moved a resolution to establish a commission. Two years ago, we on this side of the House 

proposed that this kind of a commission be established to examine the health services, the cost and the 

methods of financing and the effect of deterrent fees. We proposed that such a commission be 

empowered to make recommendations on matters of organizing health services which will control costs 

without placing obstacles in the way of obtaining needed services and at the same time improve the 

quality of health care. 

 

I said two years ago and again last year and I say again, we in the New Democratic Party have a very 

sincere and genuine concern about rising costs in health care, the costs of hospital care, the costs of 

medical care, dental and optical care and constantly rising drug costs. The Minister and the Government 

Members chose to reject, last year and the year before, our proposal. They said that the Federal 

Government established a Task Force on health services and that they would wait and see what 

happened with those recommendations. Well, the Task Force has reported and the problems of rising 

costs and organization of health services is still with us, nothing has changed. Last year the Minister said 

that his Department was studying the report of the Task Force and they were inviting various 

organizations to comment on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has peculiar problems of its own. The current deterrent fees and shifting of 

cost of ensured services from the public generally to the individuals and rate-payers are the creation of 

this Government and could and should be corrected forthwith. The total problem of cost control, 

reorganization and extension of public programs and improving the quality of care, needs special 

attention and it needs it now. Had this Government established a commission as we proposed last year or 

two years ago, we might now have been on the road to fully understanding the problem and knowing the 

solution. A special commission may still be appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party has an exciting and new program for health care. As I have 

said, until 1964 Saskatchewan led North America in the provision of health care service. In the guise of 

fighting escalating health costs, the present 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1191 

 

Government has abdicated leadership and responsibility. But the rising costs of hospital care and 

medical care that have occurred in Saskatchewan and elsewhere are largely due to outmoded 

organization and delivery of health services. This is reflected in overlapping, wastage and duplication of 

medical facilities and as a result, many essential services are either non-existent or are very deficient. 

 

The New Democratic Party will institute a program to provide health rather than a sickness service. We 

will develop an organization which assures Saskatchewan citizens will receive value for their dollar. Mr. 

Speaker, the New Democratic Party proposes the establishment of a prescription drug program based on 

a drug formulary and central purchasing to provide drugs at greatly reduced costs. We propose to 

provide hearing aids, eye glasses, braces and wheelchairs, again, at greatly reduced cost. We propose to 

establish an insured dental care service initially for those under the age of 12. We propose to give better 

care to our senior and chronically disabled citizens to include extended nursing care, that is, level four 

care, as an insured service and by increasing government support of public health and non-public 

nursing homes and geriatric centres. We propose to develop community services for the mentally ill, 

young and old, and day and night care centres. Through workshop and rehabilitation facilities and 

through increasing the number of community based health workers we propose to establish a regional 

health planning council composed of providers and consumers of service to be responsible for unified 

planning of public health, medical care and hospital services. We propose to re-examine all the 

proposals to close small hospitals and undertake any closure only after consultation with communities 

concerned and provision for satisfactory alternative services to handle emergencies. We propose to 

review and re-define roles of health workers and where necessary retrain them to ensure adequate 

medical physician services so that maximum use is made of their specialized skills and extended skills. 

Through assistance in capital expenditures and through alternative methods of pay, encourage 

community health centres and other new forms of delivery of care and thus reduce overall costs. We 

propose to improve accident and emergency services in rural and urban areas. We propose also to 

include chiropractic services as an insured service. Mr. Speaker, we also propose that all the monies that 

are received from Ottawa for health services be used for this purpose such as the Health Resources 

Fund. A year ago in the year ending 1970, almost $1 million was received from the Federal 

Government, from the Health Resources Fund, and was taken into consolidated revenue rather than used 

for health services. Mr. Speaker, above all, we propose to eliminate those deterrent fees and we make 

that commitment firm and complete. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people have had a long enough experience with the deterrent fees. They do impose 

hardships. They have not controlled costs. Mr. Speaker, I now move this Resolution. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1192 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan) moved second reading of Bill No. 43 — An Act respecting the 

Profession of Occupational Therapy. 

 

He said: Bill 43 is a Bill sponsored by the Saskatchewan Society of Occupational Therapists which is a 

relatively new institution in this province. The proposed Act contains the standard provision in the 

incorporation of the Society — registration of new members who have taken the required university 

training and have passed the examinations prescribed by the University of Saskatchewan. The enactment 

should be helpful in regulating and promoting the development of this new profession. Mr. Speaker, I 

move this Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South) moved second reading of Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend 

The Medical Profession Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as a brief explanation of this Bill, the University of Saskatchewan recently 

amended its medical school program to provide for a medical student to take his hospital internship 

before receiving his degree. 

 

Section 28 of the Act was amended in 1968 to take account of this change. It is now realized that several 

medical schools outside of Saskatchewan such as certain medical schools in Mexico require their 

medical students to take their hospital internship before obtaining a university degree. The amendment 

in this Bill provides for such students to be registered in the educational register of the College so as to 

give them entitlement to practise medicine in the hospital in which they are interning. Certain medical 

students from Mexico now interning in the larger hospitals in Saskatchewan are in this category. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. A. Mitchell (Bengough) moved second reading of Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting The 

Saskatchewan Embalmers and Funeral Directors Association. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in the interests of clarification, the following is a brief summary of this proposed 

Bill. 

 

The Saskatchewan Embalmers Act presently provides for the licensing of embalmers. This Act is 

administered by the Saskatchewan Embalmers Association. The undertakers are presently licensed by 

the Minister of Public Health under The Public Health Act; they are not entitled to embalm. This 

proposed enactment provides for complete revision of the Saskatchewan Embalmers Act so that both 

embalmers and undertakers will be licensed under the Act. The undertakers will continue to be licensed 

by the Minister of Public Health; they will be known under the new Act as Funeral Directors. This Bill 

has been proposed by the Saskatchewan Embalmers Association. It is understood that this association 

made its proposal to the Government after consulting with several licensed undertakers. This Bill is 

intended to provide the basis for uniform standards of conduct among persons occupied in embalming 

and undertaking in this province. There are presently 130 licensed embalmers and 21 licensed 

undertakers in our province. It is understood that similar legislation has been 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1193 

 

enacted in both Ontario and Manitoba. I move that this Bill be read a second time. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank: (Saskatoon Mayfair) — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to ask the Member a 

question before he takes his seat. I notice that there are no explanatory notes with the Bill and I wonder 

if he could send across the document that he is referring to. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer: (The Battlefords) — Mr. Speaker, it may not be the proper place to raise this question; 

if not, I hope the Minister would advise me where, or possibly the Attorney General? 

 

Mr. Grant: (Minister of Public Works) — I wonder if the Hon. Member could use the mike? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, this may not be the proper place to raise this question, but if it isn’t, possibly the 

Minister of Health or the Attorney General will advise me as to the proper place we might discuss this 

during this session. There were reports last summer, and I am sure both the Minister of Health and the 

Attorney General are aware of this, about a movement from south of the border to take over funeral 

parlours and embalmers by American companies. Two American companies apparently are moving very 

rapidly. They have already moved into various places in Canada and I understand since they have gained 

a monopoly in Calgary where the price of funerals has gone up by more than double. I wonder where we 

might best get a discussion on this matter. I know that many people in Saskatchewan are concerned 

about this. I feel that many of the things that are being said about these people who are moving in bear 

investigation. Statements about them are not very complimentary. I wonder if the Attorney General or 

the Minister of Health has any reports on these activities. I know that the Embalmers Association, as 

they call themselves, are upset about this in Saskatchewan. They are very reluctant to deal with these 

people, but it seems that a monopoly is being established in spite of the efforts of everyone concerned, 

not only in the business of directing and handling funerals but in the supplying of caskets, etc. Fewer 

and fewer people are in the business and it seems it is not only the high cost of living anymore that we 

are worrying about, it is also an increase in the high cost of dying. 

 

Mr. Grant: (Minister of Public Works) — Mr. Speaker, I think the logical place to deal with this would 

be in the Department of Public Health Estimates. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1194 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. D.T. McFarlane 

(Minister of Agriculture) that Bill No. 22 — An Act respecting Intensive Live Stock Operations be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. J. Messer: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, in briefly commenting on this Bill when it was adjourned last, 

I had said that the legislation was needed and that there was a possibility, in fact, more than just a 

possibility, of the need for having it be retroactive and that there should be some considerable work done 

in regard to the area of cost control in relation to the application of this Bill. 

 

In regard to the statement that the legislation is needed, I think that we have ample evidence in the 

province today where there are operations that are too close to towns and are strategically situated where 

they may well contribute to pollution of water resources that are used by certain communities. We know 

of farms that are in operation now where the waste from these livestock enterprises being distributed on 

to the land is subject to run off through spring thaws and heavy rains into water reserves and streams. In 

fact, there are a number of areas where the wastes and by-products of livestock operations are dumped 

on the ice. When this thaws and the spring run-offs come, it contaminates water in our rivers and again 

in reservoirs of water that are needed and used by communities through Saskatchewan. Hopefully, this 

Bill will take action to curb some of these operations. Because there are situations such as this, I think 

there is need for legislation in the Bill to make it retroactive so that it will give the Department, give the 

Government the opportunity to come in, not only to check new operations that are being built but to 

inspect those that have been built recently and may be contributing to pollution. Also, there should be 

legislation for looking into their means of disposing of and spreading the by-products of these intensive 

operations. If the Bill is going to be a good and meaningful one, I think that it will have to do this, 

otherwise, it will be somewhat unfair in regard to those who are going to be building new and intensive 

livestock operations in comparison to those who already have them and will exempt them from the 

legislation that the Bill will restrict or hopefully encourage others to follow. 

 

I think it is of some merit to make some comments in regard to what kind of a problem we are 

confronted with when we start talking about livestock wastes. I think it is of interest to note that hogs 

contribute out of every four pounds of feed consumed, one pound of waste; chickens out of every two 

pounds of feed consumed, one pound of waste. A cow generates as much manure as 16.5 human beings. 

A hog generates as much manure as 1.9 human beings. You can go on and on bringing evidence in 

regard to the volumes of waste that have to be contended with and disposed of in intensive livestock 

operations. 

 

It is stated that if we were to handle the waste of farm animals in North America, we should have a 

problem of confronting waste disposal 10 times as large as that of the human population. It has been 

stated by the University of Saskatchewan 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1195 

 

that a 10,000 head feed lot of cattle per year is about equivalent to the waste problem that is confronted 

by the city of Saskatoon. 

 

I want to refer to a work sheet proposed by H.H. Nicholson, Department of Animal Science at 

Saskatoon, in regard to some of the problems that he sees in waste disposal. If I may, I should like to 

quote from his statements. 

 

The quantity of waste produced by beef cattle will vary according to the size of animal. A 700 pound 

animal will excrete approximately eight pounds of manure per day. During winter feeding operations, 

approximately the same weight of straw per day must be used for bedding the animal. This animal will 

then accumulate in 140 days, a total of 2,240 pounds of waste. Let us apply this to a 1,000 head 

feedlot. In normal operation, the turnover will be two and a half times per year, therefore, 2,5000 

animals will go through the feedlot. The waste production will amount to 2,500 times 2,240 or 

5,600,000 or 2,800 tons of waste. This is a modest estimate of the waste production as it could 

increase materially if a greater amount of bedding material was utilized. 

 

He further states: 

 

There are a number of management features that must be adhered to if animal waste is to be utilized 

for land spreading with a minimum of pollution. 

 

1. Spreading must not be done during the winter, in that, manure spread on frozen ground can be 

carried off during spring break-up and cause contamination of streams and other water bodies. 

 

2. Land areas which have a water table close to the surface will allow nitrates from the manure to enter 

the water by infiltration. Such water contaminated by nitrates will be dangerous for use for not only 

human consumption but animal consumption. In relation to such land areas, feedlots should not be 

established and the spreading of manure would have to be limited to that amount which will not cause 

nitrate contamination of ground waters. 

 

3. Animal wastes should be incorporated into the soil immediately after spreading. The incorporation 

procedure will reduce offensive odors, prevent run-off of waste material and allow much faster 

breakdown of the waste material by soil bacteria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of this evidence shows that it is going to be indeed a difficult piece of legislation to 

enforce if we are to take total corrective measures in regard to pollution by the agricultural industry 

especially in relation to intensive feedlot operation or intensive livestock operations. 

 

I fail to see where the Government, in this legislation, is going to be able to encounter and legislate all 

the problems that I have been making reference to. I therefore say that or ask the Minister that he give 

consideration to broadening the scope of the Bill so that it will not only take into consideration 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1196 

the moving of animal wastes so that we can have some protection in regard to contamination but also 

because of the operations that are now proceeding, that it be made retroactive in regard to the 

Government being able to inspect these, have them update their practices so that they would fall into the 

same category as new operations that will be undertaken. 

 

I should also ask of him that he give consideration in regard to some work being done in regard to 

lessening the cost of moving of livestock operations. Outside of that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 

the Bill. I encourage the Minister and his Department to give consideration to what I have mentioned. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Minister of Agriculture) — Mr. Speaker, in closing the debate, I want to advise 

the Member for Kelsey that there is no intention of the Government in this Bill of making the 

regulations or the Bill retroactive. I think it would be most unfair to the livestock industry in this 

province if you are going to make it retroactive at all. How many years are you going to have to go 

back? Are you going to have to go back five, ten, fifteen years, twenty years? I think the Government is 

to be commended that, at long last, something is being done not only to protect the environment of the 

province for other people in the province but, most important of all, to protect those people who are 

engaged in the livestock industry from future actions by people or groups of people who may take action 

to the detriment of the industry. There is an awful lot of talk going around this province and throughout 

this country at the present time in regard to pollution being created by agriculture, by livestock 

operations and such. I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that there are other segments of our society 

that are causing more pollution than the agricultural industry, and those people who are involved in the 

agriculture industry. Sure, there may be problems, sure, there may be waste disposal problems now and 

in the future. I think that if other industries and other segments of our society look after their problems 

as well as the agriculture industry looks after theirs, then the pollution problem in the years ahead won’t 

be of a magnitude for which we shall have too much concern. So to say that it should be made 

retroactive, I don’t think is fair and I don’t think it is feasible at this time. 

 

There is provision being made for those intensive operations that are in existence at the present time that 

if they want to enlarge then they have to apply for a permit and get the okay from not only the 

Department of Agriculture but the Department of Natural Resources, Water Resources Commission, 

Public Health and so forth. I think these concerns are very well taken care of by the legislation. 

 

I think there is one very important thing here to remember. We hear so much about the cost price 

squeeze in agriculture, we listen to it every day, but if we were to listen and take some of the 

recommendations that are coming from the other side of the House and build them into these types of 

operations, you wouldn’t have an agriculture industry. You wouldn’t have to worry about pollution from 

intensive feedlots. They would make it very unbearable as far as costs of operation are concerned. We 

could lose the whole livestock industry. I suggest to you too, Mr. Speaker, that one of the opportunities 

that we have here in Saskatchewan is the fact that some of the pollution laws that are now being put into 

effect in the corn 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1197 

 

belts of the United States and in many other areas in the United States, is driving that industry out of 

those areas and if we seize on these opportunities here in Saskatchewan and if we bring in the right type 

of legislation at this time in this province, we can take advantage of the decline in livestock production 

in the United States and work it to our advantage here in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 

 

And so I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Government is to be commended for having the foresight at long 

last to take issue with those people who are complaining about pollution, especially from the agricultural 

industry, to see that something is done now to protect the environment of our province at this time and in 

the years ahead and, most important still, to protect those people who are involved in the production of 

livestock and in the agricultural industry. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. D.T. McFarlane that 

Bill No. 23 — An Act respecting Refundable Deductions on the Marketing of Saskatchewan Hogs be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. J. Messer: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, such a Bill, I think, inevitably reaps a benefit to the consumer 

not necessarily to the producer. I think that it is fair to say that when the Government encourages 

programs of diversification into a livestock industry which inevitably results in increased numbers of 

livestock in the province, they should show some responsibility not only in regard to research into the 

quality of that livestock industry but also in regard to promoting consumption of that product. I don’t 

believe that it should be cost related directly to the hog producers in establishing markets for their 

product because it is not always within their means to be able to do that in a practical way. 

 

Many producers are concerned that the money which is deducted is not always going to be spent in the 

best interests of them in their operations. They are in fear of the deductions increasing as time goes by. 

They are in fear that the deductions may not only apply to — as we have now — cattle and now being 

expanded to hogs, but that it will expand to all produce that farmers are involved in. Even though the 

deductions are refundable, it is not a very convenient means for the farmer to make application at the 

end of a given year for the refunds. 

 

We therefore question whether there is any real merit or gain to the producer when he has to be 

burdened with such deductions. 

 

I should like, for the Minister’s perusal, to bring to his attention a statement in the Western Producer 

dated October 3, 1969, in regard to an article entitled, “Producer Isn’t Getting Larger Share, Marketing 

Cost Boosted Food Price”. If I may quote: 

 

The higher cost of food in Canada is due to the higher cost of marketing the products and not because 

the producer is getting a larger share. These facts were 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1198 

reported in a recent survey by K.E. Cann, Federal economist in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Cann goes on to state that the main causes total marketing costs have increased were: 

 

1. The greater physical volume of food passing through the marketing system; and 

 

2. the increased costs of marking. 

 

It is estimated that the volume of food increased by 74 per cent in the 1949 to 1967 period and the 

costs of marketing an equivalent quantity of food increased by 137 per cent. The costs of marketing 

food produced in Canada have increased at a faster rate than the farm value of the raw product. There 

are numerous reasons for the more rapid growth in the costs of marketing. Food consumption patterns 

have changed with increase in the purchase of convenience foods. The added service and 

merchandising advertising has also increased as well as costs of labor, supplies and equipment. 

 

This article further points out that at a percentage of farm value in relation to retail value, that in 1949 

farm value was 60 per cent of the retail value. In 1967 farm value had dropped to 43 per cent of the 

retail value. 

 

This shows that the producer is not getting any more, if as much, for his production than he was a 

number of years ago. At that time he was not paying nor was he subjected to deductions in regard to the 

products that he was selling and consequently we are now burdening him with a further cost of 

production and it is doubtful whether he is going to get any real gain in regard to contributing to such 

deductions when he totals up the net income of the operation for his given year. 

 

We therefore seriously question whether there is going to be any real gain to the hog producers in the 

Province of Saskatchewan if subjected to such deductions as this Bill will allow. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald: (Cannington) — Mr. Speaker, I only wish to make a few brief remarks which I 

really didn’t intend to make until the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) mentioned that he couldn’t see 

any advantages come to the producer. As a producer in livestock, and I have been all of my life and 

intend to continue, I think the most obvious advantage is that the deduction provides for some 

expenditure of money so that we can stay in business, at least, those of us that are in the business and 

would like to stay with it. The Member for Kelsey seems to completely ignore the fact that while we 

may not get a substantially higher income at least we’d like to maintain what we are getting now and not 

go out of business. Because, make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, there is a very real danger to the 

producer of both pork and beef from competitive products that unless we maintain our competitive 

position we may well find ourselves totally out of business which will be a substantially reduced income 

to what we have now. 

 

The beef producer is very much aware of this and this is why he had requested and most of his livestock 

associations had 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1199 

 

requested the check-off. He is very much aware of the competition from both synthetics and other 

products. Synthetics in particular are a real danger in the future and unless we produce a product at a low 

enough price and in competition with synthetics then we are in real danger of being out of business 

totally. 

 

The Member from Kelsey speaks of an increased income. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is a 

possibility of increasing our income through being more competitive in the export market and the 

domestic market but we have to show some initiative and some desire on our own part at least to 

maintain this competitive position and improve it. This is why most of the livestock associations want 

this type of legislation. They want to have a certain amount of money that they have control over. They 

don’t want to have to rely on Government and everyone else to be able to make certain that we are 

competitive. I think this is exceptionally important as most of the livestock groups acknowledge. I must 

admit the Farmers’ Union, who speak very little for any of the major livestock producers, have opposed 

it. They have opposed it in Manitoba and, I might add, in Manitoba I think eventually even the 

Government there is going to get around to bringing in this type of legislation because all of the other 

farm groups outside of the Farmers’ Union are supporting it. 

 

So, in essence, Mr. Speaker, I think I should be very remiss if I didn’t bring it to the Assembly’s 

attention that this is legislation which most livestock producers are asking for. They want it, they want to 

maintain their position and improve their position. They don’t want to have to rely on everyone else, 

including governments, to carry out all of their research because the past has proven that to rely on 

someone else is not nearly as adequate as relying upon yourself and trying to help yourself a little bit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood: (Swift Current) — Mr. Speaker, I do not have very much to contribute to the debate but 

I should like to make some remarks. The Hon. Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) said two 

things. One, he said that most of the livestock associations have requested this and a few minutes later 

he said that most of the livestock producers have requested it. I think there are two different things 

involved here. I am just not too sure at all that this imposition of tax upon the livestock producer is 

requested by the majority of livestock producers of the province. I think possibly the reverse is true. I do 

not think that these livestock associations that are asking this do speak for the majority of the hog raisers 

of the province. 

 

I think that any impost of this kind that is put on for the furtherance of beef products have a great 

tendency to work one against the other. One pushing for more beef and the other pushing for more hogs. 

 

The person who is eating beef or pork can only eat so much of either one and sometimes I think that you 

have a conflict of interests, if I may say, between these organizations. I think that overall research into 

the products of both these organizations or both of these groups of producers conducted by the 

Government would be more beneficial than each one subjecting 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1200 

themselves to a tax and working along those lines. I think that this, as the Hon. Member from Kelsey 

(Mr. Messer) has pointed out, is something that may be of rather doubtful value to the hog producers of 

the province. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Minister of Agriculture) — Mr. Speaker, I never cease to be amazed by the 

narrow outlook of some of the Members opposite. Here they get up and say, “Now you’re imposing a 

tax.” 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Crying for the farmers! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Crying for the farmers, yes, you’re going to impose a new tax. Well, in the first 

place, the legislation is voluntary so we are not imposing a tax. And the legislation was requested by the 

Saskatchewan Swine Breeders’ Association, the Saskatchewan Hog Producers’ Association, and by the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture which embodies many different organizations. For two or three 

years they’ve come to the Government and asked us for this type of legislation. 

 

And to further indicate their narrow outlook, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition fail to realize, as was pointed 

out on second reading, that this legislation is now in effect in Alberta. It’s in effect in Manitoba and the 

deductions there aren’t the suggested ceiling of 10 cents but may be 25 cents or 30 cents in those 

provinces. The Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) said maybe there will be a conflict of interest. 

One group is going to say eat more beef and another group is going to say eat more pork. Well, I’m 

going to tell you, Mr. Member for Swift Current, that the swine producers are far smarter than that and 

so are the beef producers. They realize that there is a tremendous market in the northwest United States. 

They realize there is a tremendous market in Japan and the 103 million people in that country asking for 

Canadian beef and asking for Canadian pork and willing to make trade agreements with Canada for the 

supplying of these products on two conditions. (1) That we can guarantee them a high quality of 

products; and (2) that we can guarantee them a continuity of supply, and this is most important. Besides 

these two outlets, you’ve got Costa Rica and other countries. I’ll just give you one indication of the 

movement of pork. As I pointed out in this House some time ago, in 1959 we produced the same number 

of hogs in that year as we produced in 1970 but there was a tremendous difference in the average price 

for the year. Because in 1959 — I believe you fellows were the Government at that time — the average 

price at Winnipeg for B-1 hogs was about $22 a hundred for the whole year, the average price. Last year 

when we produced the same amount of hogs in Saskatchewan, the average price at Winnipeg was 

$30.14 and why, what’s one of the reasons? Because the chain stores were doing a promotional job all 

across Canada to make pork move and on top of that, the Department of Trade and Commerce and the 

packers and all those interested in moving pork were moving it to Japan, they were moving it to the 

northwest United States and they were trying to get agreements with some other countries, and moving 

some there as well. 

 

The other thing is this. The United States is our chief competitor and why? Because they are sharp 

promoters and in the United States it doesn’t matter whether it’s with grain or 



March 23, 1971 

 

 

1201 

 

some of these other products, they have a check-off so they can finance a producer organization to go 

into these potential markets, and in the case of beef, take it right over to Japan, show them what the 

finished product is like and invite the people, the hotel people, the café people, and all the people to 

come and try United States beef. This is what Canada should do and thank goodness they are starting to 

do it. And this is why the beef industry came to us a year ago and asked us to set aside a check-off for 

them so that they could get into market promotion and this is why the swine producers in this province 

have come to us and asked for the same provision so that they could voluntarily have the deduction 

made where they could set aside funds for the promotion of their product. 

 

That is why in Manitoba the Farm Bureau went to the Manitoba Government about two months ago and 

said it was about time something was done in Manitoba because Saskatchewan is ahead of us now, 

Alberta is ahead of us and so is Ontario in having these check-offs so that their own producers can 

promote their own products. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out that the thinking of Members on the opposite side of the House 

is about 20 years behind the times and if we were to try and let them get in a position where they as a 

Government were going to take care of all of these things then we should be in the same position as we 

were for 20 years when the price of pork in Saskatchewan was below $22 per hundredweight for seven 

different years of the 20, almost half the time that they were in power. And so I think the swine 

producers in Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture and the Hog Producers’ 

Association are to be commended for being forward looking. 

 

When I brought in the Bill originally I said the Board would be made up of five different people, two 

representatives of the Swine Producers’, two from the Hog Producers’ Association and one from the 

Department of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall be bringing in an amendment in the Committee of the Whole increasing the Board 

by two additional persons, two representatives of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. 

 

The Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) read some article from the issue of March 3 of the Western 

Producer but I am going to read to him an article from the March 18th issue of the Western Producer. 

The headline says, “Hog Check-off Welcome, SFA”. 

 

The Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture welcomes the hog check-off in the province, particularly 

so that producer groups can assist in promoting their product in export markets. For example, one of 

the immediate indicative needs of the United Nations world food plan is pork in the diets of 

developing countries. 

 

And then they go on to say, commenting on the $2 premium for hogs, well, this is beside the point, I 

won’t mention that one, but I think it is significant that the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture has 

endorsed this program as we have announced through this legislation and willing to back it up and now 

they will have the privilege of appointing two members of their organization to the Board. 



March 23, 1971 

 

 
1202 

Mr. Speaker, this is good legislation. It is forward looking legislation and it goes along with this 

Government’s thinking and this Government’s actions in helping the producers of Saskatchewan to 

promote and to market their own products. 

 

I point out again that there may be one organization that opposed this legislation and that may be the 

National Farmers’ Union. They opposed the cattle check-off but I think the records of the funds that 

have accrued to the trust fund through the cattle check-off would indicate that by far most farmers in 

Saskatchewan are happy to have this type of legislation. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:28 o’clock p.m. 


