
























































Hansard: April 27, 1972


1994 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

45th Day 
 

Thursday, April 27, 1972. 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 
 MOTIONS 
 
 SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved, seconded by the Hon. Premier, by leave of the 
Assembly.  

 
Ordered, that Messrs. Lane, Baker, Brockelbank, Cody, Coupland, Faris, MacDonald (Milestone), Meakes 
and Romanow be constituted a Special Committee to: 
 
1. Consider any instrument made in virtue of any Statute of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
with a view to determining the adequacy of existing statutory authority for the making and publication of 
Statutory Instruments and on the adequacy of existing procedures for the drafting, scrutiny and operational 
review of such instruments and to make recommendations with respect thereto: 
 
2. To determine whether the special attention of the Assembly should be drawn to any Statutory 
Instruments on any of the following grounds: 
(a) That it imposes a charge on the public revenues or prescribes a payment to be made to any public 
authority not specifically provided for by statute; 
(b) That it is excluded from challenge in the courts; 
(c) That it makes unusual or unexpected use of powers conferred by statute; 
(d) That it purports to have retrospective effect where the parent statute confers no express authority so to 
provide; 
(e) That it has been insufficiently promulgated; 
(f) That it is not clear in meaning; 
and if they so determine, to report to that effect; and 
 
3. To review the adequacy of existing procedures for the scrutiny and operational review of bylaws of 
professional associations and to report thereon: 
 
That the Committee have the assistance of Legal Counsel in reviewing the said Statutory Instruments; that 
such Committee will have power to sit during the intersessional period and during any Legislative Session, 
except when the Assembly is sitting and that notwithstanding Section 58 of The Legislative Assembly Act 
(Chapter 3, R.S.S. 1965 as amended) allowances and expenses shall be paid to Members of the Committee 
when sitting during any period of adjournment of the Session, at the same rate as prescribed in the said 
section of the Act; and that it be required prior to reporting that the special attention of the Assembly be 
drawn to any Statutory Instrument, to inform the Government Department or authority concerned of 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
1995 

its intentions so report; and 
That the Committee be empowered to invite any Statutory Instrument-making authority to submit a 
memorandum explaining any Statutory Instrument which may be under consideration by the Committee or to 
invite any Statutory Instrument-making authority to appear before the Committee as a witness for the 
purpose of explaining any such Statutory Instrument. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
SESSIONAL PAPER NO. 12 1972 REFERRED TO SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON STATUTORY 
INSTRUMENTS 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved, seconded by the Hon. Premier, by leave of the 
Assembly. 
 

Ordered, That the Bylaws of the professional societies and amendments thereto tabled as Sessional 
Paper No. 12, 1972, be referred to the Special Committee on Statutory Instruments. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
 SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 109 - An Act relating to the 
Payment of Succession Duty. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, second reading of this Bill as with any other Bill is a time for debate in 
principle. 
 
This stage of debate is always important but in the case of The Secession Duty Act it is by far the most 
significant stage of all, because the legislation has principle at its very foundation. That principle, Mr. 
Speaker, is equity, equity of opportunity, equity in tax liability for every citizen of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— What is a succession duty? A succession duty is a tax levied when there is a transfer 
of wealth at death. It is a tax upon the recipient to whom a transfer represents money that he did not 
previously have. 
 
To fail to tax such a windfall or such income would undermine the basic principle of equity and taxation. To 
argue against the succession duty is to argue that an individual who receives income by way of a bequest 
should pay no tax, while a farmer or a worker should pay a tax on every dollar that he earns. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— To argue against the succession duty is to argue that personal income tax rates, for 
example, should be raised so that beneficiaries of large estates would be totally tax free. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

1996 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— This does not mean that every dollar of an estate should be treated as ordinary income 
and taxed at standard rates. And certainly no one is suggesting that. The exemption and rate structure in the 
succession duty legislation before this House, eliminates taxation on modest estates, eliminates taxation on 
medium sized estates. 
 
MR. STEUART:— Eliminate? There is none now. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Further, this legislation recognizes the family unit concept in acknowledgement of the 
direct and important contributions which family members may have made to the accumulation of assets of 
the estate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may well be argued as I hear it argued from time to time that because of the parlous state of 
this Province during the last several years, there will be no large estates. But we look for better things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— We don’t believe that this Province will always be in the slough of economic despond 
that it was in June of 1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, perhaps more important, this Bill recognizes the vital necessity of 
maintaining the family farm and small business. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— The legislation before you will permit transfer of the average family farm or business 
free of tax. 
 
But what this legislation will not permit is the perpetuation of great wealth over time in the hands of a 
privileged few, through a system which would enable that wealth to be transferred from generation to 
generation with little or no tax liability, regardless of the fact that the second and third generation put no 
sweat, no toil, no tears into earning that money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— That kind of inequity characterized a period of history which has long since 
disappeared and which shall not be allowed to reappear. 
 
It is here that an equitable system of wealth transfer taxation finds its purpose. Through such a system, a 
portion of the wealth which was derived from society through economic advantage is rightfully returned to 
it, to equalize opportunities and benefit all citizens. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
1997 

And we say, Mr. Speaker, that economic activity which provides income for people is a suitable basis for 
taxation and every one of us, right about now, is rushing - rushing to finalize our income tax returns. And we 
say that it is perfectly right and proper that we should pay income tax. On the same principle we say that it is 
perfectly right and proper for recipients of large bequests to pay succession duties. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— This is a principle which has been recognized throughout history and applied, in one 
form or another, in virtually every country. And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, it was applied long before it was 
thought proper to apply income taxes. Only Liberals can say, by some sort of inverse and perverted logic, 
that it is appropriate to tax someone on his income if he makes the minimum wage, but it is inappropriate to 
tax someone who inherits one million dollars. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Shame on you Liberals! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Apparently a form of inheritance tax, a 10 per cent levy on the transfer of property at 
death, was in effect as early as the 7th Century B.C. in ancient Egypt. 
 
MR. STEUART:— And you haven’t learned anything since. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Later, a somewhat more refined form was introduced by the Emperor Augustus at the 
height of the Roman Empire. It is said that the Roman tax consisted of a flat 5 per cent levy of all legacies 
and successions over various minimum amounts. Though historians argue about these minimum levels it is 
nevertheless probable that the Romans can be credited with the beginnings of a basic exemption system. 
 
During the Middle Ages, inheritance taxation continued to play a large role in the financing of the state. 
During the period which has provided so much inspiration for the Liberal Party in the past, the Middle Ages, 
I want to point out to them that this very tax provided a major role in the financing of the state. In most areas 
of Europe, various kings and princes had recognized authority over titles to property and in the event of 
death, all property was supposed to escheat or revert to the Crown. However, tax payments - note this, Mr. 
Speaker, I wish we could find such delightful terminology - but tax payments which were then called reliefs 
could be paid by someone to the Crown in order to prevent total escheat, total reversion to the Crown. 
 
In certain cases, of course, property was allowed to pass between generations entirely free of tax from father 
to son, and this led to the building up of small and immensely powerful noble families. 
 
Great Britain’s first general tax was implemented around the end of the 18th Century and at almost the same 
time the United States introduced a national death duty in the form of a stamp tax on receipts for legacies 
and probates for wills. While the British system remained in effect from then on, the 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

1998 
 

American system was laid aside and revived in 1916. In Canada, Mr. Speaker, the first death duty legislation 
was passed in Ontario in 1892. But within two years of 1892, every other province of Canada, which was 
then in Confederation, had some death duties. 
 
A succession duty ordinance became law in this area in the Northwest Territories in 1903, and was 
incorporated into the statutes of the Province of Saskatchewan in 1905. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to you and to all Hon. Members that in 1905 the Premier of this Province 
was the Hon. Walter Scott, much revered in Liberal Party circles in this Province. I am sure he was right 
when he said that there should be succession duties in Saskatchewan in 1905. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— In 1947, after the war, the first of a series of agreements between the Federal and 
Provincial Governments was implemented under which the participating provinces withdrew their 
succession duties in return for a share of the Federal estate tax. These agreements were, of course, 
maintained right up until the end of last year. 
 
So it is clear that our present proposals are based upon solid principles and historic concern for equitable 
taxation. Mr. Speaker, modern authorities substantiate both the principle and the concern. Let me quote one 
of these modern authorities. I will quote him and it is a fairly extensive quote: 
 

There is widespread recognition that estate taxation makes an important contribution to bringing 
more equitable opportunity to all Canadians. 

 
An estate tax with a progressive rate structure can improve the fairness of the whole tax system by 
imposing a tax on wealth. To be fair to lower income groups, governments must use the two 
progressive taxes - estate and income - when possible. Surely it is contrary to the country’s long-run 
interest to allow a substantial portion of the nation’s wealth to accumulate in the hands of a few 
individuals or families. Wealth generally brings greater economic power, and this power in turn 
brings greater wealth. Unless this concentration were checked between generations, the benefits of 
the economic activities of the Canadian people would not be equitably distributed or efficiently 
absorbed. Some argue that this problem of concentration is not as great in Canada as in some other 
countries. But it is probably that the existence of death duties since the early stages of Canadian 
economic development has helped prevent the large concentrations which were characteristic of the 
United States at the turn of the century. 

 
Historically, opposition to inheritance taxes has come mainly from privileged classes trying to 
protect their wealth without regard to fairness or the common good. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, who said that? 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
1999 

MR. STEUART:— Was it Pierre? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Was it a radical socialist? Not even a moderate socialist. Those were the words of the 
former Federal Minister of Finance, Edgar J. Benson. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, where and when did he say them? 
 
MR. STEUART:— When? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Well, he said them to the London West Liberal Association in London, Ontario in 
1969. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend these principles of Mr. Benson and to Mr. Benson’s party and to the Members of 
that Party sitting opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Despite Mr. Benson’s philosophy, the Federal Government withdrew from the estate 
tax and gift tax field at the end of 1971. 
 
Saskatchewan opposed the Federal Government’s withdrawal from the estate tax field. We believe this 
should be a Federal tax. We believe that there should be a succession duty or estate tax, and we believe that 
it should be raised and collected federally. First, because Federal administration means uniform legislation 
across Canada, avoiding the possibility of a tax jungle or a tax haven. I am surprised, Mr. Speaker, if 
Members opposite now argue against that, because no government in the history of Saskatchewan that I am 
aware of, whatever its political stripe, Conservative, Liberal or New Democrat has ever argued against 
Federal levied and Federal collected succession duties or estate taxes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART:— We did, the Government of the late Ross Thatcher. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, a tax on wealth of this nature should not only be levied nationally, it 
should be distributed nationally. Because while wealth may rest in one province, we know that it was not 
earned in one province. We know that if a wealthy man dies in Ontario - let us say the president of 
Massey-Ferguson dies in Ontario leaving a large estate - a fair bit of that wealth was generated right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Off the seat of the farmers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— And there is no reason in the world why we shouldn’t get a share of that wealth. But 
Members opposite argue that 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2000 
 

none of this wealth should be taxed. And certainly, it shouldn’t be taxed nationally. We oppose their view 
and oppose it profoundly. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Talk to the farmers. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— So, Mr. Speaker, along with several other provinces, the Government of 
Saskatchewan expressed a great deal of concern about this Federal Government decision, both from the 
standpoint of general equity and from the standpoint of revenue maintenance. The provinces have for many 
years received a share of the Federal estate tax collection. Saskatchewan’s share before the rebate amounted 
to $3.5 million to $4 million a year. And I don’t think that any province should willingly lose this source of 
revenue without finding some substitute. 
 
In mid-July at the Federal-Provincial Conference of Ministers of Finance, the provinces had their first formal 
opportunity to present their views on Ottawa’s planned withdrawal from the estate tax field. And not 
surprisingly, strong representations were expressed by virtually every province. Ottawa was asked to 
reconsider its decision. And when provincial first Ministers, Premiers, met in Victoria in early August, every 
Premier present during the discussion of this estate tax question, and there were eight at the time, endorsed a 
formal joint request to the Prime Minister to defer the repeal of this legislation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— During the late summer and early fall, Federal and Provincial finance officials met 
frequently to discuss the options available to them, but no concrete action was possible until mid-October, 
when the Federal Minister of Finance indicated that the Government of Canada was prepared to enter into 
relatively uniform succession duty and gift tax collection arrangements with the provinces on a conditional 
basis for a maximum of three years to take effect on January 1, 1972. Saskatchewan accepted the Federal 
Government’s offer with respect to both succession duty and gift taxes. So did Manitoba and so did the four 
Atlantic provinces. British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec already had their own succession duty legislation 
but they took advantage of the Federal offer with respect to gift taxes. Thus, by January 1st of this year, nine 
out of ten provinces had indicated that they were going to have succession duties, nine out of ten provinces 
had indicated that they were going to have gift taxes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Let me emphasize that point. Because from some of the noises made by the Press and 
by Members opposite, one would think that Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada to have 
succession duty legislation. The situation is quite the reverse. Only one province, our neighbor to the west 
has decided to go it alone by not having any estate tax. It apparently decided they are going to raise their 
funds by taxing oil in place in the ground or by some other tax. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Sales tax. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2001 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, we may ask why Ottawa decided to withdraw from the estate tax field. 
Several reasons have been advanced. The argument for a Federal withdrawal which has the least validity and 
which has perhaps caused the greatest misunderstanding and confusion was the implication by some at 
Ottawa, denied categorically and in terms in my presence by Mr. Benson twice, that there was some 
recognizable reason for withdrawing from estate taxes because there is going to be some sort of tax on 
capital gains. That sort of implication, as I say, was denied on behalf of the Federal Government by Mr. 
Benson on a good number of occasions but twice in my presence. And I am glad that Mr. Benson did deny it 
because there is no possible, logical connection between capital gains and estate taxes. 
 
There may be some trade-off in revenue terms for the Federal Government but there is no logical connection, 
nor is there any trade-off in terms of Provincial revenues. Let me put this clearly. I see no possible, logical 
connection between not having succession duties and applying capital gains taxes, nor do I see any 
connection in terms of Provincial revenues by the Federal Government not collecting estate taxes and the 
Federal Government collecting capital gains. The fact that they are collecting capital gains brings no money 
to Saskatchewan, whereas the old estate taxes brought 75 cents on the dollar to Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly, there can be no trade-off in terms of principle. Certainly, there can be no trade-off in equity terms. 
Under the revised income tax legislation, one half of the gains on capital assets accruing from December 
1971, and I note that - accruing from December 1971 - will become taxable at death at standard income tax 
rebates. But any wealth not in a form defined as a "capital asset" will be transferable without any such tax 
liability. At the same time, most Canadians not fortunate enough to be recipients of inheritances will have to 
continue to pay taxes on their wage and salary incomes at normal income tax rates. Clearly, there is no equity 
trade-off here. 
 
Let me give you an example, Suppose in the year 1972 I earned by salary and from it saved $10,000 after tax 
and put it in the bank. And suppose in 1972 I entered into some house deals and made a profit of, let’s call it 
$10,000, for easy figuring, on which I had paid no tax. That profit on buying and selling houses, I paid no tax 
on. That profit on being a public servant, I paid a tax on. And suppose therefore, I have $20,000 in the bank 
when I die, leaving aside all matter of exemptions. Members opposite argue that it seems fairer to tax the 
$10,000 that I earned and paid tax on by working, but we should not levy a tax on the $10,000 that I made by 
buying and selling houses. And they say if I pay an income tax on it, and I now have to pay income tax on 
half of it because of the new law, then they say I shouldn’t have to pay an estate tax on it, because that’s 
somehow double taxation. Why is it any more double taxation when someone inherits capital gains on which 
taxes have been paid at half rate than it is if someone inherits savings on which someone has paid full rates? 
But yet, I hear this argument put forward time after time. A totally baffling argument. 
 
My position and the position of our Party is perfectly clear. We say that money made from buying and 
selling houses 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2002 
 

should attract the same sort of tax as money made by working at a job. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— And we say that all of that should be part of an estate and all of it should be part of a 
succession and someone who gets that money without having earned any of it should pay a tax on that. Now, 
that’s our position and it is perfectly simple. This has been the situation with respect to earned income in 
Canada from 1892 until 1968 at least. And we are baffled by any argument which says that now that there is 
a capital gains tax, it is somehow unjust to have succession duties. Anyone who can put that argument 
logically, I’d like to hear it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Ken MacLeod agrees. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Let me turn now to the question of Provincial revenues. As for the revenue side of the 
trade-off argument, the provinces previously received 75 per cent of the Federal estate tax collected in 
respect of their jurisdiction while the Government of Canada retained 25 per cent. Under the revised system, 
the Federal Government will receive almost 70 per cent of the basic capital gains revenue while the 
provinces will get 30 per cent. The arithmetic is simple. If 70 per cent of the new capital gains tax will yield 
as much for Ottawa as 25 per cent of the old estate tax did, and even this is doubtful, then there is very little 
possibility of the provinces getting the same amount of money out of capital gains tax as we got out of 
succession duties. In fact, it is mathematically impossible unless the Federal yield is very greatly increased. 
Let me say that again. If the Federal Government is getting the same amount of money through taxation by 
getting 70 per cent of capital gains that they got out of 25 per cent, of the estate taxes, how are we going to 
get the same amount of money out of 30 per cent of capital gains as we got out of 75 per cent of estate taxes? 
Try that for arithmetic. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Can’t be tough, right Ken? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— As I indicated earlier, nine out of ten provinces whose governments represent all 
political views, and I think it is three Conservatives, three Liberal, two New Democratic, one Social Credit, 
nine of these ten provinces have reached similar conclusions. The three provinces which already had 
succession duties decided to retain them and go for gift taxes as well. The other six including Saskatchewan 
agreed to accept the Federal Government’s offer to collect these taxes and in late December a detailed joint 
statement of our legislative intention was made public. 
 
The contents of that statement which I am sure are familiar to Members of the Assembly were intended to 
provide citizens with specific information for planning purposes with respect to succession duty and gift tax 
systems which were to be effective on January 1, 1972. Mr. Speaker, there have been some minor 
modifications since the statement issued in December, but no single modification was contrary to the interest 
of the taxpayers. Every one provided some additional measure of 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2003 

exemption. Anyone who acted on the basis of the December press statement has not been prejudiced by 
anything that has happened since. 
 
The statement indicated that Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Manitoba 
and Saskatchewan had agreed to present uniform, standardized succession duty and gift tax legislation to 
their respective Legislatures. These Acts were to be based in large part on comparable Federal legislation 
which had been in effect right up until the end of 1971. They would be administered through the Federal 
Government through the Departments of National Revenue and Finance for a period of three years. Since the 
announcement of last December, however, the agreeing provinces have made certain modifications in their 
legislative intentions. So in order that the confusion be cleared away I would summarize briefly the Act now 
before the House and what it will mean to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Subject to exemptions which I will outline shortly, Saskatchewan’s succession duty will be levied first on 
the value of all property of the deceased, at the date of his death which is situated in the province, whether 
the deceased died domiciled inside or outside Saskatchewan, and whether his beneficiaries are domiciled or 
resident in or out of the province, with one exception. Where both the deceased and beneficiary are 
domiciled outside Saskatchewan, the succession duties will apply only to real estate in the province. 
 
Secondly, a succession duty will be levied on all beneficiaries who are resident in the province and who 
inherit property which is situated outside the province. There are measures to avoid double taxation where a 
beneficiary resides in Saskatchewan, for example, and inherits property situated in Ontario or Quebec or 
British Columbia, Saskatchewan will then allow a credit for any inheritance tax paid in the other province. 
There are general arrangements offering credits so that there is not double taxation among the several 
provinces. 
 
Let me turn now, Mr. Speaker, to a brief discussion of the exemptions under our new succession duty 
legislation, how they will work and who will be affected. First of all, and I emphasize this because I read bits 
in the paper which don’t seem to indicate an understanding of this: no succession duty will be payable where 
the aggregate net value of an estate is $50,000 or less. If the estate after you have paid all the taxes and all 
the debts is under $50,000, then there is no tax whatever, regardless of who inherits it. This single factor 
eliminates about 95 per cent of the estates in Saskatchewan in any average year. Of the remaining 5 per cent, 
some, but only some, will be subject to tax. The maximum exemption will be $200,000. This will apply if at 
least $50,000 passes to the wife or husband and any balance goes to other preferred beneficiaries. Preferred 
beneficiaries include a son or a daughter or a father or a mother or a son-in-law or a daughter-in-law or a 
grandparent or a grandchild. Let me make that clear. If an estate passes to a son or a daughter or a father or a 
mother or a son-in-law or a daughter-in-law or a grandparent or a grandchild, the exemption is $150,000, and 
if there is a husband or wife involved, widow or widower, the exemption can go up to $200,000. And in my 
legal experience and I am sure in the legal experience of almost any other lawyer in Saskatchewan, the vast 
majority, the overwhelming majority of estates pass to either one of a wife or a husband or a son or daughter 
or a 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2004 
 

father or a mother or a son-in-law or a daughter-in-law or a grandparent or a grandchild. 
 
Now, why $200,000? This maximum is very much larger than the Federal maximum which applied up until 
the end of last year except in respect of spouses. We feel that this level of $200,000 exemption accomplishes 
two or three basic objectives. First, it provides adequate protection for a husband or wife as well as an 
acceptable recognition of their contribution to the accumulation of the estate. Secondly, it prevents the 
inequitable transfer of extremely large estates without any tax liability. 
 
As I stated a moment ago, only a handful of estates in Saskatchewan in any year will exceed this $200,000 
level, an aggregate net value. But what of estates that do? I want to make this clear that the level of taxation 
even over the $200,000 level is modest at least for the estates under half a million dollars. If a man were to 
leave his wife an estate with a net value of $250,000, and that’s a lot of money, net after all debts, a quarter 
of a million dollars, the amount of tax payable would be $13,800. An effective rate of 51/2 per cent. Almost 
anyone who fills out an income tax return has to face rates of higher than 51/2 per cent. 
 
On an estate with an aggregate net value of $350,000, and that’s a lot of money, left by a man to his wife and 
children, the amount of tax would be just under $50,000. In this case the effective rate on the total estate is 
just over 14 per cent. And many of us know that we are paying a great deal more than 14 per cent of our 
salary in tax. A great deal more. It should be remembered that the tax may be paid over a six-year period. 
This will be attractive where liquidity of assets is a problem. There is no suggestion that in my example the 
$50,000 would have to be paid immediately. All that would be required to be paid immediately would be 8 
or 9 or $10,000 on an estate of $350,000 and another $7,000 or $8,000 a year for six years. Anyone who 
inherits $350,000 and cannot use it to produce $7,000 or $8,000 a year is indeed in need of some investment 
advice. Exemptions for what are called collateral successors, such as brothers and sisters will be $25,000. 
Remember again that no estate for a net value of less than $50,000 will be taxed at all. With respect to a 
bequest made to a stranger, there is an exemption of $1,000 but again, the first $50,000 on any estate will not 
be taxable. Keep in mind that the total exemption can not exceed $200,000. Of the $200,000, $50,000 is 
available only to the spouse, $150,000 is available to that lengthy list of preferred beneficiaries which I 
enumerated. A special additional exemption will be granted for infirm children. Where the deceased left an 
infirm child an exemption of a $1,000 for each year that the child is under the age of 17 will be granted. This 
exemption will be applicable over and above the $150,000 maximum exemption or $200,000 maximum 
exemption which I earlier enumerated. There are other unlimited exemptions of the usual kind. Charitable 
gifts can be left in any amount and they reduce the value of the taxable estate. Thus, if a person had an estate 
of a quarter of a million dollars and he left $25,000 to his church and $25,000 to charity and $200,000 to his 
wife, the entire estate is exempt. Any gifts to municipalities or the Crown are exempt. If there was an estate 
of $350,000 and someone left $50,000 to the University of Saskatchewan, $25,000 to his church, $25,000 to 
other charitable organizations and 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2005 

$200,000 to his wife, the entire $350,000 is exempt. 
 
We believe that unlimited exemptions for bequests of this kind are fully in keeping with the intent of 
succession duty legislation. The wealth transferred will provide benefits to society in general. We believe 
that generally speaking, gifts to churches, gifts to charitable institutions provide for the same sort of general 
well-being that a tax in the hands of a public organization like a government provides. The money is 
available for the benefit of the public. Accordingly we are excepting it. 
 
The rates in calculating succession duty are outlined in detail in the Bill. But let me emphasize here that no 
tax is payable on the exempt portion of benefits. Where the net aggregate value exceeds the exemption level, 
the rates are applied to the excess and only to the excess. Thus, when I see people talking about the fact that 
a 10 per cent rate is high, surely it must be interpreted after you apply the very generous exemption which I 
have outlined. There has been some concern expressed that the imposition of a tax on accrued capital gains 
at death under the income tax system coupled with the introduction of a succession duty could lead to 
burdensome double taxation. As I have tried to indicate this concern is groundless. Any income tax liability 
in respect to an estate, including a capital gains tax liability, will be deductible in computing the aggregate 
net value for succession duty purposes. So once you have paid your income tax on capital transactions that 
tax, of course, comes off the estate before it is even calculated for estate tax purposes. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— How is that double taxation? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Let me turn now to some other concerns, particularly those related to the family farm 
and small family owned businesses. To hear some people talk and to listen to the occasional business man 
one would think that the transfer of farms and family owned businesses had never been taxed before. Let me 
point out this fact; the exemption levels provided for bequests to family members with the exception of the 
spouse, are significantly larger under the Saskatchewan Succession Duty Act than those provided under the 
former estate tax law. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Let me say this again. If a man wanted to leave a business to his son he’ll be far better 
off in 1972 than he was in 1965. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— In fact, if his business is not very large, if it is a couple of hundred thousand dollars, 
and I use the term lightly because many people think that is a lot of money, under this succession duty 
legislation he will pay less in tax than he would have in 1971 after giving full effect to the estate tax rebate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2006 
 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Under the formal Federal legislation for example the basic exemption in respect of a 
taxable estate for an adult son who would inherit a farm from this father was $10,000, $10,000 was the 
exemption. Now, again, I must be fair and say that estates of under $50,000 were not taxed. Under the 
Saskatchewan legislation the same son could receive a $150,000 farm, tax free. In addition any debts, 
including any capital gains tax liability will be deducted from the value of a farm or business before 
Saskatchewan tax is applied. 
 
I hear some Liberals say, "What about the estate tax rebate in Saskatchewan?" Well I am not forgetting that 
there was an estate tax rebate. Remember that that rebate applied only to 75 per cent of the tax. Taking that 
rebate into account for the vast bulk of estates the new rates will be lower for estates of a net taxable value of 
$190,000 or less than they were in 1970 or 1971. Now let me say that again, if you die in Saskatchewan and 
have an estate of $190,000 or less, leaving it to your children, leave the wife aside for a moment, leaving it 
only to your children, the tax will be less in 1972 than it was in 1971 after giving full effect to the Liberal tax 
rebate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— And if you leave the estate to your wife and children the break point where the 1972 
tax would be lower than the 1971 tax is more than $200,000. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Shame on you Liberals. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Furthermore, an analysis of farm values in Saskatchewan indicates that the gross 
value - disregarding debts and other deductions - of more than 85 per cent of farms is less than $150,000. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Shame on you boys, you belong back in the 18th century 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— I am very confident that of all the farms in Saskatchewan well over 90 per cent, on 
the figures it would be well over 97 or 98 per cent, would have a net value after all debts are paid of less than 
$200,000. Of the small per cent which might be subject to tax at the death of the owner, only a very few 
would be affected in any single year. Taking all estates the average number in Saskatchewan with a value of 
more than $50,000, and this is a recent year, I took out some figures in a recent year, the number of estates 
with a value of more than $50,000 was 210. So that’s the maximum number that could be taxed if you left 
them all to strangers. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— You people are going to oppose that. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— The average number valued at more than $150,000 was 24. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— You are going to get lots of votes on that. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2007 

MR. BLAKENEY:— And the number which would be over $200,000 would be 15 or so. Now with a 
population of around 925,000, this doesn’t seem to be an oppressive rates of taxation. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Give all 24 votes to the Liberal Party, Cy. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Members opposite have shown a touching concern for this minority group - the tiny 
minority who will be affected in any year by succession duties. What is the distinguishing feature of this 
group? The inheritance of large additions to their income which should not - in the view of Members 
opposite - bear any tax. Many of the arguments which have been offered by these groups against this 
Government’s proposal have been based upon the assumption that it follows the taxation on the transfer of 
wealth in 9 or 10 provinces and in all major western countries in some way drives entrepreneurs out of these 
provinces and out of these countries. How can it really be argued that 9 of 10 provinces in Canada want to 
drive out industry? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Shame on you Liberals! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— How can it be argued that up to 1968 - let’s use that date when the rebate and these 
other things might have come in - up to 1968, every government in Saskatchewan up to that date, Liberal, 
Conservative, you name it, wanted to drive out industry. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— The Liberal Press and the Liberal Party said that. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— That argument is not supported by statistics and should not be argued in a jurisdiction 
with a healthy economy. We, in Saskatchewan, want to have a healthy economy but we do not want to 
become a banana republic. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— We reject the suggestion that somehow we should forsake our responsibility to have a 
fair and equitable tax system in order to take part in a futile tax give-away contest with Alberta or with any 
other province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— We have heard predictions of a mass shift of assets out of Saskatchewan to Alberta. I 
ask, did this happen when Alberta first introduced its tax rebate scheme before Saskatchewan followed suit? 
And better still is there any evidence during the years of 1969 and 1970 and 1971 when Saskatchewan had a 
tax rebate and Manitoba did not, is there any evidence of a mass shift of people from Manitoba to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— How about that? Those are the free enterprisers this year. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2008 
 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Where did all these people migrating westward stop? They certainly didn’t stop in 
Regina. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Or Yorkton. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— There is no such evidence, that this sort of tax differential causes any major shift in 
people’s place of residence or the location of industry. The point is that relatively few sound long-term 
investment decisions are made on the basis of just one factor and particularly not on the potentially 
short-lived factor of a tax advantage which can disappear at any time. Major decisions are based upon 
markets, availability of skilled labor, good transportation facilities, low cost power and other basic 
considerations all of which Saskatchewan can offer without compromising the equity principle in its taxation 
system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— And all of which will continue to bring us our share of investment in the future. At 
the same time we shall receive significant revenues from a progressive tax which will permit us to undertake 
necessary programs for the betterment of conditions for all of the citizens of this Province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Finally let me deal briefly with the retroactive nature of the legislation. We are 
making it retroactive to January 1, 1972. We should very much have preferred to have dealt with succession 
duties and gift taxes before the Federal Government’s withdrawal became effective. For the reasons I 
advanced earlier this was simply not possible. We were faced with the choice of retroactive legislation or of 
permitting a tax holiday with respect to wealth transfers for a three or four month period. Remember this 
would have applied to gifts as well as estates. In concert with the other participating provinces we took the 
only rational course. If this field were to be occupied there could be no break in the continuity. The six 
co-operating provinces made their intentions clear before January 1st and while some changes have been 
made with respect to these original intentions all have been changes for the benefit of the taxpayer. 
Therefore, retroactivity will not result in any undue hardship, no one is taken by surprise. Mr. Speaker, I 
have outlined this Government’s reason for introducing this tax measure. It is soundly grounded in principle 
and in historical precedent. It is a vital part of any fair and equitable tax system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— It will ensure that the transfer of large accumulations of wealth will not go untaxed at 
the expense of the vast majority of taxpayers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— It protects the transfer of family farms and small 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2009 

businesses, it introduces into Saskatchewan what I think is a basic element of any fair tax system, the tax on 
inherited wealth and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I urge all Members to give their support in principle to The 
Succession Duty Act, 1972. I move second reading of the Bill. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— Mr. Speaker, may I just ask the Premier one question before he takes his seat? In his 
remarks he referred very frequently to the words estate or estate tax. I didn’t hear him use the terms 
succession as such. Would I be in order to ask for a brief comment on that aspect? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— If I may, Mr. Speaker, I will say that an estate tax is a tax based upon the estate which 
is left, the tax is calculated on the basis of what was left by the person who died. The Federal tax was an 
estate tax. Our constitutional lawyers tell us that no province can levy an estate tax because it would be an 
indirect tax and beyond the constitutional power of a province. Accordingly provinces levy succession 
duties. And a succession duty is a tax, not on the pool of money that a person left when he died, but on the 
persons who inherit the money. 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Milestone):— The poor ones. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— I refrain from answering that comment. It is a tax on the recipient rather than the 
donor, if you can call a man who dies a donor. The tax structure here is a succession duty made as much like 
an estate tax as possible in order to provide a continuum with the Federal one. And accordingly, unlike some 
Succession Duty Acts, the rate of tax paid by the recipient varies in this Bill, depending partly on the size of 
the estate from which he got the money, which makes it something of a hybrid. I would be happy to pursue 
this rather technical discussion in Committee but generally speaking that’s it. A succession duty is a tax on 
the fellow who gets the money, an estate tax is on the pool of wealth which was left. Only the Federal 
Government can levy an estate tax. The provinces are confined to succession duties. Hence the change and 
because of the desire of all of the participating provinces, and I think the others, to provide for as much 
continuity with the Federal legislation as possible, the legislation is made to be as much like an estate tax as 
can be legally done under the general heading of a succession duty. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K. R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park):— Mr. Speaker, I think today we have witnessed rather an 
incredible performance. I haven’t heard the Premier shout quite so much since last August. He had a bad 
argument then, and I think he has a bad argument today. In fact I have seldom seen the Premier perform quite 
the way he did. When he went through the history of these taxes even he couldn’t help but break down and 
laugh at the weakness of his own argument, which basically indicates that he is an honest man despite the 
fact that he is producing for us rather a foolish argument. The Premier was rather impressed with the escheat 
features of some of the older jurisdictions. Escheat, as everybody in the House knows, is a system . . . 
 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2010 
 

MR. STEUART:— I don’t know. 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— . . . where the Government takes everything. It is a form of confiscation, and I am 
impressed that the Premier was impressed enough with confiscation to discuss it in glowing terms. 
 
I want to remind the Premier that the Pharaohs were wrong, Augustus was wrong and history will prove that 
Blakeney was wrong. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— The Premier in quoting the Hon. Mr. Edgar Benson, quoted from a time when Mr. 
Benson did present an estate tax to the people, but he did not mention that he took it off and replaced it with 
a capital gains tax. Even Mr. Benson clarified his own thinking in that regard. One of the things that the 
Premier forgets is that the principle depends upon two or three things. The first principle is, who gets taxed; 
secondly, who doesn’t get taxed; and thirdly, what do your neighbors do. That one is more important perhaps 
than all others. The main principle of all isn’t that we tax because we want to tax (which is the philosophy of 
the NDP). The NDP seem to say that we’ve got to tax somebody. 
 
My principle is very simple - what does it do for the people of Saskatchewan? If the answer is that it helps 
the people of Saskatchewan then you should do it, and if it hurts then you should not do it. 
 
One thing that the Premier admits is that we get a share of the capital gains tax. At least I hope he admits it, 
because the tax base that we will be taxing is founded upon a figure which is arrived at later adding capital 
gains. The Premier says there is no trade-off in principle but there is a very good trade-off in dollars, and 
that’s good enough for me. 
 
The Premier will also know that the Provincial revenues from capital gains over the years will grow. Each 
year the revenue from capital gains should be more than the year before just because of the growth of the 
nation predicted by, and as a result of, good Liberal policies in Ottawa - not good NDP policies in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One problem is that the NDP changed the ground rules. There is a clear and distinct alteration of the ground 
rules for people in Saskatchewan. Prior to 1972 we operated under a pretty good set of Federal Estate Tax 
laws, but even those laws were required and regarded by the Federal Government as no longer necessary in 
light of the additional moneys to be derived from capital gains. The Premier changed the ground rules 
starting January 1st, 1972 without giving the people an opportunity to alter their affairs accordingly. He has 
presented us with a succession duty, which is a tax on wives which was not the case in 1971, and a tax on 
family transfers between brothers which is clearly more severe than the tax previous to this year. When you 
get the position of two brothers operating as partners on farm land, each of them may have $100,000 in 
assets. One of them may be a bachelor intending to leave his land to his other brother. If he has an estate of 
$100,000 it 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2011 

is quite obvious to me and obvious to anyone else that a severe tax will be paid on that $100,000 gift to a 
brother if the bachelor brother dies and lets the other one continue with ownership of the farm land. 
 
Many farm lands may have to be sold to pay the tax. One thing the Premier didn’t mention was the delay, the 
deferred period of payment of tax, involves a payment of non-deductible interest, so if you are going to pay 
your tax over five years you are going to have to pay interest and that’s non-deductible for any purpose. One 
of the purposes of the Land Bank is to buy land so people can pay succession duties. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the main problems in taxation is an assessment of what your neighbors are doing. 
The Premier said, over and over again, nine out of ten provinces imposed succession duties, but one of the 
things he did not emphasize is that the province that is the big exception is the Province of Alberta, right 
next door. 
 
If any business has an equal choice between bringing their business to Saskatchewan and bringing their 
business to Alberta they would be crazy under the present NDP tax laws to bring that business to 
Saskatchewan. I suggest to the Premier that for every one dollar in tax that he gets from the people who 
remain here and who die here, who have the misfortune of dying here, he will lose $5. I am convinced that 
the benefit to be gained is negative. For every dollar the Province of Saskatchewan will gain they will lose 
$5 in other taxes and $5 in other businesses and $5 in other revenues to the province. 
 
If, in fact, the Province of Alberta had a tax similar to the tax here in Saskatchewan - similar to our 
succession duties - much of what the Premier says would make sense. I do not deny that a lot of his argument 
on taxation is sound provided he looks at all the facts, and the most important and most critical fact and one 
that was recognized by the Liberal Government under Ross Thatcher is that our neighbor has a tax haven. It 
is the kind of tax haven that will attract money and some of the money that it will be attracting could be 
money that otherwise could come to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a suggestion to this Government. I want to remind them that the 
exemptions, particularly to wives, under the previous laws were very, very generous. If you died in 1971 on 
December 31st, it didn’t matter how much money you had, no matter how much money you gave to your 
wife, it was entirely free of estate tax. There was no limit. This has been a startling change. Husbands and 
wives working together all their lifetime to earn this estate may well find the money placed in the hands of 
the husbands. He may be the titular owner of it. He may have title to it but it was earned by the sweat of their 
joint efforts. Now these generous rules have been altered, they have been altered to the disadvantage of the 
taxpayer. In addition, in Alberta and Saskatchewan 25 per cent only of any tax that was payable was actually 
paid by the estate. So no matter what the tax rates, no matter who might find themselves paying taxes, only 
25 per cent of the rates were paid in Saskatchewan and in Alberta. In that respect Saskatchewan matched 
Alberta. Saskatchewan said, "Alberta, you will not get a natural advantage because of the tax laws." 
 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2012 
 

Many people in Saskatchewan made their plans, and their arrangements, under these generous conditions. 
Contracts were made, transfers and mortgages prepared, children had undertaken obligations and they 
expected parents to forgive these obligations in the coming years. These more restrictive laws of 
Saskatchewan have destroyed many legitimate estate plans. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we must be fair to 
people who honestly and reasonably and in good faith made plans under the laws as they understood them to 
be. I recommend that The Succession Duty Act and The Gift Tax Act, which will be coming too, be delayed 
for one year. A one-year deferment would give people an opportunity, a fair chance, to rearrange their plans. 
A one-year deferment would give people an opportunity to make an orderly readjustment of their family 
arrangements with full knowledge of what the laws would be January 1, 1973, and it would give them a fair 
and reasonable breathing space. The people got almost no notice at all. In December there was a Press 
release, and that is all the notice people had to make changes in their family plans and their family 
arrangements. 
 
Any government believing in fair play, concerned with the legitimate affairs of its people, wouldn’t hesitate 
to recognize the facts that I have outlined and would not hesitate to give a one-year deferment to these tax 
laws. It would not in any way be in isolation of the principle of taxation that you have enunciated. In no way 
would it destroy the principle, but it would indicate to the people that you are prepared to be fair. It would 
indicate to the people that you are prepared to give them an opportunity to readjust to the new laws. It would 
give one year, fair period, a breathing space that they deserve. One year is a totally reasonable amount and I 
say that any other course of action by the NDP Government is unjust and indeed is oppressive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier today went through a long and laborious set of facts and figures and calculations 
and adjustments and all the rest of it. I should like to get a copy of that so that I may answer some of what I 
regard as weak and obviously unjustified arguments. Because of that I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 108 - An Act relating to the 
Payment of Gift Tax. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us is The Gift Tax Act. Gift taxes are traditionally a tax designed 
not primarily to produce revenue but to produce revenue vicariously by ensuring that there will be estates on 
which estate taxes or succession duties might be levied. Gift taxes are used everywhere where there is 
succession duty legislation. Nine out of ten provinces now will have gift tax legislation. The gift tax 
legislation which is before us has already been enacted in several of the provinces, British Columbia and 
several others. Once again the only province which will not have gift tax legislation is our neighbor to the 
west and since it is an accompaniment of succession duty legislation they feel it not to be necessary. Eight of 
the ten provinces will have The Gift Tax Act administered by the Federal Government on their behalf and in 
this case the number includes British Columbia and Ontario. Gift taxes are traditionally administered in 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2013 

conjunction with incomes taxes. As you will know that on your income tax form there is a section asking 
you whether you made any gifts during the year and if you did there is a requirement that you file a separate 
gift tax return. Since Quebec collects its own income taxes, it administers its own gift tax program. 
 
The Gift Tax Act is, I think, in all major respects the same as the previous Federal legislation. The only thing 
which I think need concern Members of the House and indeed members of the public is the level of 
exemptions and they are as follows. The total exemptions in any one year is $15,000 subject to what I am 
going to say in a moment about once-in-a-lifetime gifts. Excluding once-in-a-lifetime gifts the total then is 
$15,000. The total gift to a spouse in any one year that is tax free is $5,000 and there can be any number of 
gifts of $2,000 or more up to the limit of $15,000. 
 
Let me then take a fairly standard pattern. A person could give $5,000 to his wife and five gifts of $2,000 to 
five other persons making a total of $15,000 in any one year. Gifts above those levels are subject to gift tax. 
The Federal legislation, by which I mean the uniform statute to be collected by the Federal Government and 
drafted for the participating provinces, made no reference to the old once-in-a-lifetime gift. We in 
Saskatchewan felt that there was some particular merit in preserving the once-in-a-lifetime gift in 
Saskatchewan because of the assistance which it gives in transferring of farm property and residential 
property to the next generation. We, accordingly, have provided in our gift tax legislation the 
once-in-a-lifetime gift which was a part of the old Federal legislation and will be part of our new legislation. 
It will be on almost precisely the same terms as it was last year in the Federal legislation. It will be possible 
for someone who has made a once-in-a-lifetime gift under the Federal legislation to now make a second 
once-in-a-lifetime gift under our legislation. So in that sense there has been a rebirth effective January 1, 
1972 and everyone has had a second lifetime when it comes to making once-in-a-lifetime gifts. In all other 
respects I think the administration of the Act will be the same as it was under the old Federal Act. 
 
With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, and with the knowledge that the details, and there are rather extensive 
details, of the Act can be more appropriately discussed in Committee, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K. R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park):— Mr. Speaker, I just have a word or two on this Bill. There 
are three traditional legal ways of avoiding the payment of succession duties. 1. To move out of the province. 
2. Spend it all. 3. Stay alive. 
 
There is another one and that is the one that they are dealing with - you can avoid succession duties by giving 
your estate away. The province can’t very well keep people here and it can’t prevent people from spending it 
all. If you are going to stay alive, they want to stop you from giving it away during your lifetime, so that 
upon your death they can tax it. We have got a very simple piece of estate planning advice. When people are 
planning their estates today, our advice is 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2014 
 

"don’t die," stay alive for four years . . . 
 
MR. GUY:— Stay alive ‘til ‘75! 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— . . . and the Liberal Party slogan will be, for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, 
"Stay alive ‘til ‘75!" We’ll fix this up for them. So try and upgrade your health services for the next four 
years. If people stay alive ‘til ‘75 we’ll solve a lot of the problems that have been created in the past year by 
this Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— Mr. Speaker, this is a companion piece of legislation not intended to get any additional 
income but merely to keep the people from giving their property away during their lifetime. It is a 
companion piece of legislation to The Succession Duty Act, so I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E. I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 119 - An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1970. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I should like to move second reading of an Act to amend the Urban 
Municipality Act. 
 
I would say that quite a portion of the amendments of this Bill are minor in nature and are simply meant to 
clarify the meaning of the existing provisions. There are some other portions, however, on which I should 
like to speak this morning. One that I should like to refer to is that the previous Village Act contained a 
provision for the reversion of a village to an organized hamlet by order of the Minister. When the new Urban 
Act was drafted this provision was inadvertently omitted. The amendment which we are now bringing in 
allows a village to revert to an organized hamlet without having to go down to a hamlet then be brought back 
up to an organized hamlet which is the situation at the present time. It is simply a technical clarification. 
 
Another amendment will reinsert into the Urban Act provisions for the implementation of a ward system of 
local government for cities, providing the councils initiate a bylaw in this regard and providing that the 
electors approve the bylaw. The old City Act always provided for the ward system of government as an 
alternative to the election of a council at large. It is considered desirable that the electors of cities should still 
be accorded the privilege of deciding how they wish to elect their representatives. It is my understanding that 
when the Act was rewritten a few years ago, that this matter of providing for a ward system was 
inadvertently left out. The only major change in regard to this amendment to what it was earlier is that the 
provision for ward boundaries may be coterminous with the boundaries of the provincial election 
constituencies if the council and the electors so decide - that the ward boundaries can be coterminous with 
provincial electoral boundaries which we assume might be very beneficial in using voters’ lists and such in 
different ways. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2015 

The amendments to this Act also delegate to the clerk of the municipality the responsibility for calling 
special meetings requested by the mayor or council. There can be requests and petitions brought in, but the 
way the Act reads at the present time it is the mayor who must call the special meeting. But there are times 
when they can have a special meeting, according to this Act, a special meeting can be called by the clerk if 
the majority of the council wish to have it, even if the mayor is not present. I think this makes common 
sense. It has been in The Rural Municipality Act for some time. 
 
Another amendment deals with the procedures for handling petitions presented to council for submission of 
a bylaw on a question, such as the one that I have just mentioned in regard to the ward system. The present 
section was drafted on the basis of annual elections. The change to a three-year term for members of the city 
council results in a regular election being necessary only every third year. The present section as it is worded 
is not particularly useful to the public in petitioning for a vote on certain matters, for example, such as night 
shopping. It says that it shall be taken up at the time of the next election. Under the present situation the next 
election may be three years away. We are bringing in an amendment to take care of this situation that it will 
be carried out in the same year if it is brought in before the 1st of October. 
 
I should also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that representations have been received from the Construction 
Association, the Society of Professional Engineers, the Society of Architects and a number of builders, 
suggesting that construction costs in the province would probably be reduced in a number of cases if 
building standards were uniform throughout the province. We don’t at the present time have standard 
building codes in the different cities and towns in the province. The National Building Code of Canada 
appears to provide suitable regulations to deal with this subject and is therefore considered desirable to 
provide permissive authority for municipalities wishing to provide building regulations to adopt the National 
Building Code of Canada. Where a municipality now has building regulations other than the National 
Building Code such regulations will have validity only until December 31, 1973. What we are saying here is 
that no municipality is forced to bring in a building code or to bring in the National Building Code. There are 
many small municipalities in the province who just don’t have the resources to enforce a building code. For 
them to bring in a building code, be it the National Building Code or any other building code, would be 
rather useless. But what we are saying is where a building code is to be in effect in a municipality, it shall be 
the National Building Code. So we shall therefore have uniformity throughout the province, that all building 
codes will be the National Building Code and the ones that are now in effect that are not the National 
Building Code will be in effect until December 31, 1973 giving them that opportunity to change over to the 
National Building Code. But we are not telling every municipality that they must have the National Building 
Code and endeavor to enforce it because this would be a rather impossible burden to force upon some of our 
smaller villages and such. 
 
The present Act now requires a council to pass a bylaw to declare a building to be a nuisance. 
Representations have been made by city councils to the effect that this requirement is too formal, it’s too 
long a process to provide an effective 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2016 
 

means of dealing with nuisances. We are proposing an amendment that simply deletes the words "by bylaw" 
the means that councils can deal with nuisances simply by a resolution. But the strictures are still in the Act 
that do not lessen in any way the protection that is afforded to the property owner. There are a number of 
things that must be complied with before a building can be declared a nuisance or anything can be done 
about it and these remain the same. We are simply saying that the initial steps to be taken by the council do 
not have to be a bylaw which is rather a cumbersome procedure. They can be simply by resolution of the 
council, but this does not in our opinion in any way affect the protection that is afforded to the property 
owner under the present Act. 
 
I might say also that the city of Regina has asked for legislative authority to enable them to negotiate with 
railway companies on the relocation of certain rail lines. It is considered desirable that such authority be 
provided to all municipalities. Any debt to be incurred in this regard would be subject to the approval of the 
Local Government Board. When the city of Saskatoon, a few years ago, moved to have the railroad removed 
from the centre of their city, it had to be done by a special Act of the Legislature. We felt that it isn’t 
necessary to have a special Act in all these cases and that we should simply amend the Act to allow the cities 
to do this sort of thing. 
 
Another change which we are proposing is that the collection, removal and disposal of garbage at the 
expense of the municipality that is not paid for by the taxpayer can be put on the list as taxes and not as a 
separate debt. This is always a bit of an encumbrance and we felt that it would be an assistance to the 
municipalities to have these sorts of debts collected the same as taxes and it really simplifies the situation in 
that regard. 
 
Another thing that we are bringing in is a provision concerning the amount of grants that a municipality may 
or is required to make in regard to organizations. We are saying that it is a one-half mill limitation. We are 
saying that this is not affected by grants that they are expected or may make under other Acts. They may 
make grants in regard to libraries and such under another Act. This has nothing to do with that. We were 
simply saying that one-half mill is the limitation to be placed on donations for grants that can be made to 
organizations. 
 
There is another amendment which may be of interest to the House and this is in regard to the payment of 
arrears of taxes. Where a property owner is in arrears of taxes, all these arrears must be cleared up before 
money is applied on current taxes. And this may have been some difficulty especially under the old 
Homeowner Grant legislation where a person might want to pay up his taxes in regard to his residence and 
doesn’t have to repay all his back debts in regard to other taxes in order to pay his taxes in regard to his 
residence. This amendment will mean that he can say where he wants to place the money that he is paying on 
his taxes. This I would assume, Mr. Speaker, would not be as important now as it was earlier under the old 
Homeowner Grant legislation because under the new legislation that was brought in the other day, he will be 
receiving grants on other property besides his home. But there still will be places where this will be suitable 
and useful to the landowner or the taxpayer. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2017 

Another matter that I think is worth mentioning on second reading is in regard to allowing a municipality to 
acquire a piece of property in settlement of taxes. This has been done in the past only in regard to the taxes 
that were in arrears on a certain piece of property. Where a municipality acquired a piece of property, it was 
only in regard to the arrears on that property. This is now allowing a taxpayer if he wishes to turn over a 
piece of property to a municipality, any excess of value of that property over and above the arrears which are 
on it may be applied on another piece of property on which he owes taxes and we think that this will be 
desirable and of use to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are numerous other smaller amendments to this Act which I do not consider to be matters 
of principle and they can be taken up in Committee. So with this explanation on what I consider to be the 
major amendments in this Act I move second reading. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. GARDNER (Moosomin):— Mr. Speaker, most of the provisions and the changes in this Act, I 
don’t think we find objectionable in any way. Many of them have been asked for by the urban municipalities. 
However, Section 5 may be of some concern. It’s of some concern to me, and there are some words in there 
that personally I don’t think are necessary. It talks about the ward system. "Cities shall be divided into 
several delineated wards." I feel it should be left at this. They have added the words, "The Boundaries of 
which may be coterminous with the boundaries of provincial electoral constituencies within the city." I see 
absolutely no need for these words. The city should be free to set any boundaries they please. In fact, by 
putting this in we have the danger of introducing party politics into civic affairs. In fact, these words are 
almost a suggestion that this should be done. This, of course, like in other cities in Canada, the NDP have 
been promoting political activity in the cities and the suggestion is there of the possibility that parties could 
use provincial constituency organizations within a city to support candidates for the civic positions if the 
boundaries are the same. This would be very simple to do. The organization is already there for the various 
provincial constituencies and the suggestion that these be the same is almost a suggestion, I believe, that they 
will be using this to promote candidates in civic affairs. It’s certainly opening the door for partisan politics in 
civic affairs. There may be some people who are in favor of this but I think the vast majority of people feel 
that this is undesirable. 
 
I don’t really believe that anyone has asked for these particular words to be inserted in this section. I am a bit 
surprised that they are there. We will have questions to ask about this in Committee and we won’t hold up 
the Bill at this time. This is perhaps the only part of the Bill that we take serious objection to. 
 
MR. WOOD:— Mr. Speaker, it is not my desire to prolong debate and it is certainly not my desire to get 
into a discussion as to the desirability or otherwise of politics in municipal elections. But I wish to point out 
to the Hon. Member that the word in there is that they "may." It is entirely up to the 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2018 
 

municipalities or up to the people involved. 
 
MR. STEUART:— . . . anything they want? 
 
MR. WOOD:— That’s right. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 124 - An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, one of the most important pieces of health legislation ever passed in this House 
was The Medical Care Insurance Act. 
 
Our Government is proud of this achievement and extremely pleased with the impact that it has had to 
enable persons in need of medical care to receive it without hardship. This pioneering legislation in 
Saskatchewan undoubtedly encouraged the development throughout Canada of Medical Care Insurance 
programs. 
 
I had the good fortune to participate in the initial planning for the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
program. In 1961, when The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act was passed, the provisions of that 
Act met very specific needs which were non-existent at that time. Within ten years of experience in the 
operation of a medical care program in Saskatchewan, the program has been widely accepted, both by the 
practising physicians and by our Saskatchewan people. 
 
It is now possible to look to new needs, to new possibilities and a new concept, to improve the provisions of 
medical care offered to the people of the province. We are sufficiently confident in our existing system that 
we can experiment with innovative changes without undermining any of the advantages or benefits now 
existing in the Medical Care Insurance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that my consultations with the Saskatchewan Medical Association and the College 
of Physicians and Surgeons has been most co-operative and helpful. We had discussed the provisions of the 
amendment to The Medical Care Insurance Act and the amendments to other legislation which affect the 
Saskatchewan medical profession. 
 
A number of the amendments which I am proposing were initially suggested by the medical profession. We 
have attempted to accommodate the views of the medical profession wherever possible. Similarly, I believe, 
the SMA and the College have appreciated the reasons why we have proposed a number of amendments to 
facilitate new ways of delivering health services. 
 
I am enthusiastic about the progress that has been made between our Government and the medical profession 
in understanding and becoming more sensitive to the views of each other. I have given notice, Mr. Speaker, 
that I will be introducing amendments to The Medical Profession Act. The main feature of the amendments 
to that Act is the legal separation of the Medical Association and the Saskatchewan College of Physicians 
and Surgeons. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2019 

It is necessary to reflect this change in The Medical Care Insurance Act. This separation of function 
essentially means that the Saskatchewan Medical Association will be responsible for protecting and 
promoting the interests of the physicians. The College of Physicians and Surgeons will on the other hand 
protect the interests of the public through its licensing and regulatory powers over practising physicians. 
 
The desirability of making this functional distinction has been thoroughly discussed with the SMA and the 
College during the last few months. We all agree that this change is warranted. As you know in respect of 
financial negotiations with the physicians the Government relates to the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
in order to ensure that the SMA has sufficient financial resources to perform its negotiating functions in the 
best interest of its members, we have agreed to incorporate a rather innovative concept in The Medical Care 
Insurance Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw attention of this House that just a few days ago the SMA had their meeting and 
they adopted a resolution stating - in part: 
 

Whereas the Saskatchewan Medical Association has been established as a separate corporate body 
for the College of Physicians and Surgeons to represent the professional good of all Saskatchewan 
physicians, be it resolved that the representative assembly of the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
approve the principle of voluntary membership in the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

 
Then they went on to say that annual dues be collected either through a lump sum or a check-off basis 
following the Rand Formula. In The Medical Care Insurance Act we make provision for such a check off and 
provision for the so-called Rand Formula that has been endorsed by the SMA. 
 
An amendment to The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act will allow the Commission to collect an 
annual negotiating service charge on behalf of the SMA. The amount of the charge will be reviewed and 
agreed upon each year by the SMA and the Minister of Public Health. The negotiating service charge is the 
cost to be incurred by the SMA in the performance of its responsibility to negotiate rates of payment for the 
professional services of physicians and other related costs that they may incur. 
 
The Medical Care Insurance Commission would collect this amount from active practising physicians in 
Saskatchewan on the written request of the SMA. The collection would then be remitted to that organization. 
 
Another amendment to this Act will include chiropractic services as a health benefit under The Medical Care 
Insurance Act. Many of our citizens wish to use chiropractors for treatment of certain conditions and by 
insuring this service we shall eliminate the discrimination against those beneficiaries who wish to use the 
service of a chiropractor. In recognizing chiropractic services as a health benefit, we are anxious to make 
other health resources available to chiropractors so that they can provide a high quality of service and 
efficient service. 
 
An amendment to The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act will allow chiropractors to use hospital out-patient 
facilities for 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2020 
 

diagnosis and treatment of patients. An amendment to The Medical Profession Act will remove any legal 
barrier to desired co-operation between physicians and chiropractors in the treatment of patients. 
 
Possibly the most important amendment to The Medical Care Insurance Act is the one which provides for an 
alternate method of financing medical services. Saskatchewan has been rather slow to experiment with 
methods of paying for physician services other than on a fee-for-service basis. Alternative methods have 
been employed in other parts of the world including other parts of Canada. Our Government is interested in 
experimenting with alternative methods of payment for health services because it is our view that the 
fee-for-service system is unnecessarily restricted on the form of practice a physician may adopt. It also 
restricts the health services that can be made available to our people. We have assessed alternative methods 
of payment for health services in other parts of the world and in Saskatchewan. We have discussed the 
matter with the medical profession and with some organizations which would like to experiment with a 
different payment system. 
 
Following these discussions we concluded that medical practitioners and other health organizations should 
have the right to experiment with different methods of delivering and paying for health services. We are 
proposing an amendment to The Medical Care Insurance Act and to The Hospitalization Act to allow for this 
experimentation to take place. There is nothing compulsory about these amendments. It simply opens the 
way for those who wish to explore a different way of providing comprehensive health services. 
 
Specifically this amendment allows the Medical Care Insurance Commission to make payments on a global 
budget basis to non-profit organizations which are providing insured services to beneficiaries of the Medical 
Care Insurance Program. The Commission would be allowed to pay a negotiated amount directly to the 
non-profit organization which in turn would make arrangements with physicians and other health personnel 
to provide services to health beneficiaries. The payments would be global in the sense that the budget would 
include all costs associated with the provision of the agreed upon services. This payment mechanism 
essentially reflects the method we use in paying for hospital services. 
 
We know from studies undertaken by the Federal Government that the Health Association in our province 
has been able to provide a high quality of care to patients with less total cost per patient to the Government. 
A comprehensive study undertaken by one of Canada’s leading health researchers on behalf of the Federal 
Government, clearly substantiated the findings of earlier studies which concluded that the non-profit health 
organizations in Saskatchewan have found methods of controlling, at least to a degree, the total cost of 
health services per beneficiary. These cost savings have been made possible by organizing medical practices 
so that a greater proportion of care is provided on an ambulatory basis. 
 
This eliminates some of the need for expensive hospital care. It would appear that providing a broad range of 
health services in a clinic setting has the potential benefit of simultaneously extending the range of health 
benefits to individuals and controlling the total cost of health services. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2021 

I might add that one of the ways that these non-profit organizations have been able to achieve 
over-utilization of expensive services is by emphasizing preventive health measures to patients. 
 
It is our hope that the global budget method of financing health services will encourage a team approach to 
health care. As you know the fee-for-service method remunerates physicians only when they themselves 
have provided medical services. This payment scheme would appear to encourage a wasting of physician’s 
time and talent because a number of the more elementary tasks would be delegated to other health personnel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note with interest, that throughout Canada the word of ‘physician’s assistant’ has become 
almost a standard word. Because experience seems to indicate, and those in the health field, seem to 
acknowledge that the physicians’ assistants can be usefully employed. They can do much of the elementary 
work that is being performed by a physician, enabling the physician to use his skills more beneficially as 
well as be able to serve more people. 
 
I note also with interest that the Saskatchewan Medical Association at its annual meeting, a matter of ten 
days ago, have acknowledged the importance and value in using this kind of personnel. 
 
By utilizing the team approach, each member of the health team will be utilized to the greatest potential and 
the patient will benefit from having expert care and advice in each aspect of his total health need. Global 
budget financing will enable clinics to employ personnel such as physiologists, social workers, health 
educators, physician assistants, in addition to other physicians and other health personnel. 
 
Many studies have indicated that these less highly paid health workers are able to reduce significantly the 
demand on physicians’ time. Moreover the utilization of para-medical personnel may contribute to the 
provision of more community and home care services which, hopefully, will reduce the demand for hospital 
services. 
 
This new method of financing health services is available to any non-profit organization which chooses to 
employ the concepts inherent in the payment mechanism. This new payment scheme has been established on 
an experimental basis. We shall closely evaluate the experience on the non-profit organizations. As long as 
the beneficiaries receive a high standard of care and the total cost of this scheme compares favorably with 
other methods of payment, we shall look favorably at these and other forms of payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may be that some of the Members have not noticed the views expressed on this new 
approach by the Saskatchewan Medical Association. I draw your attention to an article that appeared in the 
Canadian Medical Association Journal of January 8, 1972. Let me quote: 
 

Dr. E. Hindmarsh, president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association states he favors 
experimentation in the area of alternate methods of payment for physicians’ services. As suggested in 
the brief presented to the Provincial Government by the Community Health Service Association, 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2022 
 

some methods of payment might prove successful for certain physicians in certain types of practice, 
he said. Some methods of payment might be acceptable to physicians but perhaps not to the patients. 
To make such experiments meaningful, Dr. Hindmarsh said he would like to see the same privilege 
of experimentation available to other medical clinic groups as well. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the Bill provides this will made it possible. He carries on and says: 
 

In order to properly assess salary or capitation systems they should be assessed in the "market place." 
I feel this would provide a better index of patient acceptability. 

 
He continued: 
 

However, the board of directors of the Saskatchewan Medical Association agreed with the Minister 
of Health in a meeting with him in July to co-operate in experimentation in the delivery of health 
care as well as methods of payment. We have suggested to the Minister that he convene a meeting of 
representatives from various health disciplines to exchange views on health care delivery perhaps 
with special focus on regionalization. 

 
And in this regard, again, Mr. Speaker, we will be giving the problem of regional health councils due 
consideration and will be consulting with the medical profession, the hospital association and other people in 
the health delivery system. Dr. Hindmarsh adds: 
 

We assume that any experimentation in methods of payment will thoroughly assess. The Association 
is willing to be a part of the assessment of the results. 

 
In regard to the last comment, certainly assessments will be made to determine how the global system works 
to make sure that we are using the money most effectively and providing the most effective system to the 
people in our Saskatchewan communities. Mr. Speaker, this Bill also contains some other minor 
amendments. 
 
One difficulty which we are correcting in this Bill arises infrequently but causes some distress for individuals 
affected. A few physicians who do not bill the Medical Care Insurance Commission directly require their 
patients to pay their accounts before they provide the patient with a detailed statement of the services 
rendered. Under these circumstances the Medical Care Insurance Commission cannot pay the beneficiary so 
that the beneficiary has the money to pay to the doctor. These difficulties for some of our citizens seem to be 
unnecessary and we are correcting the problem through an amendment to the Act. I might also advise the 
House that this amendment has been approved by the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
There is another minor amendment to this Act. We propose to broaden the range of services insured under 
The Medical Care Insurance Act. This change is essentially an administrative act. The intent of the 
amendment is to make it possible for the Medical Care Insurance Commission to pay for services which may 
have been assigned to the Department of Public Health through another Act. Certain administrative 
difficulties in the payment mechanism occur for services which have been provided at the 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2023 

request of a third party. And services which have been provided under the health Acts other than The 
Medical Care Insurance Act. Mr. Speaker, in summary the proposed amendments to The Medical Care 
Insurance Act provide for the insuring of chiropractic services, new methods of financing health services, 
relationships between the medical profession and the Medical Care Insurance Commission and some less 
important housekeeping amendments. I am hopeful that the major amendments to this Act will lead to more 
efficient health service in Saskatchewan and a further improvement of the quality of health care to our 
people. I am hopeful that this Bill will receive the unanimous support of this Legislature. Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act now. 
 
MR. G. B. GRANT (Regina White Park):— Mr. Speaker, after that somewhat lengthy explanation my 
only regret is that when attending university I didn’t take five law classes instead of two because I am sure 
that every other Member, other than the legal Members, found it a little difficult to follow. Hopefully we can 
have a clarification of some of the particular clauses when we get into Committee. 
 
I should like to comment on the last observation of the Minister where he speaks of the broadening of the 
area of payment for MCIC and he referred to third party examinations. As I understand these they would 
include examinations for marriage certificates, employment, insurance and possibly even recreation. I don’t 
know whether it includes that or not. Personally I can’t get very excited about the MCIC paying for these 
examinations even though they might be required by legislation because I feel they are not creating that 
much of a hardship on any individual and in many cases, I feel they are absolutely unnecessary and I am 
referring particularly to those involved in recreational areas, where certain children have to have medical 
examinations before they can participate in sports. To me this is just another increase in the payments to be 
made by the Medical Care Insurance Commission. I wasn’t too sure, and possibly the Minister would clarify 
this point in his closing remarks, but I gather that as far as the membership in the SMA was concerned it was 
strictly voluntary. If the medical practitioner requested a check-off system it would be carried out. If this is 
the proper interpretation, I have no objection to it but if it is a compulsory check-off system then I have some 
reservations. A considerable portion of the Act refers to the alternate method of payment and there has been 
considerable discussion in this House about this experiment. It is difficult to criticize it when the medical 
profession have apparently accepted it and hopefully the innovation or the experiment will result in probably 
a better type of service and hopefully a more economic one. 
 
But what puzzles me a bit, Mr. Speaker, is on numerous occasions the Minister has indicated that he did 
have authority to proceed with this method of payment which he entered into on March 1st with the health 
clinics and I am just wondering if he had this authority just why we need this Bill at all. And it strikes me 
that he is not being consistent, when in one breath he says he has the authority and then turns around a few 
weeks later and brings in a very complicated Bill. There are other amendments that involve the method of 
payment as well. I believe the only reservation that the medical profession had, and I am 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2024 
 

surprised they haven’t made a bigger issue of it, but that’s their privilege I guess, is that they felt that the 
relationship should be between the medical practitioner and MCIC rather than between the association and 
MCIC. I was disappointed, and I have expressed this view, that it was entered into somewhat hastily before 
the Federal assessment under the University of Toronto professor is complete. It would seem that the Health 
Department in the Government to your right has made up their minds on it in advance. There was one 
reference made by the Minister of it being available to a non-profit organization and then in a later remark he 
indicated that it was also available to profit-making organizations. Well, he said it is available to other 
clinics and most other clinics are profit-making, I believe. I think he should clarify that point because I was 
under the impression that it was reserved or restricted to non-profit organizations. 
 
In reference to this also one of the advantages he suggested is a delegation of medical services to other 
personnel such as physicians’ assistants, etc. Hopefully this would result in a lowering of demand on the 
medical practitioners’ time and I suppose theoretically a reduction in cost. I hope he is right but I have a 
feeling that as soon as these medical people are released and their services are rendered by some other 
paramedical personnel that once again it is like the provinces filling the vacuum created by the Federal 
Government withdrawing from succession duties. I am sure the medical profession will rush in to fill the 
vacuum of time that they may have on their hands. I am firmly convinced that there is a very direct 
relationship to the number of doctors and the time they have to the cost of the Medical Care scheme and I am 
sure the Minister will agree with me on that. 
 
References made to Section 45 of the Act which I believe gives the MCIC authority to reassess accounts and 
I notice that the amendment does not exclude the practitioners under global budgeting from Section 45 and 
I’d like to have the Minister explain that a little more fully as to why it is needed. I presume it is to act in a 
policing capacity on the practice of these physicians even though they might be paid on a salary basis. I 
presume they don’t want them performing unnecessary services or something of that sort. References made 
throughout the Bill in several sections in the deletion of the words ‘or other person’ and I would like a 
further explanation of that. 
 
I notice that he made reference to direct billings to patients and the difficulty encountered. I wonder if in his 
closing remarks if he would not also comment on the situation where a medical practitioner has overcharged 
an individual he is billing direct and it is not ascertained until a later date and in the meantime the patient has 
been reimbursed and the patient in turn has paid the medical practitioner, if there is an amendment in this 
Act that would provide for recovery. I believe under the present Act the only person they can recover from is 
the patient. I know we have always been loath to do that as it is almost impractical because you are dealing 
with small amounts with individuals whereas the accumulative effect of these overcharges, as far as the 
doctor is concerned, might be quite a goodly amount. 
 
With explanation of those points, Mr. Speaker, in his closing remarks and an examination in some detail as 
we go through it in Committee of the Whole, the Opposition will support 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2025 

this Bill. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, in replying to several questions the Hon. Member asked, my first reply to 
the question of whether we will be paying for all medical examinations for employment purposes or for 
purchase of insurance, marriage certificates or examination of children for taking part in sports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intent of this amendment is to have these type of benefits established by regulation rather 
than in the Act. The Hon. Member may be aware that there are and have been situations where quite a 
number of medical examinations for marriage purposes have been paid for because they have not been 
identified as such. This particular amendment is recommended by the Commission because they advise that 
under the present structure the Commission is held legally responsible for not paying any of the bills for such 
examinations but the difficulty is one of control. It is intended, and I want to assure the Member, that these 
will be handled by regulation. I agree with him that people who want to buy insurance and where the 
insurance company requires a medical examination, normally the insurance companies pay for the medical 
examination and this should not be paid for by the Medical Care Insurance Commission. Similarly in the 
case of employment, in some instances employers require a medical examination and are prepared to pay for 
it. It is intended, and I want to assure him, that this will be handled by regulation rather than by the Act. This 
comes to us on the advice of the Commission. It does not mean that the coverage would necessarily be 
broadened but there are some difficulties the Commission is experiencing because of the rigidity of the 
present provision. 
 
He made reference or raised a question about the voluntary membership in the SMA and the Rand Formula. 
Perhaps we can get into more thorough discussion when the Bill is in Committee. The SMA and the College 
have separated. The SMA have endorsed the principle of voluntary membership but are concerned that with 
the voluntary membership their organization might run into difficulties as far as funds are concerned that 
might be expended on the so-called collective bargaining purposes we have indicated to them that we would 
accept the principle of a Rand Formula. The details of the formula are to be worked out, the Act provides for 
an agreement between the Government and SMA. 
 
He raised the question about whether the Act provides for global budgets for just community clinics or 
whether it includes non-profit organizations. I think the Act is quite clear that global budgets would be made 
available to non-profit health organizations but not to profit-making organizations. At the present time three 
community clinics have entered in an agreement for global budgeting on an experimental basis. We are 
willing to enter into agreement with other groups providing they satisfy the Commission and the Hospital 
Services Plan and the Department that they are a non-profit organization. There are places I understand 
where department stores set up a clinic as a profit-making organization. I want to assure the Members such 
organizations would not be eligible. But again, more discussion can take place on this and further 
information can be provided when we are in Committee. 
 
As far as the reference to the Hastings Committee Study, that Committee has been studying the community 
concept of health delivery for some months now. I might advise the Hon. Member 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2026 
 

that I had the pleasure of meeting with Dr. Hastings. He was in Saskatchewan. He had meetings with us, it 
seems there is really no relationship between his current studies and us entering into an agreement for a 
global budget. It might be some months before the report is completed and as he knows the Associate 
Deputy of the Department of Public Health is on that Committee. So we do have direct information of what 
the Committee is doing from time to time. In fact, the experiment here on the global budget system may very 
likely prove to be very helpful to the Hastings study that is going on at the present time. 
 
He raised the question about why we include in Section 45 a review and assessment of account for 
everybody and do not exclude those who might be on global budgeting. This is for a very deliberate reason 
because we want to make sure that the professional standards and the quality of care is going to be 
maintained. From our standpoint it is important that the legal authority exists for reviews. 
 
In answering the last question, Mr. Speaker, on direct billing, a provision is included in the Act that a 
physician will have to give a detailed statement to a patient before he can expect the patient to pay the 
account. We have had brought to our attention, that a physician who is on the so-called Mode 3 may after 
seeing the patient, the patient is required to pay the account before receiving the account. All that the patient 
receives is a receipt "paid for a visit - so much." The patient then submits the account to the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission and the Commission has to get the details from the doctor of what was provided. 
Under the proposed amendment, before the physician can expect the payment he must give the patient a 
statement of services that he has provided. Mr. Speaker, the number of accounts that are submitted now on 
Mode 3 is about 4 per cent of the total accounts. We think that the amendment we are proposing is fair and 
reasonable. It has the support of the SMA. 
 
On the question of recovery - since it is a direct payment to the patient rather than the physician, can we 
recover? I am advised that there are virtually no physicians in the province who do not submit some accounts 
to either the MCIC or the Department, or the Medical Services Division. If there are recoveries to be made, I 
am assured by my officials that there are always certain outstanding billings, therefore we can make 
recoveries if that is necessary from other outstanding amounts owing not necessarily here. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 124. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
MR. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 125 - An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains several provisions that are intended to improve the quality of 
the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan insofar as the public may be concerned and also intended to 
improve the provisions of this Plan from the administrative viewpoint. One provision revises the definition 
of a patient so as to include a person admitted to a hospital as an out-patient under the order of a 
chiropractor. 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2027 

This will permit the Hospital Services Plan to make payment for certain out-patient services provided by a 
hospital on the order of a chiropractor. Another amendment authorizes payment to be made to a hospital by 
the Hospital Services Plan for services provided in the hospital by a physician or other qualified person 
pursuant to an agreement between the hospital and the physician or other qualified person. This amendment 
will authorize the Hospital Services Plan to make payments to such hospitals as the Wascana Hospital at 
Regina and the University Hospital in Saskatoon for services provided on a sessional basis by physicians to 
certain patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former Government did enter into agreements with the University Hospital back in 1967. 
That was done by an Order-in-Council. It is really under that provision, under that precedent and under that 
Order-in-Council the authority was given to not only enter into agreements with these two hospitals but 
clinics as well. The Hon. Members have now raised the question of whether the legal authority exists. Well, 
if the legal authority doesn’t exist now then it didn’t exist in 1967. And it is for that reason that this 
amendment is being made to satisfy them. If they are in doubt that the legal authority exists then we are 
going to make it retroactive to 1967 when they entered into agreements with those two hospitals. 
 
It will authorize payment to be made to certain community health associations that entered into an agreement 
with physicians to provide services to patients. It should be noted that this provision applies only to services 
provided prior to the first of July, 1972. Because another amendment authorizes the Minister of Public 
Health to make payment as agent for the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission. This 
amendment will apply in cases where it has been agreed with a non-profit association that payment for all 
services provided under the auspices of the association will be made on a global or budget review basis. It 
will be much easier administratively for payment being made on a global or budget review basis to be 
channelled through one government agency. The Hospital Plan will be reimbursed by the Commission for 
payment for these services that are insured services under The Medical Care Insurance Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the remaining amendment authorizes the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to establish an 
appeal procedure providing for any person to have his complaint heard in a case where he has not paid the 
hospital and medical care premium by the date due, but believes that he should be considered as a 
beneficiary. It is believed that this procedure will remove the injustices that have been created in individual 
cases by the rigid application of the existing regulations. 
 
I know the Hon. Member raised this particular question when we were in Committee of Finance the other 
day of whether we are considering any action. It is not an easy problem to resolve but we are making 
provision in the Act to give the Government legislative authority to establish an appeal procedure to deal 
with legitimate cases where the premium has not been paid and as a result the person is not entitled to 
benefits. It has come to my attention on a number of occasions of a person being sick in a hospital, being in a 
coma when his premiums came due. It was just impossible for that person to remember or know that his 
premiums were due and there were no immediate relatives to pay the premium and then the person incurred 
large hospital medical care bills, certainly not because he was unwilling to pay but 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2028 
 

because he was unable to pay. I think in these circumstances the procedure will be provided to exempt that 
person. He will still have to pay the premium but he will pay at some later time. 
 
With these few remarks I move second reading of Bill No. 125 - The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 
 
MR. G. B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park):— Mr. Speaker, in view of the time and as I have some 
comments to make, I will call it 12:30. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
 WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. GRANT:— Mr. Speaker, to you and to Members of this House, I should like to introduce 60 Grade 
Eight students from St. Matthews School in the Speaker’s gallery. This is the second appearance of this 
group during this Session. They are particularly interested today in the type of debate that takes place during 
second readings and adjourned debates. I have guaranteed that they are going to have an interesting time 
while they are here. I know we all join in extending a second welcome to them during this Session. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Milestone):— Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask through you and to all Members of 
the House that we extend a welcome to approximately 20 students from the community of Avonlea with 
their teachers, Mr. McKeller and Mr. Hanson. I certainly hope that they have a very pleasant and a very 
enjoyable afternoon in the Legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University):— Mr. Speaker, excuse my being slightly delayed. I would 
like to introduce through you to the House, students from Brunskill School, the alma mater of my youngest 
brother, three blocks from my parents’ home, and their teachers Mr. Hawthorne and Mrs. Mack. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Bill No. 125 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Hospitalization Act. 
 
MR. GRANT:— In connection with the amendment to The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act, there is 
really not too much that can be said about it because to some extent it supplements the amendment to The 
Medical Care Insurance Act. It is significant in two particular areas and I refer to the reference to the 
chiropractic services and the last amendment which has the effect of setting up machinery to deal with 
persons who for one reason or another have not paid their health premiums and find themselves in financial 
difficulty. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2029 

Dealing with that portion first, this has been a difficulty in these Acts every since they were introduced and I 
know my predecessor the Premier must have had the same problems that Mr. Steuart and I had because in 
order to get the percentage coverage of the population in Saskatchewan, one must be pretty tight fisted when 
it comes to the question of emission of premiums or the acknowledgement of the service being available to 
them without paying the premiums. But there is no doubt at all and I certainly made an effort to try and have 
it corrected and it is a difficult problem. But there is no doubt at all that the sick were being heavily 
penalized and the well person wasn’t being penalized at all in the event that the payment of premiums was 
overlooked. There was some advantage in that the Minister didn’t really have any authority to intervene and 
about all he could do was express sympathy. The individual was responsible for the hospital and medical 
account. I don’t know whether the solution suggested here is the proper one but at least it’s a move in the 
right direction to try and give relief to the ones who are legitimately remiss in payment of their premiums. 
But of course, once the door is opened, it does lend itself to abuse and I am a little puzzled as to how any 
appeal board is going to be 100 per cent impartial in dealing with these cases and treating them fairly without 
at the same time letting a few slip in through the door who should have paid the premiums. 
 
I know at one time we considered a method of penalty that would affect everybody and I think it has some 
merit. If you were a month late in paying your premium, you pay a penalty of say $5 for each month that you 
were late with a maximum. At least doing it this way everybody was assured of coverage but at the same 
time whether they were sick or not, they paid a penalty for being late in the payment of their premiums. This 
is somewhat consistent with other cases of late payment of premiums or changes - there is usually a penalty 
attached. We are not going to oppose the move because in my opinion it is an effort to overcome something 
that has been in existence ever since the Hospitalization Plan was brought in and since Medicare came in. It 
is one that certainly caused a lot of hardships with individuals and families. One that was easy for the 
Minister to administer except that sometimes he had deep sympathy for the person involved and this will 
become a more difficult thing to administer but, as I say, it is a step in the right direction. 
 
I appreciate the Minister touching, in his closing remarks, the question of what appears to be inconsistency 
but there may be good reason for the use of the terms. In the definition of patient and referring to chiropractic 
services, the expression ‘diagnosis or treatment’ is used and later on in the same Section reference is made to 
‘diagnostic services only.’ I am sure there must be an explanation to that but I just can’t see it. 
 
The Minister touched on the reason for that July 1st, 1972 date and I would appreciate him reviewing that 
again because it just didn’t register with me. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Melfort-Kinistino):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a short comment and ask a 
question. I can recall under the previous Government where a constituent of mine wound up in the hospital 
with a stroke. His card ran out. He had paid his card very religiously 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2030 
 

all his life but his card ran out and when he came to again, he had a bill awaiting him for about $800. The 
former Minister of Health gave it a lot of sympathy but no compassion. I should like to know whether this 
will be retroactive or whether you would be prepared to look at cases that were ignored prior to this Bill. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a word or two about 
a statement made by the Member from Melfort-Kinistino. He mentioned that a constituent of his 
unfortunately fell behind in his premiums and I presume was faced with a very high hospital bill. Let me say 
that this happened unfortunately in many cases when we were the Government. It happened before we were 
the Government. The law has not changed, it is the original law in that regard that was put in when 
premiums for the hospitalization and the Medical Care Plan were brought in and they are not suggesting a 
change in this particular Act. If you do not pay your premium, if you fall behind in your premium, the 
penalty in the Province of Saskatchewan is very severe. You can fall behind one day and the penalty is 30 
days. Well it may be a little bit different than that but it is a very severe penalty. I don’t think they are 
changing the Act but the way the Act was before no discretion was given to the Minister and from now on 
we will see how compassionate the Minister will be and he is going to have a very difficult time. I 
sympathize with him because a great many cases people will be in the hospital and not in a state to be aware 
that their premiums are lapsing, the hospital authorities might not be aware or other people may not be aware 
that they have lapsed, then all of a sudden they find themselves with very high bills to pay. There was up to 
this point no discretion so don’t say that the Minister might have been short on sympathy or short on 
compassion because he had no discretion. We could have changed the law, if you are changing it now, fine, 
except that I think the Minister is going to find some real problems in this. 
 
One of the reasons that we have such a high percentage of people paying their premiums in this Province is 
that the penalty was very severe. Now there were many people including Mr. Grant, the former Minister of 
Health, who mentioned this many times in our Cabinet and in our caucus that the penalty was too severe and 
there were other people in our caucus that felt the same way but they did not prevail. The feeling was that 
while it was severe that if we let the barrier down pretty soon we would be in the same situation they are in 
in some other provinces and the collection of premiums would become a farce. If they ever dropped down to 
below 90 or 80 or 75 per cent then you will find difficulty collecting from anybody. If the Minister is 
prepared to take this responsibility on I sympathize with him and he is going to have a very difficult time and 
some very, very difficult decisions to make. I want to make it clear that the former Minister, Mr. Grant, may 
have been very sympathetic and I am sure he was but there was no discretion allowed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, dealing first with the Section that has had the most discussion that is the 
requirement of payment of premium before a person is entitled to benefits. I think 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2031 

everybody acknowledges or should acknowledge that this particular provision has been in effect since the 
Hospitalization Services Plan was put into effect in 1947. There has been no change in it and it is not a 
question of a Minister being sympathetic or not being compassionate. That has been the law and I think the 
law has been there very deliberately so that people would pay the premiums and I am sure that every Health 
Minister has had to face the same kind of pressures and the same kind of problems when we see that there is 
a very legitimate case of a person being in a hospital seriously ill, perhaps being unconscious and his 
premiums come due and the payment isn’t made. These are, I think, the most serious problems. 
 
Then you have very innocent sort of situations and I have one right on my desk at the present time of a 
family - it so happens I know them personally; for 25 years they have paid their premium on time and 
certainly paid their premium before the benefit started for the next year. They did happen to be four days late 
and it so happened that two of their children got seriously ill and required medical care which amounted to a 
substantial amount and they have to pay the bill themselves. It is not that they wanted to evade the payment, 
it was just one of those things the odd time a person does forget. 
 
I can tell the Hon. Members that consideration was given to the complete separation of premiums and 
benefits and perhaps provide a penalty of some sort of the person that does not pay on time. You face the 
same kind of a problem if you provide for a penalty as you now have with premiums, because we do have a 
legal requirement that all citizens have to pay. I can say this that a large part of the problem has now been 
removed. We find that people who are 65 years of age and over are the ones who quite often forget to pay the 
premium and it is in these cases that you find more incidence of sickness. So I think the problem has become 
less severe than it was prior to January 1st when all citizens had to pay the premium. By exempting those 65 
years of age and over from payment of premium we have minimized the problem significantly but there are 
still problems. 
 
Now I am not sure how this is really going to work. What we are providing is by Order-in-Council to 
establish an appeal mechanism and the hope is that we shall establish an administrative tribunal to rule on 
these kinds of cases. Hopefully it will work. If it doesn’t then we will have to come back and make further 
amendments in future years but I think we have to give ourselves a fair chance of seeing what can be done 
through some administrative and appeal mechanism and then we shall be able to judge how well it works. 
 
For the information of the Members - and I just checked this last night with some of my officials - that the 
number of people who are late or may be delinquent the percentage is quite small. It is less than one per cent 
of the total who pay premiums. But when you add up the number it is still a significant number of those 
people who are delinquent in the order of 4,000 citizens. The number isn’t greater or smaller this year, it has 
been almost constant over the years. All I ask is that the Legislature recognize what we are trying to do, we 
are looking for a solution. Hopefully it will work and if it doesn’t then we will have to come with other 
proposals in future years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were other questions that were posed but I think they can best be dealt with in 
Committee. The specific 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2032 
 

questions posed by the Hon. Member from Whitmore Park, I would be glad to give him all the detailed 
information when we are in Committee and to save time, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 130 - An Act respecting 
the Marketing of Natural Products. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading of this Bill I think it will be useful to give a brief 
history to the Members of this Assembly in relation to Marketing Board legislation. The Federal Government 
passed the first Producer Marketing Board legislation in 1934 which was subsequently ruled ultra vires in 
1936 since it exceeded Federal powers established under the BNA Act. It was held that the statute did 
attempt to regulate trade that was entirely local while the Federal power was restricted to interprovincial 
marketing. Following the ruling by the Supreme Court and the judicial committee of the Privy Council all of 
the provinces subsequently passed legislation providing for regulation of marketing within their respective 
provinces. The Federal Government in 1949 passed the Agricultural Products Marketing Act which provided 
for delegation of Federal powers to Provincial Marketing Boards relating to products being moved out of the 
province. In 1971 the Federal Government enacted the Farm Product Marketing Agencies Act, better known 
as Bill 10176 providing for national marketing boards under certain conditions. 
 
The first Saskatchewan Natural Products Marketing Act as passed in 1945 and the last review of 
amendments was in 1963. The activity under the Saskatchewan Act since it was passed in 1945 shows that 
we now have five marketing boards operating within the confines of that Act: The Broiler Chicken 
Producers Marketing Board; Turkey Producers Marketing Board; Commercial Aid Producers Marketing 
Board; Honey Producers Marketing Board and the Canada Fresh Water Fish Marketing Corporation which 
operates in Saskatchewan through a delegation of provincial powers using Section 11 of The National 
Products Marketing Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one may ask at this time as to why we need to regulate marketing. In the past years, 
indeed some years ago, there was some considerable difference of opinion in regard to the need for 
regulation of some agricultural products. But during the past few years I think there has been a general 
tendency throughout Canada, for producers have vigorously pursued in many areas, regulated marketing 
through the use of marketing boards and/or commissions. 
 
This approach differs with the previous trend of almost exclusive use of co-operatives if there was any use 
available to them at all. In order to protect individuals and family farms, producers now contend in some 
cases, and in many cases, that they must control all of the product. There have been situations where the five 
or ten per cent surplus, or for that matter even a threatened surplus, has reduced the price and reduced the 
price drastically for all of that product. Certainly these are the reasons why we have marketing boards now 
for broiler chickens, turkey and eggs. I think especially eggs because it is most current in the minds of those 
in the Province of Saskatchewan who were involved in the chicken-egg war not all 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2033 

that far distant in the past. 
 
Producers have been facing rising costs and in many cases the price of their own product has declined. They 
quite rightly feel that since the vendor of their supplies sets his price to cover costs plus a reasonable return 
that producers must also do the same to be successful. Since there are many producers facing fewer and 
fewer buyers individual producers are in a weak bargaining position. They want legislation providing for an 
organization that has real countervailing power to improve their bargaining position. Individual producers 
fear the advance of horizontal and vertical integration and corporate farming and see marketing boards as a 
useful farm organization to curb such developments. Programs of regional development have resulted in the 
loss of traditional markets through their subsidized production. Individual producers cannot regulate total 
production without organization. Nor can they as individuals determine what the local market for them really 
is. Individually they do not have the resources to accumulate sufficient market knowledge. 
 
Our experience with marketing boards to date indicate that support for regulating the market has come from 
both large and small producers. A producer may support one plan and be against another and the decisions 
are made on the content of the particular plan. But, Mr. Speaker, there is now a good deal of support from 
farmers producing nearly all agricultural commodities for the establishment of marketing boards. There may 
be exceptions at this point at time of certain commodities that are produced in Saskatchewan where the 
producers do not, nor do they require, a marketing board. I think the most significant one would be the Cattle 
Association at this point in time. Prices are high, the markets look good for the future. That is all fine. They 
don’t have to form a marketing board unless they so desire and under the Act they would be able to do so 
when they wanted to by asking for a vote. 
 
I should like, Mr. Speaker, to outline the revision of the Act. The basic changes in the new Act are as 
follows: 1. The Act will be divided into parts to achieve a distinction between the bodies politic incorporated 
provided for within the Act. 2. There is some updating of terminology and definitions to conform with the 
current practice and the other Acts. 3. The new Act provides for the role of responsibilities of a Minister 
whereas the old Act did not refer to a Minister in any way, although a Minister had always been assigned 
jurisdiction over it. 4. Part One provides for the appointment and the responsibilities of the Government 
Advisory Board which will be named the Natural Product Marketing Council, rather than the Saskatchewan 
Marketing Board. 5. Part Two provides for the establishment of producer marketing boards. This part is 
basically the same as the old Act and the boards continue to have the same power which include the basic 
principles of supply or quota and price controls. Some new sections have been added which were previously 
regulations that, in many cases, have been in effect for more than 20 years. Regulations which I am sure that 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and the Members opposite will appreciate we are now prepared to put into 
legislation. 6. Part Three introduces a new basic principle in the Act by providing for the establishment of 
marketing commissions. These agencies, Mr. Speaker, are basically government appointed marketing bodies 
as compared with producer boards where the members are elected. They will have many of the powers of the 
producer boards but will not have any power in relation to supply control. I want to make 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2034 
 

this clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They may control deliveries or grades, prices and the like, but they do not have the power to prohibit 
marketing of a product, nor to control the production of that product in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The need for a commission, I think, can be better outlined if in the future, a need for quick action by 
government to correct or improve a deteriorating market condition arises. I think a good example would be 
the feed grains threat that was apparent last fall. It appeared in some areas of the province due to a bumper 
crop of feed grains that farmers may be again prepared to sell at fire sale prices. In fact, there is the record to 
show that some small quantities of barley were sold in various parts of the province for prices at or near 35 
cents per bushel. It could happen also with regard to such products as lamb, potatoes, honey or special seed 
crops where a limited and narrowly based market can be unduly and quickly affected by a number of factors. 
 
But I think the feed grains is a best example and I want to comment on that to some length. Because 
Saskatchewan is a major feed grains producer, the prospect of a recurrence of firesale prices should not, nor 
can it be, ignored. I think all of us remember the problems and the prices that farmers were confronted with 
in the late ‘60s due to surplus of grains in this Province. 
 
Moreover the development of markets for feed grains outside of Canada can be undertaken by a feed grain 
commission or some other such body. The feed grain situation is of concern to all of the provinces, not 
merely Saskatchewan, but I think primarily Saskatchewan and its two sister provinces, Alberta and 
Manitoba. 
 
In addition, other organizations have been searching for solutions to avoid erratic price movements and very 
low returns to feed grain producers. The Canada Grains Council has been considering the problem. The 
National Farmers’ Union has held a series of important meetings throughout Canada this winter pertaining to 
the matter. 
 
Today, the Director of Planning and Research for the Department of Agriculture is meeting with the 
Canadian Wheat Board in Winnipeg to discuss the possible role of the Canadian Wheat Board in a marketing 
monitoring agreement or arrangement. When from all this effort there emerges a workable program it will be 
necessary to have the legislation to provide the basis and the authority for this to work. 
 
The amendments to The National Products Marketing Act and the amendment to The Grain Marketing 
Control Act are needed to provide this legislative authority. 
 
I know that Members opposite have voiced their concern in regard to the feed grain situation and, in fact, 
gave their support to the amendment of The Grain Marketing Control Act. I hope they will also give their 
approval of the new Natural Products Marketing Act. 
 
I referred a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, to the hearings held by the National Farmers Union throughout 
Canada. I appeared at the hearing which they held in Yorkton to discuss the enabling legislation needed 
because the legislation without these amendments made it impossible to place the sale of feed grains to 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2035 

larger livestock feeders under either the Canadian Wheat Board regulations or the Provincial Price and 
Marketing regulations. 
 
The amendment to The Saskatchewan Grain Marketing Control Act will make producer sales subject to 
regulations under the Act. The amendments now proposed to The Natural Products Marketing Act will 
provide the umbrella for establishing a feed grains marketing commission which could monitor the sales of 
feed grains in Saskatchewan. 
 
It is crucial to emphasize that these two changes in legislation provide enabling legislation only. The details 
of how more orderly marketing is actually instituted will be decided only after extensive discussions and 
consultations with farm organizations, the governments of the other prairie provinces, the Canadian Wheat 
Board and the Federal Government. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to more orderly marketing in feed grains as a way of 
improving grain farmer incomes. Stabilizing prices for feed grains used by the feed grains sector, sparing 
hard-pressed farmers from the need to sell at firesale prices and perhaps of even greater long-term potential 
of taking major initiatives in market development work. 
 
We favor a policy according to which prices can vary from a base price according to location and time of 
year, recognizing that these are accepted bases of price differentials. These differentials will make the 
arrangement equitable from the viewpoint of livestock producers wherever they may be in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan livestock producers will enjoy a reduced risk from wide variations of feed grain prices. They 
will not need to use their own funds to hedge against price changes by storing large quantities of feed grains 
that are normally necessary. 
 
The Saskatchewan livestock economy will be permanent and profitable if it is based on feed grain prices that 
are reasonable and steady and not feed grain prices that are excessively low or excessively high causing 
unstable pricing. If equity and fairness is to be achieved among livestock producers in all parts of Canada, 
then it is obvious that freight rates on livestock and livestock products shipped from the prairie region will 
have to be adjusted down to counterbalance the feed freight assistance policy and to ensure that the bulk of 
Canada’s livestock are produced on the Prairies where the economic law of comparative average indicates 
they should be produced. 
 
Orderly marketing of feed grains, I think, will put an end to the rumors that circulate from time to time in the 
East - east of the Lakehead at least - about the price of barley in the West. One or two reports of the isolated 
desperation sales of very cheap barley are enough to bring on the cry that Western livestock producers are 
getting barley too cheaply and that the sales of Western feed barley by the Canadian Wheat Board to the East 
should be suspended. 
 
Orderly marketing will put an end to such unfounded stories and remove some of the pressures to reduce the 
powers of the Canadian Wheat Board to sell so as to maximize the income of prairie grain farmers. All three 
prairie governments are committed to bringing about better and more stable prices for feed grains through 
the more orderly marketing of feed grains in their respective provinces. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2036 
 

This amendment and the other amendment to The Grain Marketing Control Act will provide the much 
needed legislative basis for marketing methods that will be shaped in consultation with the farming industry 
and the Canadian Wheat Board and the other Prairie Provincial Governments. 
 
Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a brief comparison of the proposed Natural Products 
Marketing Act for Saskatchewan with the Acts of Alberta and Manitoba. Although they are written very 
differently, the general framework and powers granted under the Acts are very similar. All three, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba, provide for establishing a producer marketing board, with a wide range of 
powers including the right to control the quantity of a product that a producer may market. 
 
All three, Mr. Speaker, provide for the establishment of marketing commissions by the 
Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council without a vote being held. All three establish a provincial board or council 
which is to supervise the operation of marketing boards or commissions. Compared to the draft of the 
Saskatchewan Bill we find that in Manitoba, the Saskatchewan Bill sets out more powers than are set out in 
the Manitoba Act. The Manitoba Act does not set out the powers of a board, at least legislatively, to inspect 
books, stop and search vehicles, seals, produce and the like. 
 
However, the Manitoba Act, in the section dealing with regulations that the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council 
can make, reads as follows, and it is Section 32, subsection 2(b): 
 

Vesting in those boards or commissions any powers or rights deemed necessary or advisable to 
enable them to administer the regulations effectively. 

 
Which in my mind and I think in the minds of the Members of this Assembly is a pretty all-inclusive 
authority. 
 
In the case of Alberta the Act provides for the producer board to have the authority through the marketing 
council and the Lieutenant-Governor to enforce a long list of powers that can be conferred. As far as 
penalties are concerned, the Manitoba Act has the same penalties as the Province of Saskatchewan. Alberta’s 
fines are $1,000 ceiling instead of $500, as we propose to have in the Saskatchewan Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on making those brief remarks I ask the Members to your left to consider the advantages that 
such a new Natural Products Marketing Act will have for the producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. T. M. WEATHERALD (Cannington):— Mr. Speaker, in order to facilitate the proceedings of the 
Legislature as we are attempting to move along fairly rapidly in the last number of Bills being presented to 
us, I will without the benefit of, which would normally be more extensive remarks on this, proceed so that 
we may not hold up the House on this particular Bill. 
 
I was pleased, Mr. Speaker, to find the Minister expressing concern about the regulations in Manitoba and it 
was nice for us, 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2037 

on this side of the House, to find that the Government opposite is now starting to recognize some of the 
aspects which we have complained about for some time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEATHERALD:— We are pleased that they are now recognizing at least another province, the 
problem of too powerful regulations that we have been bringing to their attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister has put forward some of the benefits of marketing boards. Today in our country, 
and indeed they have for some length of time, farmers have been seeking ways and means of finding more 
money from the market place for their productions. This all too frequently has been too low as far as their 
products were concerned. Many experiments have taken place by producers into methods and ways to find 
how they may obtain a better income from the market place. 
 
Some of these experiments, naturally enough, have occurred through marketing boards and for many 
products marketing boards have turned out to be successful. The remarks that the Minister has made 
referring to this Act, we find little to disagree with. And in actual fact the Natural Products Marketing Act 
which was passed by the Federal Government, in many ways was the forerunner and that Bill made possible 
the present Act which we have today. 
 
It was unfortunate, we thought at the time, that it was presented to Parliament in Ottawa that many of the 
beneficial aspects of the Bill were lost sight of, simply because of the Federal Government’s inclusion of 
cattle and calves in that particular Bill. Naturally enough it seemed to us that cattle producers opposed the 
provision of inclusion of cattle in the Bill and this battle over the inclusion and the ultimate result of taking 
cattle out of the Bill overshadowed what were many of the beneficial aspects of it. 
 
I might say that at the time we supported the fact of taking cattle out of that Natural Products Marketing Act 
which was passed in Ottawa and are pleased that they no longer are under it without a vote of the producers 
and a new change in the Act through Parliament. 
 
But as I mentioned many of the beneficial aspects of the Act were lost sight of because of this argument over 
the inclusion of cattle and calves. 
 
Marketing boards, I think, as the Minister outlined should be based on individual products and each producer 
will have to look at that product to see what is the best method of marketing for him. The usage of votes for 
the producers is a legitimate and logical way to bring this about. I think that it would be totally wrong for us 
to think that we could have a marketing Act as a blanket thing to cover all products, simply because I think 
that each product has to be dealt with on an individual basis. 
 
Marketing boards have done a good job for people in many products that are produced by farmers, in 
increasing their income and in being able to maintain at least some semblance of a satisfactory price to 
farmers. The Minister did mention that he intended to use this Act substantially for the stabilization of feed 
grain prices and we supported that when the Bill was brought 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2038 
 

in with the suggestion that this would require the co-operation of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, a 
matter on which we felt very strongly about at the time and which we still feel very strongly about today. 
 
We will support this Bill. We think that marketing boards can make a contribution for some individual 
products and as long as the vote of the producers is required and the complete control of producers of the 
marketing board is adhered to. We think that this, in many aspects, is still experimental in nature in trying to 
obtain income from the market place. We think that is worthwhile and supported by more producers. We 
will be supporting the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
 ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
 SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that Bill 
No. 92 - An Act respecting The Pyramid Franchises be now read a second time. 
 
MR. B. M. DYCK (Saskatoon City Park):— Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak in the support of the Bill 
respecting Pyramid franchises and in support of a very excellent presentation given by the Hon. Attorney 
General (Mr. Romanow) a few days ago. Pyramid selling is nothing new in Saskatchewan. This is proved by 
countless chain letter promotions which have probably been in existence since mail service became 
commercialized. All in all they were usually harmless, although the criminal code made them illegal because 
they were an unnecessary burden on post office facilities. 
 
In recent years however all this has changed. Pyramid sales promotions have suddenly become big business. 
No longer is it necessarily a nickel and dime enterprise. With massive advertising and high pressure 
salesmen, pyramid selling can become a multi-national and multi-million dollar business. That is exactly 
what happened with Holiday Magic only several years ago. Holiday Magic was first registered in 
Saskatchewan in May of 1968 and was still in business in December of 1970. It was not the former Liberal 
Government that blew the whistle on Holiday Magic, it was the CBC and their Sunday night program, 
Weekend. Well over 100 people were conned of $2,000 each by Holiday Magic. No amount of persuasion 
could convince these people that Holiday Magic was a bad investment for they were convinced that instant 
success was on the way. However, when Holiday Magic was finally exposed by the CBC the bubble burst. 
Cosmetics formerly retailing for up to $2 ended up on sale at a local department store for 15 cents apiece. 
Only then did reason prevail over emotion. Although the promoters of Holiday Magic probably made over 
$100,000 profit in Saskatchewan alone, action by the former Liberal Government was completely 
ineffective. Their failure to protect the public interest is shocking. A fraudulent scheme of this magnitude 
clearly needs much more effective policing and guarantees must be made that it cannot occur in the future. 
 
Before the storm had died down over Holiday Magic, new and more elaborate promotions were starting up. 
This time they initiated in Florida and spread across North America. One was 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2039 

Koscott Interplanetary of Canada and the other was Dare to be Great. Both are wholly owned subsidiaries of 
Glenn Turner of Orlando, Florida. According to a recent magazine article, Turner claims to be worth $150 
million. Whatever his assets they are no doubt large and have been built on the gullibility of countless 
would-be millionaires. 
 
Koscott Interplanetary, a cosmetic promotion, and Dare to be Great, a motivational course, both are based on 
pyramid selling. In effect they are elaborate chain letters with cosmetics or motivational therapy lending the 
pretense of respectability. Only the promoters and the small minority who get in on the ground floor are 
likely to profit from any pyramid selling scheme. The vast majority are guaranteed to suffer in financial loss. 
 
Of these two pyramid schemes which until recently, were very active in Saskatchewan, Koscott 
Interplanetary was the larger promotion. I should like to explain its operations in some detail for they are 
very revealing. 
 
The company was first registered in Saskatchewan on March 19, 1970, but it was not actively promoted until 
the later part of the year. The extent of its operations can be gained by examining a list of its agents supplied 
to the Government on September 30, 1971, under The Direct Sellers Act. 
 
At that time there were ten consumer sales managers who paid $1,000 each, 69 supervisors who signed away 
$2,000 and 65 distributors who were relieved of $5,000 apiece. Altogether these 144 individuals forked over 
$463,000 in less than a year. Where did all this money go? Over 50 per cent of the outlay of these so-called 
investments was pocketed by Koscott Interplanetary of Canada while the rest went primarily to those 
distributors who had gotten in on the ground floor. 
 
What did those who took the bait get for their money? Each person who paid the $2,000 supervisor’s fee for 
example was given cosmetics with an assumed retail value of $2,000. However, their wholesale value, 
according to the company was only $240, a mere 12 per cent of their supposed retail value. Obviously the 
cosmetics were fantastically overpriced. 
 
The fact that each distributor would have to sell this entire initial outlay of stock at the same price he paid for 
it before he could possibly earn an honest dollar on future retail sales is the clincher. This proves that retail 
sales were merely intended to give the appearance of legitimacy. No respectable business could possibly 
operate on terms such as these. 
 
As a result there were only 42 persons directly engaged in the selling end of the enterprise. In other words 
there were 144 officers commanding 42 privates. Clearly, the retailing of cosmetics was a front for the main 
business of selling franchises, of value only if more franchises could be sold to future suckers. The potential 
of door-to-door sales of cosmetics was a drop in the bucket compared to the $2,850 commission distributors 
could earn by conning someone else to part with the $5,000 distributor’s fee. 
 
Of the 144 franchise promoters as of September 30, 1971, only 29 were then considered active. The rest had 
lost their shirt and had already given up trying to con other unsuspecting citizens into the same trap. It is 
these unfortunate people who 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2040 
 

need government protection from pyramid vultures. 
 
As pyramid selling has been organized throughout North America, throughout North America state and 
provincial governments recently have swung into action to combat its abuse. 
 
Turner’s twin companies, the worst offenders, are currently being investigated by 30 state Attorney Generals, 
the Federal Trade Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as a host of private suits. 
In a decision by the Iowa Supreme Court, a judge noted that "despite the thinly veiled cloak of respectability 
with which Koscott has attempted to clothe its pyramidal merchandise sales promotion scheme, the badge of 
fraud clearly shows through." A judge with the Superior Court of New Jersey said that Dare to be Great 
"attracts the unwary and preys upon their folly. It dooms them to failure from the very beginning and omits 
to apprise them of its unfeasibility." 
 
In Canada, pyramid selling has been attacked in a variety of ways. In August of 1971 the British Columbia 
Securities Commission prohibited Koscott from trading in distributor agreements for two years on the 
grounds that the fees charged were misrepresented as investments. In Alberta and Quebec, Koscott has been 
prosecuted under the lottery section of the criminal code. Last Wednesday, April 12, Koscott Interplanetary 
of Canada pleaded guilty to this very charge and was fined $7,500 in provincial court in Edmonton. 
 
However, none of these attempts to curtail pyramid selling has proved adequate. The courts are only able to 
prosecute after the crime has been committed. What is needed is legislation to tackle pyramid selling before 
it gets started, not legal prosecution after hundreds of citizens have been bilked of their hard-earned dollars. 
 
This legislation which has been introduced will effectively control pyramid selling from the start. Before a 
company can be licensed to promote such schemes, it must meet the requirements set out in the proposed 
legislation. This will not hamper legitimate businesses but it will protect the public from the type of 
enterprises promoted by Glenn Turner. As a result, the Government will be one step ahead of pyramid 
operators - not following in their footsteps. 
 
Second, each licensed pyramid franchise promoter must continue to live up to the regulations if it wishes to 
do business in Saskatchewan. To make sure of this a $10,000 performance bond must be posted. 
 
Finally, this legislation provides for a rebate to the customer if he finds his contract less than adequate. For a 
period up to 60 days, a dissatisfied franchisee will be able to receive a full refund on his purchase. The 
amount of refund decreases on a sliding scale over time but he will still be able to receive 75 per cent of his 
investment up to 180 days. Clearly these regulations impose no undue burden on honest businessmen, but it 
will make it difficult, if not impossible, for the pyramid huckster to stay in business. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the need for legislation restricting pyramid sales promotion is obvious. I have 
only mentioned three particular companies and their efforts to swindle the public. There have been others as 
well. For each the 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2041 

pattern is the same - elaborate promotional buildup, extravagant claims appealing to human greed, high 
pressure salesmanship and finally the reality of fraud and hard-earned savings lost. 
 
The time has come to end this vicious cycle. The time has come to stop this unscrupulous bilking of 
unsuspecting people of their savings. This legislation will effectively control pyramid sales promotions by 
excluding the crooks and the con men and allowing legitimate businesses to prosper. 
 
This legislation tackles the root of the problem - it doesn’t wait until the crime has been committed. It can be 
summed up by a single phrase - prevention and control. The public interest demands no less. Mr. Speaker, I 
support this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Milestone):— Mr. Speaker, after listening to the Member from Saskatoon (Mr. 
Dyck) stand and direct his remarks to you, I was a little disturbed at some of the comments he made. We 
support the principle of this Bill in trying to control pyramid sellers but to turn around and say that a current 
problem that occurred in 1970-71, is the responsibility of the Liberal Government and then to turn around 
and take a vicious attack on us, I think requires a little investigation and a little reply. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, he admitted that it was a current problem. Second, he admitted that every other 
jurisdiction in North America is beginning to investigate it. In fact it begins to remind me a little of the 
Memorial Plot scandal that took place in Saskatchewan. Hundreds and hundreds of people were bilked 
which that former Government did absolutely nothing about. Then there was the investment scandal under 
the socialists back a few years ago. The legislation to protect consumers in Saskatchewan under a Liberal 
Government was in the forefront of all of Canada and all of Canada has begun to copy that particular 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly we want to go back and do a little research and I am sure that we will have some 
things to say about this Pyramid Bill before we will accept it in principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Snyder that Bill No. 
105 - An Act respecting Trade Unions and the Right of Employees to organize in Trade Unions of 
their own choosing for the Purpose of Bargaining Collectively with their Employers be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. D. F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North):— Mr. Speaker, in speaking on this Bill the other day I said 
that the great failure of the Bill, The Trade Union Act is that it does not provide for even the slightest 
improvement in the area of collective bargaining. The main purpose of legislation with respect to trade 
unions is to promote and enhance good industrial relations. The only new provision in this Bill No. 105 that 
might serve this purpose is the addition of an 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2042 
 

executive officer to the Labour Relations Board. It should be noted that this position of executive officer to 
the Labour Relations Board was a position recommended by the report of the Labour Management 
Committee on the construction industry in 1970. It might also be noted that the chairman of that committee 
was Mr. C. K. Murcheson, who was the Deputy Minister of Labour for the former Liberal Government. If 
this executive officer is given the authority and jurisdiction that was suggested in this report then I believe 
this executive officer will produce a more harmonious relationship between labor and management. 
However, this feature is the only new aspect that will enhance better industrial relations in our province. This 
has to be a sad commentary on what is a so-called new Trade Union Act. 
 
I also said the other day that any legislation dealing with labor should be designed so that the individual is 
assured of the maximum possible protection and at the same time the maximum possible freedom. This is 
another serious area of failure in this Bill. There is only one feature that will allow any employee to apply to 
the Labour Relations Board to rescind any order that was obtained by fraud. This is certainly a just provision 
and it is spelled out in this new Act. I am sure that this right has always been given in the past but it is a 
commendable feature to have incorporated in the Act. However, this is the only feature of this Bill that 
enhances protection or freedom to employees. 
 
There are three particular aspects of this Bill that deny freedom to employees which they are now enjoying. I 
should like to comment briefly on these. May I preface my remarks on this matter by saying that all three 
examples are favorable concessions to the Trade Union organization, at the expense of the employees. This 
is difficult to understand when surely the function and objective of the Trade Union organization is to serve 
and not to hinder the employee. The only rationale for strengthening the position of the organization at the 
expense of the individual is to assume that whatever is good for a particular union is necessarily good for 
every individual employee. It is difficult to understand how the Government can restrict individual employee 
freedom in this Bill when they profess to be so interested in Human Rights. 
 
The first provision I should like to comment on is one that was taken out of the present Act. Under existing 
legislation if 40 per cent of the employees in a unit have indicated that they no longer wish to be represented 
by the Trade Union representing them to the Labour Relations Board shall direct that a vote be taken by 
secret ballot of all employees eligible to vote to determine which Trade Union if any is to represent them. 
The new proposed Act does not offer employees this right. It will now be seen that employees dissatisfied 
with the Union that represents them will find it very difficult to get rid of that Union. It will not be absolutely 
impossible but in all practical terms it will be extremely difficult. The only practical method will be to have 
another competing Union apply to represent them. It is interesting to note that Trade Unions have not had 
their similar right taken away as a result of this new Bill. A feature of the Bill allows them if they show 25 
per cent support to ask that a vote be taken by the Labour Relations Board. I don’t object to this but I do 
object to taking the employees’ similar right away from him. 
 
A second feature of this Bill makes it a very risky 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2043 

business for an employee to engage in any activity against his Trade Union or to engage in any activity on 
behalf of any other Trade Union. Where membership of a Trade Union is a condition of employment then an 
employee does not have the freedom which he now enjoys under the present Act. This makes it virtually 
impossible for an employee to engage in any activity against his Trade Union even if he feels the Trade 
Union is not representing him in a satisfactory manner. He does so under the risk of losing membership in 
the union and therefore losing his job. This example of a loss of individual freedom makes a position of a 
Trade Union very strong indeed. 
 
A third feature of this Bill denies the right of an employee to appeal to the Labour Relations Board whether 
or not a new union in fact represents him. The present Act states that where a Trade Union claims that by 
reason of a merger or amalgamation or a transfer to it by another Trade Union of that union’s right, that it is 
the successor of that other Trade Union, the board may upon application of any person require that the 
successor either has or has not acquired the rights, duties and privileges and duties of its predecessor. This is 
a reasonable provision and should have been included for the protection of all involved. Under the proposed 
legislation there is no appeal to actions and decisions taken amongst unions. These three examples all 
provide concessions to union management at the expense of the working man. 
 
I should like to say a few words about a couple of other features in this Bill. These are features that were 
brought forth as amendments to The Trade Union Act back in 1966 and have been continued in this new 
proposed Act. At that time there was some wild debate and criticism that was very ill-conceived. I refer to 
the features about arbitration that were introduced in 1966 and are continued in this Bill No. 105, thereby 
obviously having the blessing of the Government opposite. I should like to quote from Debates and 
Proceedings of 1966, page 1,572 when Mr. W. G. Davies discussed the introduction of these arbitration 
sections. I quote: 
 

It seems that what we will do here is simply to regiment accommodations that have been arrived at 
by mutual consent. This it seems to me is contradictory to the very principles that this Bill intends to 
set forth. The clauses in this Bill will help very little if in fact they are not a hindrance, they impose a 
strait-jacket form of arbitration on the parties that have already agreed in a broad sense to these very 
procedures and who need no pressures, no further pushes in that direction. 

 
In that same debate the Member from Regina North East, the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek) had 
something to say about these arbitration sections which are included in this Bill. I quote, the Minister of 
Public Health: 
 

It forces upon the parties to a collective bargaining agreement specific arbitration procedures which 
may not be desirable, acceptable or even applicable to particular industries or institutions. 

 
It now appears that these criticisms of these two gentlemen, two gentlemen very knowledgeable in labor 
matters, was not very accurate. They now see that this and other measures introduced by Mr. Coderre, the 
Minister of Labour at that time were indeed 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2044 
 

well founded. 
 
A section also introduced in 1966 and continued in Bill No. 105 is for exclusion from unions on the grounds 
of conscience based on religious belief. This is a section that I think is fair and just and I give it my support. 
When it was introduced in 1966, Mr. Davies and the present Minister of Health again spoke against it. I 
should like to quote from the Debates and Proceedings 1966, the Present Minister of Health on page 1,594. I 
quote: 
 

May I bring to the attention of the Members opposite that if this provision is adopted it would be the 
very first such provision in Canada, a very dubious and unnecessary first. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to read the debates of 1966 to see how shortsighted the criticisms were at 
that time. It is interesting to note the number of 1966 amendments that were included in this new Trade 
Union Act proposed today. I hope my criticism today of this Bill is a little more farsighted and accurate than 
that of the NDP when they were in Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no provision in Bill No. 195 to allow for representation of the general public on the 
Labour Relations Board. This is a concession to both unions and management and it is acceptable to both 
parties. The Minister of Labour feels that members of the public add nothing to the Board’s deliberations and 
that they do not bring with them any special knowledge or expertise. I think this view shows the attitude of 
the Government opposite which seems to ignore the public’s interest in industrial relations. They apparently 
are quite prepared to watch and encourage labor and management as they lock horns. They are not willing to 
admit that it is the general public that often feels the adverse effects of such encounters. 
 
Another section enables certification of a union before the employees have come to full strength. The 
Minister has given his reasons for this and to a point these reasons are valid. In the cases where the employer 
uses stalling techniques for an indefinite period of time and prevents certification using the excuse that he 
will be employing new people in the future. However, there are certainly problems with this feature and I use 
for example, an industry that has started and is expected to raise 600 or 700 employees within two or three 
years. This section allows for the certifying of a union when the employees are at a low number, say 50 or 
even 100, or theoretically three. There should be exception allowed for this kind of obvious example. This 
Bill allows for a strike vote to be determined by as little as 26 per cent of those eligible to vote. This taking 
of a strike vote is an extremely serious matter that affects the very livelihood of the employees. It might seem 
rather too important a decision to be made by as little as a 26 per cent of the employees. I think consideration 
should have been given to some form of government supervision of a strike vote to help lessen tensions and 
problems that arise in such situations. This supervision might also allay some fears about the 26 per cent 
required to carry a vote, and help to assure that all employees eligible to vote actually have a practical access 
to vote. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2045 

Another clause in this Bill No. 105 gives the Labour Relations Board the right to decide and make orders 
concerning matters that are not within the jurisdiction of the Board. These decisions are not then reviewable 
by any court of law. I would agree that matters within its jurisdiction should not be referable to the courts as 
an appeal, but I will not agree that the courts should not be able to review decisions made that were not 
within the jurisdiction of the Board. This is a basic freedom that has been taken away from both employees 
and employers, another example from the Government opposite that is hard to understand when they profess 
to be concerned about human rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an Act that is composed of many features that are not in the best interest of employees. 
This is an Act that does not provide for any degree of equality between the principals, it does not enhance or 
fortify the present system of collective bargaining. Bill No. 105 is a Bill that does not deserve the support of 
this House. It was suggested to me yesterday that the implications of this Bill may not be very important in 
about six months, because there may not be any employees to organize after the Minister of Industry and the 
Minister of Labour get finished. I have to agree there is some merit in this suggestion. May I repeat, Mr. 
Speaker, to put it mildly, I am disappointed in this new Trade Union Act and I am disappointed in the 
attitude of the Government opposite and of the Minister of Labour. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, before the vote is taken, I feel that a few 
comments should be made in explanation or in rebuttal to the observations from the Member from Moose 
Jaw North who just took his seat. 
 
I can say I think some of the points that he raised certainly bear very serious consideration by all those who 
seek to improve labor management law and labor management relations. But on the whole the basic criticism 
of the Member from Moose Jaw reflected the predominant feeling in the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan 
against strong Trade Union legislation which in effect assists working men to organize themselves in Trade 
Unions. That is basically the thrust and the purpose of a Trade Union Act. 
 
A Trade Union Act is designed for employees to assist them in three common characteristics of collective 
bargaining, namely, the right to associate, the right to negotiate and the right to withdraw the only thing that 
they have got to sell, their labor. If you weaken any one of those three, you weaken the entire principle of 
collective bargaining. What we did in The Trade Union Act of 1944 and what we have done here in this Act 
of 1972 is once again to strengthen those three characteristics, the right to associate, to negotiate, and the 
right to withdraw the only thing that a man on the field can withdraw, the only market, the only commodity 
he has to sell, namely his labor. 
 
I say this, it sounds political, I suppose it is but it is the truth. From 1964 to 1971 the basic thrust of the 
amendments introduced by the then Minister of Labour and by the Liberal Government, was to take away 
either one or all three of those rights to a lesser or a greater extent. You could see it riddled throughout the 
entire amendments to The Trade Union Act. 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2046 
 

The whole business of, for example, the decertification on a 40 per cent vote. This is the very first point the 
Member for Moose Jaw raised. This is a strange principle that you should be able to decertify a union on 
what amounts to a minority vote. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— You can’t . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Well, at least you can get it before the Board on a minority vote. The fact of the 
matter is that that is . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Well, the other . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Well, you name me one other club, you name me a Kinsmen Club or any other 
association that has that similar provision, I’d be pleased to know it. If it is, it would be an interesting 
provision, but I am sure it doesn’t exist. The fact of the matter is that we deal in democracy by majority 
rules, we deal with it in the House, we deal with it where possible throughout. The fact is that the 40 per cent 
vote operation allowed a minority to make a kick at the cat where in fact the majority may not have been in 
fact so satisfied to do it. It is the type of provision that lent itself to labor disharmony because if there was a 
minority interested in disputing the right of a Trade Union’s representations, all it had to do was petition for 
the vote and you would have the consequent vote taken and the consequent union bargaining, the consequent 
politicking for votes and the like and with the consequent trade union disharmony. That is the type of thing 
that is not designed to promote industrial peace. The Hon. Member had that as a criticism. He pointed out a 
second criticism, he said that it is not risky business if an employer should interfere in any of the 
deliberations of the Trade Union members with respect to whether or not they should join in a trade union or 
not. That’s true, it is now - yes, the provision that you are referring to is the so-called free speech clause. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— I never mentioned . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Well, I stand to be corrected. But my notations say that and I was listening very 
carefully. I took the Hon. Member to say that it is risky business now by this Bill No. 105 for an employer, 
an employee - well then with respect if that is the case, I draw back on this. I don’t see with respect how the 
Hon. Member could say that it is risky business for any employee now to make comment. In fact that’s the 
whole purpose of taking the provision with respect to the employer’s right to interfere in the question of the 
certification. You boys put in a provision there where the employer could throw in his 10 cents worth as to 
whether or not a Trade Union should be organized or not, on the supposedly free speech. I submit that that 
section was the type of section which made it a risky business for an employee. Because if an employee 
decided to go against the wishes, expressed or otherwise of the boss, as to whether or not they should be 
certified in a particular union, then you could have a very risky situation. What this Act has done is 
discontinue that type of an operation and has come back to the situation that in fact it is not risky, because 
the whole basis of this Bill is based on the principle that the employee, and the employee only, has a right to 
determine what trade union, if any, he should decide on, what arbitration he should go in, 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2047 

what conciliation he should take or what unfair labor practice charge he should lay. 
 
The third question that the Member raised was the question of transfer of obligations. He argued that this 
was bad because now the Labour Relations Board has no final say on it. Again this is a difference of opinion 
that obviously exists between them and us. I say that whether trade unionists decide to merge with another 
union, that is the business solely of the trade unionists, and not of the Labour Relations Board and not of the 
employer. I think the Trade Union member has a right to determine on the transfer of obligations whether he 
wants to join a particular local or different union or not to transfer his obligations. We have changed that 
provision. I am glad that the Minister of Labour has so done. 
 
With respect to the general public and the lack of representation of the general public, let me say that my 
experience with the Labour Relations Board has been, I think - I can’t say extensive but certainly I have had 
some considerable experience before a Labour Relations Board - I have found the general public 
representatives to not be truly representative of the government of the day, whether that is an NDP 
Government or a Liberal Government, reflecting a particular bias or a point of view. I think they were 
surplus in increasing the Board from five to seven, it is not really necessary for the speedy dispatch of trade 
union business and I am pleased to see that these members are not on the Board. It has nothing to do with a 
derogation of the public interest from our standpoint, it is simply designed to make the workings of the 
Board much more efficient. 
 
With respect to the general build-up provision, I say to the Hon. Member that I have known this to be a 
dodge and to have been used as a dodge by employers who have said, employers have said, look you can’t 
certify it because there are only 50 employees and we plan to have 150. The Labour Relations Board on the 
law as it stood said, you are right because there is no full complement, and they denied certification. By 
denying certification they denied protection to those 50 trade unionists who sought to become certified and 
have the protection of the trade union. The result was there was no certification and no union strike. I say 
with respect that the build-up principle so-called as it has been decided by the Labour Relations Board and 
other decisions is bad and I am glad to see that the Minister has seen fit to exclude from this Bill that 
principle. 
 
One final comment that I would make to the Hon. Member in rebuttal, is his comment respecting, I believe it 
is Section 22 on the right of review certiorari. He said that this now has been denied, he argues that the 
Board should still be subject to court review if there is an excess or a lack of jurisdiction by the Board. This 
provision which is written into the Act is essentially the same as has been in the Act in the period from 1944 
to 1967, whenever it was that the Liberal Government amended it and included that particular provision, the 
two or three words basically added to it. The fact is, I tell the Hon. Member that this provision has never 
stood in the way of courts reviewing by way of certiorari excess or lack of jurisdiction by the Labour 
Relations Board. Section 22 or whatever it is, seeks to deny the courts that privilege not only in this Act but 
in a number of other statutes. It has been upheld now clearly by many 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2048 
 

cases and many authorities that the courts do in fact have a right to come in and say that simply stated you 
have exceeded your jurisdiction. This section will not in my legal opinion at any rate, really effectively stop 
that as desirable as that attempt to stop might be. I happen to think that it is a very desirable provision to try 
to seek this limitation of the right of review. 
 
So what I say all in all to the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw is that I regret that he cannot see fit to support 
the provisions of this Bill. They are provisions which do make up a new Trade Union Act. I close by saying 
to the Hon. Member and to all Members of this House that a Trade Union Act if it is to be truly a Trade 
Union Act concerned with the rights of employees and working men should be founded on the principle that 
everything possible within the law should be done to make it easy or as easy within the industrial context for 
those employees to associate themselves in a trade union and negotiate for their own working conditions and 
to withdraw the only thing that they have got to sell on the market, their labor. That is the only commodity 
they have to sell. 
 
The Trade Union Act should reflect those three things very, very openly and clearly throughout in good 
legislation. This Bill does this, it is good legislation, it is going to be approved by the employees, all 
employees, working employees, trade union or otherwise. I would commend the Hon. Member from Moose 
Jaw to consider this matter again, and to still lend his support to this Bill in second reading. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting, the Attorney 
General stated that any good labor legislation should take into consideration three things. He said the 
employees - I am sorry I didn’t catch the other two things. What were they? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— The right to associate, negotiate and the right to withdraw the only thing a working 
man has to sell, his labor. 
 
MR. STEUART:— Fine. That’s typical of the attitude of the Government opposite. There is nothing wrong 
with what he says, we agree with what he says, but it doesn’t go far enough. Surely, good labour legislation 
should also take into consideration the employers. You can’t have industrial peace if you have dissatisfied 
employees, or if you have dissatisfied employers, but you must have equity and fairness. There is another 
group that you must consider, there is a group that is not being considered in this Act, and that is those 
people in the union movement but you’ve got to consider not just the rights of the top management of the 
unions but of the union membership as well. I’ve a telegram here, Mr. Speaker, that is addressed to me. I got 
it today and I am going to quote this telegram in full. It says: 
 

Following is a copy of telegrams sent to Gordon Snyder today. ‘Saskatoon Personnel Association 
representing 26 major employers in the city of Saskatoon request that Bill 105 to amend The Trade 
Union Act be tabled to allow further study and representation by employer groups and interested 
citizens of this Province. We recommend that 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2049 

an independent commission be set up to look into the proposed amendment to this Act.’ 
 
It is signed R. L. Deuchek, Chairman, Special Committee of the Saskatoon Personnel Association, 401 22nd 
St. East, Saskatoon. 
 
This Association represents 26 major employers in Saskatoon, hospitals, Federated Co-op., potash industry 
and a great many other people. Now I want it clearly understood that Mr. Deuchek sent this telegram on 
behalf of this special committee, not on behalf of his employers and he sent it representing the Saskatoon 
Personnel Association. 
 
MR. HANSON:— Did they meet? 
 
MR. STEUART:— I presume they met, yes, as a matter of fact they met two weeks ago, to answer your 
question. They had Mr. Ching, Deputy Minister of Labour, and they asked him if he would explain. They 
had heard rumors, they had heard news reports and so on of changes that were going to be brought into this 
Legislature concerning this Act. Sweeping changes, very effective changes, serious changes. Changes that 
would have great implications not just for the employees but for the employers as well. Surely this is a 
two-sided street. Surely there are two sides to the coin. And they asked Mr. Ching if he would mind 
explaining some of the changes that were about to take place. He in effect told them, No, wait until the Bill 
comes in. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Right. 
 
MR. STEUART:— That’s right, the Hon. Member from Saskatoon says. I’ll ask any Member over there to 
answer. Will they stand up in this House and say truthfully that they did not consult the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour before they made these changes? Obviously they consulted them, they consulted the 
Federation of Labour and I don’t question their right or their responsibility to do this. I say, fine, no you 
haven’t consulted anybody because Mr. Member from Saskatoon, wherever you are and you won’t be there 
long, it would be an insult if they had to consult with you. I said in this House last night, and the Attorney 
General sprang to his feet and he was very hurt, I said this Government is against business. They have a war 
on employers, they have a war on business. Here is another example. They bring into this House sweeping 
changes to The Trade Union Act that will affect, I don’t know whether favorably or unfavorably, union 
representation employees. But they don’t have the courtesy, they don’t have the consideration, they sit there 
and they laugh and giggle, but they will not look at the other side of the coin, the other half of the equation - 
the employers. Now, I am going to ask permission, Mr. Speaker, to adjourn this debate and I hope we can 
hold this debate up and this Bill up until next week sometime to give the employers the opportunity to study 
this Bill which they haven’t had. To study its implications so they can make some representation to the 
Government and if they can get past the iron curtain that the Government of Saskatchewan has put up around 
their Premier and their Cabinet Ministers, then maybe they will listen to them. And if there are changes 
necessary and I don’t say there aren’t, if there are changes necessary they will listen to that side of the story. 
Obviously they haven’t listened to it to this point and I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2050 
 

MR. SPEAKER:— Before putting that motion I should like to point out to the Leader of the Opposition that 
the rule says a telegram itself cannot be read unless the person assumes full responsibility. I am sure that you 
will be prepared for full responsibility for your telegram. 
 
MR. STEUART:— I am prepared to assume full responsibility for the telegram, whatever that means. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— The reason I should like to explain this to Members at this time is that a telegram is not 
signed with a signature and it is a prevention against any telegrams coming in which aren’t authentic and a 
Member, therefore, must assume full responsibility. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, I would certainly agree to adjourning the 
debate. I just wanted to say if I might, the Hon. Member said that he wanted to adjourn the debate on the 
hope that the Government would listen to employers and the like. I just want to say we agree to adjourn the 
debate without any additional conditions. 
 
MR. STEUART:— You won’t listen to the employers . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— No, we are anxious to pass the legislation, which has been carefully considered and 
properly determined by this House and which it is in the best interest of the people. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill No. 115 - An 
Act respecting the Foreign Ownership of Agricultural Lands in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
MR. J. C. McISAAC (Wilkie):— Mr. Speaker, about a week ago we were treated with a barrage of Bills 
from the Government and one of them being Bill No. 115. First of all the title itself is a misnomer and it’s 
misleading. An Act respecting the Foreign Ownership of Agricultural Lands in Saskatchewan. Except, Mr. 
Speaker, the Act does not relate to foreign ownership in any way, shape or form. The title itself is a 
misnomer. The Domestic Control of Farm Land would be a much better title, to restrict the ownership of 
farm land. Or the NDP Land Grab Act would be a good deal more appropriate title for this particular 
legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we learned absolutely nothing from the Minister of Agriculture in his attempt to give this 
Bill second reading. The fact is the Minister didn’t really give this Bill second reading. What happened he 
came into the House, chickened out a day or two or a few days before when he realized the uproar that this 
Bill had caused in this Province and elsewhere. And I am sure the uproar that it caused in his own caucus, 
Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame the Minister for the position he was put in either. I blame the 
Premier and the Government, Cabinet Ministers and backbenchers for ever bringing it in, a piece of 
legislation of this kind. The result was the 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2051 

Minister came in and he gave a five minute commentary on the Bill that was an insult to the House, an insult 
to the people of the province and it was an insult particularly to the farmers of the province and it was an 
insult particularly to the farmers of Saskatchewan. I have never witnessed such an inept performance, such 
misrepresentation and such deception as that demonstrated by the NDP Government opposite in bringing in 
this Bill. They have some real dandies to their credit so far but I think this performance on this Bill has to 
take the cake. 
 
The Government and the Minister haven’t told the House and the other people of the province why this Bill 
is before us. Why would the Government opposite, Mr. Speaker, bring in a Bill that gives the Cabinet itself 
such tremendous and sweeping powers over land tenure in this Province? I hope Premier Blakeney will get 
into the debate and tell us why. I hope the Attorney General and I am sure he will tell us why the 
Government is bringing forth a Bill of this kind. I should like to hear from the Member for Touchwood (Mr. 
Meakes), the Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) and other long-time farm Members in this House as to 
why this legislation has been put before us. 
 
Is the Government worried about foreign ownership of farm land in Saskatchewan? And if they are they 
haven’t told us. The Minister didn’t tell us that when introducing the Bill. Mr. Speaker, is the ownership of 
farm land by non-Canadians a problem in Saskatchewan? Is it? I ask the Members opposite if it is. And if it 
is how extensive is that problem? What are the facts and figures? We didn’t have any statistics. We didn’t 
have any facts and figures given us by the Minister when he introduced this Bill. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP Government must be convinced that that is a problem and if they are, let us have some statistics so that 
the people of Saskatchewan can judge whether or not it is. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that ownership of land in 
this Province by American citizens is certainly not a problem in northwestern Saskatchewan. I can certainly 
testify to that. I am sure the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor) can. The Member for Cut Knife 
(Mr. Kwasnica), the Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) most certainly can. We have American 
citizens up there in my area and other parts of the province who have kept their American citizenship, some 
of them, but they have been good citizens of Saskatchewan for years and years. 
 
Now the question of American ownership may be a problem in some regions of Saskatchewan and if it is a 
problem in other areas of Saskatchewan, and I am not convinced that it is personally, Mr. Speaker, surely 
that matter can be dealt with by some other means than a grant sweeping Bill that’s as restrictive as this one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the worst feature of this Bill is not the anti-American aspect of it, it is the anti-Canadian aspect 
of it. Since when, I ask the Member for Cut Knife, since when have half of the people of Lloydminster been 
considered foreigners in Saskatchewan and that’s what this Bill calls them? It’s a Bill restricting the right of 
Canadian citizens. It is a Bill that is against the Canadian Bill of Rights. It is a Bill that restricts the rights of 
Saskatchewan citizens. And it is legislation, Mr. Attorney General, that is in contravention of the BNA Act 
and the Saskatchewan Act of 1905. And certainly, if not an actual fact, then it is most certainly against the 
intent and the spirit of those two Acts. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2052 
 

This legislation is a complete contradiction of the Human Rights and the Civil Rights legislation that we see 
put forward by Members opposite and preached about to such a great extent. It is a restrictive, destructive 
measure that has already cost the farmers in this Province millions of dollars. Okay, now why has it cost 
farmers money? Any time that hundreds of potential buyers are stricken from the market that has to have a 
depressing effect on the price of that commodity. The price we are talking about here is the price of land in 
this province. All we need is a reduction of about $1 an acre and this Bill brought about a greater reduction 
than that to put that figure into the millions. The price of land, Mr. Speaker, will be depressed by this Bill 
and the Government obviously hopes for that result in order to facilitate the purchasing of land for the Land 
Bank legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can see no other reason for introducing this Bill at this time. It is designed to reduce the 
potential market for farmers for their land. 
 
The Minister also told us in his second speech on second reading that this Bill will be studied by an 
intersessional legislative committee and yet in his first speech, Mr. Speaker, he repeated on two occasions 
that the Bill, regardless of when it is studied, how long it is studied, will still be made retroactive to April 1, 
1972. Now, Mr. Speaker, the question that I ask and the question that a lot of people of Saskatchewan and 
outside of Saskatchewan are asking, why has the NDP taken on such sweeping powers as they do in this 
particular piece of legislation? Why didn’t the legislation provide for minimum exemptions? Why wasn’t it 
mentioned? Why didn’t the Minister say, for example, it is the Government’s intent to preclude those people 
involved with a half section or three quarters or whatever it was? He made no reference whatsoever, Mr. 
Speaker, to any possible exemptions under this proposed legislation. 
 
The few remarks which were made by the Minister in introducing this Bill contained a few real gems. He 
said, in effect, and I don’t recall his exact words, that the responsibilities for social policies rests with this 
Legislature and changes in those policies. Well, now surely, Mr. Speaker, the question of land tenure and 
land titles and land transfer is a major social issue and a social policy if we are going to change it. The 
Minister made that statement in bringing in a Bill that gives the Cabinet total power over making regulations 
in this regard. The fact is we are not making those decisions here in this Legislature as we should be and as 
the Minister suggested - and he is asking us to give those powers to the NDP Cabinet opposite. Now I am not 
sure whether the overall Cabinet or the inner Cabinet or the Secretariat, which of those three groups, but 
certainly it is in the hands of the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. An Act, Mr. Speaker, for example, that 
requires an Order-in-Council, and an Order-in-Council is the only way it can be done, to exclude all of the 
Canadian banks from the provisions of this particular Bill. To exclude, for example, the Farm Credit 
Corporation whose head office is not located here in Saskatchewan. These people are not allowed under the 
strict terms of this Act to mortgage land in this Province. And as I say it requires an Order-in-Council of the 
Government opposite to exempt these people from the provisions of this Bill and the Minister talks about 
making decisions here in the Legislature. 
 
The Minister made another rather amazing comment when he 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2053 

introduced this Bill and again I don’t blame the Minister because he certainly should have pulled the Bill, we 
should never have seen it and I don’t blame him for the fact that it is here. I blame the entire Government, 
the entire Cabinet, the entire caucus for the fact that this Bill is here. The Minister says there is no difference 
really between someone who owns land in Saskatchewan and resides in New York or resides in Toronto. 
What he is saying is that there is no difference between a Canadian and an American citizen. Canadian 
citizenship to Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, means nothing. Separatism is obviously not confined to 
Quebec or to British Columbia but we are now part of that happy club here in being a separatist province. At 
a time, Mr. Speaker, when most political leaders, most parties, are concerned about Canadian unity and 
Canadian identity, the Government opposite tells us in this Bill that other Canadians are foreigners here in 
Saskatchewan. That’s an unbelievable, narrow and parochial attitude that could only come from the Party 
opposite and the Members opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the introduction of this Bill and the Minister spent most of his five minute 
commentary expressing concern about the size of the farm units in Saskatchewan and the so-called corporate 
farm. Yet, he was right, and yet the Bill does nothing whatever to control this particular problem, if indeed it 
is a problem. The Bill doesn’t do one thing in this regard. If the Government is concerned about the size of 
farm units, if some of them are getting too large, surely they should say so and surely they could bring in 
legislation to deal with that question, if indeed, it is a point of concern. And while it may be a point of 
concern, that I’ll concede, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it certainly isn’t the most pressing problem facing 
Saskatchewan farmers today! If this was the concern of the Government why didn’t they bring in a Bill 
saying, or stating or prohibiting, the size of a farm from going beyond three sections or four sections or five, 
whatever they wished, or if they wished to relate size in some manner to the total assessment then there were 
ways and means to do that. 
 
It is interesting in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, that such a move to prohibit the size of farms would affect 
more of their own supporters than any other and it is for this reason I suggest that they will move very slowly 
in this particular direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am led to one conclusion only in this regard. The Bill doesn’t do what the Government 
proposes to deal with the size of farms, it doesn’t in any way relate to foreign ownership. It relates, as I say, 
to an anti-Canadian concept and that’s the biggest concern I have about it. I believe that the NDP have 
blundered and blundered badly in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, in bringing it in and then in turn proposing to deal 
with it by way of a legislative committee. May I suggest to Members opposite, to the Attorney General and 
others, Mr. Speaker, that majority of 45 may look pretty good today and this winter, but I can tell you it 
won’t stand many more moves of this kind in producing a Bill like Bill No. 115. The Bill doesn’t deal with 
absentee ownership as such, and that may be a problem with farming in this Province, but it doesn’t deal 
with absentee ownership as such. It doesn’t deal with the size of the farm unit, nor does it deal with the 
so-called corporate farm, whatever kind of animal that is. And a legislative committee to consider some of 
these topics, Mr. Speaker, is something that makes a good deal of sense in my opinion, but surely it makes 
sense to set 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2054 
 

up that committee before the legislation is drafted and before the Bill is brought in here. We could set up the 
committee, have hearings around the province, determine if there is a problem, look at any possible 
suggestions that might be forthcoming by way of solution and then come back to the Legislature with a Bill 
or several Bills to try and deal with those questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier and I ask the Attorney General to get up in this debate and tell us why this 
Bill is here and I ask the Government at this time to withdraw the Bill until such time as the question is 
studied. I suggest to the Attorney General, the Minister of Health and other Cabinet Ministers here, if they 
are concerned about curbing foreign ownership of land, and I refer here to ownership of land by 
non-Canadians, I am not talking about Canadians living in other provinces, if it is found to be a problem 
surely there can be other ways and means found to control it. As an example, and I make the suggestion 
which I haven’t explored that far, but for years in this Province we have charged a higher licence fee to 
non-resident hunters coming to Saskatchewan. Now if the NDP in their wisdom decide we must discourage 
absentee American ownership of farm land, then why not consider some additional municipal levy or some 
kind of non-resident licence fee to operate a farm in Saskatchewan? I am not in favor of such a move, I am 
not personally in favor of such a move but it would seem to me that this approach would make a good deal 
more sense than tampering with the land titles and the rights of people to inherit land and own land here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing this legislation. I regret very much that the NDP have made a move that 
jeopardizes the very basic right of Canadians to own property and own property here in Saskatchewan. Again 
I ask the Attorney General to get up and let’s have the Government’s views on this Bill. Let’s have the views 
of the Cabinet as to why this legislation is here. To immediately proceed with this is to tamper with the 
traditional principles of land tenure that the Attorney General as a lawyer would certainly know goes back 
for hundreds of years in British common law. I will oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and any version there of 
it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, we heard today a speech by the Hon. Member 
for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) who I think is generally regarded as being a Member who is fair and impartial by 
all Members of the House, although he holds a particular philosophy. That has certainly been my view of the 
Hon. Member up until the speech that he gave a few minutes ago. 
 
I don’t know what a government more could do other than what it has done. When the Minister of 
Agriculture (Mr. Messer) got up at the time of second reading and said to the people of the Province of 
Saskatchewan, that here is a Bill that we introduce. He said, we are going to put this Bill to a special 
committee. We want this committee to be representative of both of the Parties in this House. We want this 
committee to travel up and down Saskatchewan to get the views of the farmers and others of our province. 
We want this committee to study other legislation in other jurisdictions. He indicated all of those things in 
his second reading speech. He said, in effect, Mr. Member for Wilkie, that the purpose of the Bill is to give a 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2055 

focal point to the discussion. He may not have used those exact words but that is, in effect, the sum and 
substance of what he said in second reading. I heard that loudly and clearly. He said the Bill would not be 
made law until the committee was finally set up and determined and its recommendations were received. 
That’s exactly what he said. He also said, to my knowledge, that he was not wedded to any of the specific 
provisions in the Bill. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— Why did they print the Bill? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Because I have said to the Member from Wilkie already, the Minister of Agriculture 
has said time and time again that the purpose of this Bill is to be the focal point, if you will the subject 
matter, of a discussion on the question of foreign corporate ownership in the Province of Saskatchewan. And 
here is the Bill as a source of discussion. Now the Member from Wilkie seems to suggest that there is 
something wrong or there is something improper for a Member of the Government or for any person of the 
Legislative Assembly to get up and to say, here is a Bill, we are telling the people of Saskatchewan that we 
are going to be having that Bill the subject matter of a debate later on in a special committee. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— If you want to debate it you could do it on a Resolution. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— We could do it by resolution. The Member from Wilkie is 100 per cent right but let 
not the Member from Wilkie say that we could not do it the way that we did it, because we can do it the 
same way and the Member from Wilkie acknowledges that. If the Member is sincere and he acknowledges 
that we could do it that way and as some Members of his Party say, that they are genuinely concerned about 
this matter of foreign ownership then he would lend his support to the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Members on this side to have this Bill and all other related matters around the topic thoroughly canvassed 
and discussed in Saskatchewan rather than making a political football out of the issue. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— And I said this in my opening remarks about the Member from Wilkie because I 
meant it and I know from our caucus our people feel the same way. I say that I am disappointed in what he 
said because the Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) has gotten up now on at least two or three 
occasions that I know of in this House, in fact I think even once before the Orders of the Day, urging the 
Government to take this topic into hand and to work to some resolution of it. I always assumed, although I 
may have been 100 per cent in error, that either the Member from Cannington or the Member from 
Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), and certainly I’ll say the Member from Cannington is the agricultural spokesman 
for the Liberal Opposition. I assumed that what he said was in effect the voice of the Liberal caucus and the 
Government assumed that, and having assumed that we said, okay, we are going to join you in your request 
to study this question of foreign ownership. Here’s a Bill as a proposal. Here is a committee that is going to 
study it as the Minister has said. Let’s get to the task and solve the problem for the people of the 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2056 
 

Province of Saskatchewan. But now the Member from Wilkie gets up and he says today, and again he says 
he doesn’t blame the Minister of Agriculture for introducing the Bill and for saying that it is going to be the 
subject matter of a review, he says he doesn’t blame the Minister of Agriculture, he blames our Leader. I can 
say to him that I don’t necessarily blame him for the tenor of his remarks today because I think the tenor was 
set by his Leader, who never was convinced that this matter is a serious matter of political discussion and 
debate in the Province of Saskatchewan. If the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) was genuinely 
concerned about this problem of foreign ownership as the Member from Cannington suggests at any rate, I 
won’t even say he indicates it’s a problem because maybe he doesn’t believe it is a problem, but he clearly 
left that impression on me and I think Saskatchewan. If the Leader of the Opposition was sincere in saying 
that this was a problem he wouldn’t have gotten on national television the day the Bill was introduced and 
tried to make big political mileage of it as he did. He wouldn’t have gotten up from his seat in the House and 
immediately taken a strip off the Minister of Agriculture about Government bureaucracy and the power that 
rests in the Government, and the power that rests in the Attorney General, if he was sincere. Because as we 
said there is no power until the Bill becomes law and we said the Bill wouldn’t become law. And we said the 
Bill wouldn’t become law until there was a committee studying it. So why does the Leader of the 
Opposition, and why does the Member from Wilkie, chastise the Government about taking powers on to 
itself when there are no powers until the Bill becomes law. 
 
Do you know why I think the Member from Wilkie and the Leader of the Opposition have said that? They 
have said it, and I say to the Member from Wilkie again if he wasn’t in the House the day that the Minister 
said his remarks perhaps he could be excused. I don’t know but I am sure that every Member in this House 
heard the Minister of Agriculture get up and say it wouldn’t become law, it would be referred to a 
committee. It is on the records clearly. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Would you try and make it clear what kind of committee. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, I say to the Member from Wilkie and I say this as fairly as I can being a 
biased politician on this side of the House. I listened carefully to every word the Minister of Agriculture said 
on this Bill because I am the next part of the step. I am just telling the Member that I am the next part of the 
scenario that the Minister of Agriculture was trying to unfold for the people of Saskatchewan about the 
committee. I am the next part of it that is why I was listening carefully because I have a resolution to propose 
to the House on this whole subject. So I was listening carefully when he said that that was the intention in 
second reading to bring in this committee. Quite clearly, I don’t know how the Member from Wilkie could 
have misinterpreted it, or the Leader of the Opposition could have misinterpreted it, unless they wanted to 
misinterpret it for purposes of political advantage. 
 
Now the Member from Wilkie says if you wanted this for discussion you could have brought this in by 
Resolution. I said, yes, and he acknowledged to me that if we wanted it for discussion we could have brought 
it in in the form of a Bill and 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2057 

turn the subject matter of the Bill over to a committee as the Minister says we are going to do and as I’ll be 
doing in a minute. We could do it that way as well. If we are going to make something the subject matter of 
debate and discussion, would not the Hon. Member from Wilkie agree with me that we would want almost 
every conceivable aspect of the topic in for debate and discussion in the Bill? Questions such as whether or 
not non-Saskatchewan but Canadian people are foreign. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— Nonsense! 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Nonsense, he says. I am not sure whether he says nonsense to the proposition or 
nonsense to the concept because I want to tell the Member from Wilkie that I am not a person who is very 
conversant in agricultural matters, but you just have to listen to the farmers. I say in the Province of 
Saskatchewan there is grave concern about non-Saskatchewan Canadian owners owning land in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. That may not require legislation but that’s the way I read it and I read that there should be 
some debate on this. There should be some discussion on it. The committee may not recommend that and the 
Government may not accept the recommendation one way or the other, but let it not be said by the Member 
from Wilkie that this Government is anti-Canadian or anti-business or anti-farmers because we are seeking 
to have this Bill the subject matter of a committee discussion, something the Minister of Agriculture has said 
all along in his second reading speech. 
 
The Member from Wilkie asks why did the Government bring in this Bill. If I haven’t made myself clear 
now then I will never make myself clear to the Liberal Party opposite. Sometimes I am convinced that I 
never will. The Member from Tisdale, the Minister of Agriculture, and I repeat again the thrust of his 
remarks. The purpose of this Bill is to put forward a subject that can be the subject of debate and study and 
consequent recommendations by a Standing Committee or Special Committee of this House, the basis of 
which could be possible legislation at the earliest opportunity available by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
That is in effect the purpose. 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Milestone):— The Bill . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— What does the Member from Milestone say the purpose of the Bill is? 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Exactly what the Bill says. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— The Member from Milestone says the purpose is exactly what the Bill says. We say 
that it isn’t, we outlined the purpose, but the Member from Milestone doesn’t accept that. He doesn’t accept 
that, the Member from Wilkie doesn’t accept that, his Leader doesn’t accept that. I ask all the people of 
Saskatchewan when I get up in my position and the Minister of Agriculture, we may be politicians, but 
surely there has got to be some onus of responsibility on it that even you people would grudgingly admit. I 
tell the people of Saskatchewan the purpose is to have it a subject matter of debate. The Member from 
Milestone says, No, and the Leader of the Opposition. Why? I’ll tell you why again. Because you boys don’t 
want to study this matter seriously. I am afraid you want to make it a 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2058 
 

political issue. I say to the Member from Milestone, the Land Bank is . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— You are putting the cart before the horse. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— The cart before the horse. Well, I am sorry I can’t explain to the Member from 
Milestone because he is either incapable or unwilling of understanding what the position of the Government 
is. I say again to the people of this Province that the purpose of this Bill is, as has been stated by the 
Minister, the purpose of the Government was to work around this Bill and other issues and other briefs to 
find the solution of what we considered to be a problem of foreign ownership, corporate ownership in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. We assume that is a problem that all the people of all Saskatchewan agree it’s a 
major issue. I think even some of the more thoughtful ones in the front benches would see that to be an issue, 
the Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) the thoughtful 
ones, and the Member from Morse (Mr. Wiebe), they would agree that that is an issue. Now if you say that’s 
an issue, and we say that to you sincerely, then join hands with it to solve the problem or try to find the 
solution which can be made up in recommendations to be an issue. 
 
Now I don’t want to discuss any of the other substantive portions of the proposed Bill because the Minister 
of Agriculture says it is to be subject of a final study by a committee. Intersessional committees although 
they are partisan and political in nature are committees that have done a good job. The Member from 
Lumsden (Mr. Lane) is either inexperienced or unable to understand that. And I think probably both. 
 
MR. LANE:— Put it with the Land Bank. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— The simple fact of the matter is, No. With respect to the Land Bank we were clearly 
elected on that issue of the Land Bank. We got a mandate on the Land Bank and we are proceeding with the 
Land Bank because we held hearings with the people of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Agriculture met 
thousands of farmers and knows their views and it comes in as Government policy as a matter of legislation. 
We did not campaign on the foreign issue and if we did the Minister said in second reading it is his intention 
to hand the matter to a committee. Now you people say it should be referred to a committee and we ask you 
to join with us in that task to make sure that we have got the best possible legislation on foreign ownership 
and corporate ownership that the Province of Saskatchewan can have to meet this very pressing and 
important problem. And I say to the Members opposite that surely we can bury our political differences in 
the resolution of that problem. I am sure that those Members of the committee on our side will be prepared 
to do that. We had strong differences over the Family Farm Protection but the committee worked well. 
Everybody acknowledges that. This Committee can also do the same job very well. I am inviting the Liberal 
Party to join with us in that stated task by the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move an amendment to the motion made by the Minister 
of Agriculture, seconded by the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy): 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2059 

 
That all the words after the word "that" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 
Bill No. 115 be not now read a second time but that the subject matter of this Bill be referred to the 
Special Committee on Ownership of Agricultural Lands being composed of Messers: Kowalchuk, 
Owens, Meakes, Pepper, Carlson, Tchorzewski, Hanson, Kaeding, Weatherald, MacLeod and 
Wiebe; 

 
That such Committee be directed to investigate the effects of the purchase and ownership of 
agricultural lands by non-resident, foreign and corporate persons; 

 
That such Committee will have power to sit during the intersessional period and during any 
Legislative Session, except when the Assembly is sitting, and that notwithstanding Section 58 of the 
Legislative Assembly Act (Chapter 3 R.S.S. 1965 as amended) allowances and expenses shall be 
paid to Members of the Committee when sitting during a period of adjournment of any Session, at 
the same rate as prescribed in the said section of the Act; 

 
That such Committee will have power to send for persons, papers and records, and to examine 
witnesses under oath; to receive representations from interested parties and from members of the 
general public, and for this purpose to hold meetings away from the seat of Government in order that 
the fullest representation may be received without unduly inconveniencing those desiring to be 
heard; 

 
And that this Special Committee be further instructed to submit its final report to the Assembly with 
all convenient speed. 

 
Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate this is the amendment which clearly says that the Bill will not 
be read a second time, but as the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) said the subject matter of it will be 
referred to the special committee. I invite the Members opposite to join those of us here who have indicated 
an intention to work on an agricultural committee from our side, to look at this problem. If they dissent, they 
dissent, if they join us in recommendations, they join us in recommendations. But the point being is that all 
Saskatchewan farmers will be the benefactors of a good work done by a good committee on this very vital 
and important issue of foreign ownership that the Government is most concerned about. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. C. McISAAC (Wilkie):— Mr. Speaker, just a few words on the amendment and a few words in 
reply to some of the comments of the Attorney General. I have never heard my friend the Attorney General 
put up such a weak defence for such an iniquitous piece of legislation as we are dealing with today. 
Certainly, there are a dozen different ways that the Government can bring the question of foreign ownership, 
and whether or not it’s a problem, to the attention of this House and to the attention of farmers. They can go 
to the farm groups, they can go to the Farmers’ Union, the Federation of Agriculture, they can hold meetings 
all over the province. There are a dozen things. They can bring out a White Paper as the Minister did on the 
Land Bank. And I ask you 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2060 
 

again and nobody has yet told us, why they brought in this legislation and then chickened out and decided to 
set up a committee to study it throughout the summer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister introduced this Bill, and I quote from Hansard, he said: 
 

It is our intention to appoint a Select Committee to consider the question of foreign ownership . . . 
 
That doesn’t tell us one thing. A Select Standing Committee, a Special Committee, an Intersessional 
Committee, good God knows, it could be a committee selected from his office, for all we know. He didn’t 
really tell us what kind of committee and I asked him at the time. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— He doesn’t know. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— What kind of committee is he talking about? He certainly could have told us then. And 
again I repeat, the Minister didn’t really know what he was doing except they had decided at the last moment 
to refer this to a committee. They were scared of the issue. They realized they had stirred up a hornet’s nest, 
when you start talking in Saskatchewan about the rights of people to have title to their land. And that’s what 
this Bill interferes with. Up to now it says, whether it’s my land in Battleford or Unity or yours in Saskatoon, 
I, Roy Romanow or Cliff McIsaac will have title to whatever the piece of land is. Now, it is going to say 
whether or not you can sell it to a Saskatchewan resident or not. And that is the first time in hundreds of 
years that the title rights have been interfered with to the extent that this Bill proposes. And don’t Members 
opposite think for a minute that farmers are not going to be really shaken over this piece of legislation 
regardless of what happens. Regardless of what this committee recommends and what this committee brings 
in . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— A Federal election. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— . . . I am sure that the subject matter being discussed in this committee will bring out 
some good points throughout the summer. But it has been jeopardized already by the Government telling the 
people of their basic intentions to get hold of more land for the Land Bank and people are not going to forget 
the threat to land ownership in this Province. And for that reason, the committee when they do hold hearings 
throughout the province, isn’t going to get the proper feeling, it isn’t going to get a good feeling of the 
farmers because they are afraid of this Government. They are afraid of a government that in three days would 
bring in three such pieces of legislation, the Land Bank, the Succession Duties and this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest again and reiterate again that they moved in reverse, they have moved backwards, 
they have made a blunder and a blunder that is going to cost them not only the next provincial election but it 
is going to cost them seats in the next federal election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture):— Mr. Speaker, never have we 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2061 

heard in this House such a despicable attempt to make a political issue out of a Bill that is concerned about 
the transfer of farm land in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. McDONALD:— It is a political issue. 
 
MR. MESSER:— You are making the political issue. The Hon. Member for Wilkie says that the Attorney 
General made a weak defence in regard to what we were presenting in this Bill. He tried to leave the opinion 
with the Members of this House and the people of Saskatchewan that we got weak and we chickened out 
when we introduced that Bill. And in order to substantiate that, he takes out of my speech on second reading, 
out of context, one short sentence in order to try and build up his defence in regard to what they are trying to 
do. I’d like to read a little more out of that speech so that I can clarify once and for all for the Members 
opposite and for the people of Saskatchewan what I said when I brought in this Bill and gave second reading 
to it. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is our intention to appoint a Select Committee to consider the questions of foreign 
ownership and corporate ownership of agricultural lands. 

 
At that point the Member for Wilkie stops. I should like to go on. 
 

The committee will be concerned with agricultural lands and not lands that are within the boundaries 
of incorporated towns and villages and cities. The committee will travel about the province in a 
preplanned series of meetings to hear briefs from interested citizens on the matter of foreign and 
corporate ownership of land. Legal counsel will be attached to the committee. If it believes that such 
a venture would be a wise use of its time and its resources, the committee may choose to visit some 
of the adjoining States along the United States - Canada border which already have some active 
legislation respecting the ownership and corporate ownership of farm land. In the course of the 
meetings, the committee will be holding in Saskatchewan, the opinions of people, people of 
Saskatchewan will be brought to light. And the final form that the legislation respecting foreign and 
corporate ownership will take and reflect the views and the concerns of our residents in this 
Province. 

 
That’s what I said on second reading, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— I’d like to further quote to remind the Members opposite who appear to be deaf. And I 
quote: 
 

I expect that briefs will be presented not only by individuals but also by farm organizations and I feel 
certain by local Chambers of Commerce and other civic organizations that will recognize, recognize 
clearly the importance of stabilizing populations in rural Saskatchewan to provide the economic 
basis for the survival of towns and the social basis for thriving church communities, social leisure 
organizations and the like. 

 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2062 
 

I went on to further state, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In fact, I think it will be the case that they will lay down and give us recommendations that will be 
needed in regard to the Orders-in-Council and the regulations that will have to be passed pertaining 
to this Legislation, saying to those people, Mr. Speaker, that we are not by any means conclusively 
decided in our minds that we are going to pass regulations or legislation without contacting and 
conferring with farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 
I further quoted, Mr. Speaker: 
 

It is fully expected that through the series of meetings, the briefs that they will be receiving during 
their discussion of the proposed legislation, that amendments will be forthcoming, amendments that 
will be attached to this Act at a later debate. 

 
I closed, Mr. Speaker, if I may quote again, by saying: 
 

This will give us the opportunity to look at the people who are domiciled in Saskatchewan and make 
exemption for those that we think are not domiciled here but are not in any way restricting or causing 
hardship in regard to the transfers of land in the Province of Saskatchewan. That will be the job of 
the committee and that is why in the Bill we have a number of regulations that the committee, I 
think, will be discussing at their hearings and with the people of Saskatchewan who will be 
presenting briefs to them. In regard to designating the number of acres or the value of land holdings 
in the province that should be exempt, in regard to classifying non-resident persons, in regard to 
exempting non-resident persons, it may well be that after the committee has finished its hearings in 
the province, that some of the things that we are now suggesting in the regulations may, in fact, 
become legislation. 

 
On three or four occasions, I attempted with all the clarity possible to try and define what we are doing by 
bringing this Bill in at this time, then structuring a committee to go to the people of Saskatchewan to find 
what amendments it should contain and what it should contain in the regulations and the Orders-in-Council. 
 
Now the Hon. Member from Wilkie tries to tell us that I didn’t tell them anything in the second reading of 
that Bill, that they didn’t know what we were doing with the Bill. I ask him, how much clearer could it be 
than what I have already again read into the record regarding my second reading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was one other reason we brought this Bill to the Legislature at this time and that was so 
that we would not have a situation developing in the province if we did it by motion by those people who 
were are concerned about that are in fact foreign or corporate ownerships of land and not situated or based in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. I think even the Members opposite will have to agree with me that if we 
brought in a motion saying we were going to, in the next six months or year, discuss the foreign and 
corporate ownership of land in the Province of Saskatchewan without something that gave 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2063 

us an opportunity to make it retroactive, that in many cases, these people would spend that six months or that 
year purchasing more land n the Province of Saskatchewan and create more problems for our rural and 
smaller communities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— These are the reasons we brought in the Bill and I would again try to tell them, Mr. 
Speaker, that it was clear as to what our intentions were at that time and I ask them to accept and support the 
amendment now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McISAAC:— On a Point of Order is the Member closing debate? This is his third speech on this. 
 
MR. MESSER:— I am speaking to the amendment. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— I see. I just wanted to make it clear. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— The amendment and the subject matter of the Bill is referred - in the amendment is the 
subject matter of the Bill so it does make it difficult to restrict speeches of those who have spoken before 
such as the Minister of Agriculture and the Member from Wilkie - both have spoken on the Bill and both 
have spoken on the amendment. So it is difficult when the subject matter is referred to because it leaves it 
fairly wide open. So the debate is on both the motion as originally moved and the amendment that the 
subject matter be referred to a committee. 
 
MR. T. L. HANSON (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of this Bill. When I went 
home last weekend, I was completely overwhelmed by the response to this Bill. And I want to, at this time, 
thank the Liberal Party for giving us the Press coverage that we needed to expose this situation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON:— When Hume Farms started to purchase land around the Fillmore area, our people of that 
community sat back on their hands and said nothing. Only three years later did they start to realize that the 
problem existed. Then Bole Land Company came into the picture and started purchasing large blocks of 
land. Still our people didn’t get up in arms. Only a few of us radical socialists raised the red flag and said, 
"Look out boys, we’re in trouble in this community." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON:— I attended a party on Saturday night and I had about 20 people up in arms, either for it or 
against it but they are talking about it, they are thinking about it. And I doubt whether we could have got the 
same response if we had introduced a nice little resolution onto the Order Paper and 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2064 
 

said we might study it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON:— Our committee when it goes out this summer will get decent representation, well thought 
out representation, because people will be kicking this idea around in their head for the next two months. 
 
MR. LANE:— They’ll be kicking something. 
 
MR. HANSON:— Right, they may be kicking you guys out completely, Federally. The Members opposite 
said they didn’t know what we intended to do with this Bill. We asked them to give us the names of three 
Members to sit on an intersessional committee and one of the terms of references that I mentioned was that 
we would be studying corporate ownership. Now if this doesn’t tell you people over there something you 
better wake up because we want this thing discussed to the fullest extent and the only way that you can get it 
discussed to the fullest extent is to introduce a radical Bill right now that wakes up the thoughts of everybody 
in this Province. They say we are backing up. We are not backing up, we introduced this to get the response 
that we are now getting from the people of this Province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. T. M. WEATHERALD (Cannington):— Mr. Speaker, I have been looking back at what the Minister 
said in the remarks and I think if we did not understand what his intentions were, I think there was good 
reason why we didn’t. First of all, I would suggest to the Minister that he has taken a bad approach to what is 
a problem that deserves discussion. And I suggested in the initial state, Mr. Speaker, when the legislation 
was tabled in this Assembly, at no time was a statement given or anything to the Press, and I am not 
suggesting statements should be made out of the House, but I am suggesting . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Not about you, Tom. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD:— No, no, you’re not in trouble with me, not yet. What should have been done, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll offer this to the Minister because I think this is what should have been done, is the Bill 
should have been introduced to the House along with a clear-cut statement at the time when the first reading 
was given of this Bill, that he intended to set up a special committee of the Legislature to look into it. 
Because when I look into his remarks, it says here: 
 

It’s fully expected that through the series of meetings, the briefs that will be received during their 
discussion of the proposed legislation and amendments will be forthcoming, amendments that will be 
attached to this Act at a later date. 

 
At no time did we have an indication on this side, at no time did the people of Saskatchewan, and those who 
are concerned about this Act who lived outside of Saskatchewan, have the indication that this Bill would not 
be passed and that we would 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2065 

not have a committee set up after the Bill was passed, similar to the situation of The Family Farm Protection 
Act. And you say a Special Committee and in the rule book there is no such thing as a Special Committee, 
it’s a Select Committee of the Legislature. And I must say that I was listening very closely to the remarks 
that day and the remarks that he made at no time indicated to us or I’m sure to the general public of 
Saskatchewan that a committee of the Legislature was going to be set up before this Act was passed and I am 
sure that many people throughout Canada and throughout Saskatchewan were led to believe that we would 
have this Act passed and at a later time a committee would investigate it and bring back a report. In other 
words, a similar situation to what we had under The Family Farm Protection Act, an Act which was passed 
and which later was investigated by a committee of the Legislature. And I am sure that this was interpreted 
by the Members on this side in that respect and it was interpreted by the people throughout the country in 
that respect. 
 
MR. MESSER:— Because of your statements. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD:— No, no, it wasn’t. It was your statements when you gave second reading. It’s right 
there. Your statement is right here in black and white. And I don’t think we made any statements on having 
hearings. We didn’t have the faintest idea in the world that you were going to have any. 
 
As for statements of my own on this subject, I think they are quite clear and I haven’t changed my mind and 
it is shared by my colleagues and that is, that as far as foreign ownership is concerned, that there should be 
some restrictions placed on American ownership. In this respect, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that my 
statement of last summer is very clear on the record for anyone who wishes to read it. I favored some 
restriction on American ownership and I still do today, but I didn’t favor and I don’t today, starting to talk 
about our fellow Canadians as foreigners. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEATHERALD:— When we start talking about people who live in Virden, Manitoba or 
Lloydminster, Alberta or Calgary or Winnipeg on the question of Canadians being foreigners, Mr. Speaker, I 
and the Party opposite part company very rapidly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEATHERALD:— So I want to make it clear for once and for all that I favor some controls on 
American ownership, and I have for some time and it is no secret. But I do not favor the action of the Party 
opposite drafting a Bill and having the American people, people who live in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, all over Canada, and calling them all foreigners and putting the same restrictions on them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, having said that I suggest to the Government because it is still not too late, that there are 
three distinct problems here that should be dealt with and they should be dealt with in three distinct Bills. 
First of all, they should be dealt with as a separate situation and separate problem as 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2066 
 

corporate ownership in agriculture. And that committee should deal carefully as to any suggestions regarding 
corporate ownership and that should be a separate Bill and no attempt should be made to lump it in with 
what are three distinct problems. 
 
There are three problems in this Bill. The Government has tried to put forward their views in one Bill when 
it should be three different separate situations dealt with on that basis. They have tried to talk about 
American ownership, or foreign ownership, if you want to call it that. They have tried to talk about corporate 
ownership and they have tried to talk about Canadian ownership. Each one of those are three distinct 
problems that should be dealt with in three distinct ways. And when they bring that type of legislation to the 
Legislature we will be most prepared to discuss it and debate it with them. 
 
But the Party opposite, Mr. Speaker, has tried to lump all of these into one Bill and they have totally 
confused the whole issue as far as most of the public is concerned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggest therefore what the Minister of Agriculture should have done is that if he wanted 
to put forward his views he should have put out a White Paper, not a piece of legislation like this. He should 
have put forward a White Paper suggesting what his views were and let the public of Saskatchewan discuss 
it for the next five or six months. If there is a Special Session in the fall, then it would be very, very 
appropriate that that legislation be brought in in August or whenever the Special Session be here. I am sure 
that the report can be drafted and discussed by that particular time. I think what the Minister should have 
done was set forward his views on a White Paper for the discussion of the public and that committee could 
deal with those views and be presented to the Legislature probably this August or September or when the 
next Session of the Legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that what are serious problems for the people of Saskatchewan have been 
fantastically mishandled by the Government opposite. We hope that this will be corrected in the future. I 
think many of the legitimate concerns that have been expressed regarding Canadians - and I am not talking 
about Americans, I am talking about Canadians, Mr. Speaker. I am talking about our aunts, uncles, brothers 
and sisters who happen to live in another province - the concern that this may have caused them is 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because the Government opposite did not need to bring in this type of legislation 
against fellow Canadian citizens. 
 
We all talk about Separatism in Quebec, but it appears that the Government opposite just wants to put up a 
barrier around the little island of Saskatchewan so you can’t get in or out. I will certainly part company on 
the aspects of this Bill on a Canadian aspect. 
 
I will share, Mr. Speaker, and I have never made any bones about it, I will share their concern as expressed 
in this Bill regarding American ownership. I say that quite unequivocally. I share that concern regarding 
American ownership as far as agricultural land is concerned. I have expressed that concern for a number of 
years and I continue to express it, but I cannot in any sense of the matter, lump Canadians in with American 
citizens. That will be a very sorry day that we shall not continue to recognize our brothers who live across 
this country as 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2067 

a national unit that is ours regardless of whether we live in Ontario, British Columbia or Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I will therefore conclude my remarks. I think I have made my position clear to the Members 
opposite and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, just one small Point of Order if I might. He said that the rules have no 
mention - and I am not sure whether he used the word Special Committee or Select Committee. But I direct 
the attention of the House to Rule 87, Sub (1), Sub (2) which quite clearly sets out Select Committees, 
Standing Special Committees and composition thereof. Page 44 and 45 in the Rules and I think generally 
known by the Members. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD:— On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. His remarks referred to a Select Committee. 
The words in the book on page 44 refers to a Select Standing Committee. When you talk about a Select 
Committee I don’t know whether you are talking about the Members of the Legislature or a committee 
appointed by your group. If that isn’t legitimate to you it certainly is to me because when you talk about 
Select Committee I don’t know who you are talking about. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill No. 
110 - An Act to facilitate the Acquisition and Disposition of Farm Land in Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. K. R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park):— Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned debate yesterday, the Hon. 
Member from Turtleford constituency (Mr. Feduniak) promised that he would deliver to me a copy of his 
speech and I wish to acknowledge that he has done so, and I appreciate it. 
 
One thing that this should not do, but may well do, is descend into a debate on figures, numbers and 
percentages, and all the rest. Because then it will very likely descend into a confusion of the people of 
Saskatchewan. This is the direction that we shall be going if we follow the direction of the Hon. Member for 
Turtleford. I do not in any way agree with his figures and his figures do not coincide with the facts. 
 
One of the problems about his "realistic" example is that his calculations are correct if his figures are correct, 
but his figures are wrong. He starts off by suggesting, for example, (talking about the purchase of land) that 
by purchasing land at $100 per acre it would cost so many dollars. And he said if the interest rate was 10 per 
cent, then the interest would amount to a certain amount. Of course, the mathematics is not difficult. The 
problem is, however, that 10 per cent is by no means a realistic price to pay for money on the mortgage 
market today. 
 
I talked yesterday, by telephone, to some lenders. The two major lenders on farm land in this area are the 
Farm Credit Corporation and Sherwood Credit Union. Now the Farm Credit Corporation is, today, lending 
money to mortgagors to purchase land at 7 per cent. I don’t know that it helps us at all to be 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2068 
 

discussing a figure of 10 per cent if the figure in fact is 7 per cent. 
 
MR. M. FEDUNIAK (Turtleford):— On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker. I know what I was speaking 
about and I should like to point out to the Hon. Member . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! That is not a Point of Privilege. 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— If I may continue. I talked to the Farm Credit Corporation and they tell me that the rate 
of interest on mortgages for the purchase of land today is 7 per cent. I spoke to the Manager of Sherwood 
Credit Union Limited and he said that they are quite prepared to lend money today on the purchase of farm 
land at 9 per cent. And he said included in that 9 per cent is life insurance on the first $10,000 of money lent. 
 
The Hon. Member for Turtleford goes on and talks about a rate of 10 per cent. He could easily have talked 
about 20 per cent, 30 per cent or 40 per cent, because the figures that he talked about have no relation to 
reality. He then talks about what you would do if you kept all your money and invested it in the Credit Union 
at 8 per cent. 
 
Now the fact is that the Credit Union doesn’t give 8 per cent on its deposits, when it lends money at 9 per 
cent. So all the figures and the mathematics are correct provided the foundation is correct, and the 
foundation is wrong. What has happened is this. The Provincial Government can borrow money, long-term 
money, at 8 to 8½ per cent. This was admitted by the Premier. They are prepared, according to the Minister 
of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), to lend money in effect - that is, they will buy land and lend the land - at 7 per 
cent, which means that for the purposes of rental they are prepared to subsidize the rental of farm land to the 
tune of at least 1 per cent per annum. 
 
When they are going to sell land, however, they should - if they are properly comparing the purchase with 
the rental situation - use actual and exact figures. And if you are going to sell land surely to goodness you 
could sell it either at 7 per cent or at the most, 8 per cent, or you could go to the Farm Credit Corporation or 
Sherwood Credit Union and get it at 7 or 9 per cent. None of the figures involved come close to the 10 per 
cent figure discussed yesterday by the Hon. Member for Turtleford. 
 
What is happening is this, that the Government is deliberately reducing the rental, in the earlier years at least, 
to bring about an acceptance of their plan. They want to subsidize the plan on a rental basis for a few years 
until they get it accepted, in principle, and get the people over the initial shock; and to show how good it is 
they exaggerate the figures and the expense that it would cost when you buy the land. 
 
I complain a little, perhaps I should complain a lot, about the subsidy of rental when it comes to renting to 
people, but I complain a good deal when people talk about an exaggerated figure, which they do when it 
comes to purchasing. It indicates to me, however, that they set about deliberately off onto two 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2069 

policies. Policy No. 1. They do not intend to sell the land and therefore they are going to subsidize the rental 
to avoid the necessity of selling the land. Policy No. 2. To make it look even better they are going to 
exaggerate the figures and the cost and the expense to the farmer if he were to buy the land. 
 
It indicates to me also the extent to which the Waffle element has taken control of the Party opposite. What 
is happening, Mr. Speaker, is very simple. The Succession Duty Act, the Land Bank, the Limitation of 
Ownership of Land are all a part of a plan to convert the ownership of farm land from the people of 
Saskatchewan to the Government of Saskatchewan. It is a package policy. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— It’s not a Communist plan. 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— No, not a Communist plot. It’s all a conspiracy by the Minister of Agriculture, by the 
Waffle element and the Hon. Attorney General. The whole works of them. It is a plan, it is a package deal to 
convert the ownership of land from people to the Government. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Who wrote that? 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— Well, I think the Bill was written by some person working out of the back door of the 
office of the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Do you think the Premier wrote it? 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— Not a bit. I think that Bill was written by the Waffle element of the Party across the 
way. 
 
Now the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) wants the oil industry nationalized. The Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson) proudly announces the sale of a large permit to Shell of Canada, a 
multi-national corporation. So what is happening is this. While the Agriculture Minister is playing around 
with the farm lands of Saskatchewan, his Minister of Mineral Resources is busily selling out the natural 
resources of our country, all against the wishes of the Member for Saskatoon University. 
 
We should like to present here a valid proposal, an alternative to the proposition put forth in the Land Bank. 
We have decided that we must - as we did with the Burns Plant - give you all the assistance possible. I now 
am prepared, probably I shouldn’t do it, but I am prepared to do this, I am prepared to help you fellows out, 
because the Liberal Party here wants to act in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. So if I can 
help the plan out, we are unselfishly prepared to do so. We recommend that the Government guarantee loans 
for the purchase of farm lands. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— As simple as that. To begin with you would get the 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2070 
 

interest a lot lower than the figures indicated by the Hon. Member for Turtleford (Mr. Feduniak). It would be 
a lot cheaper. Secondly, it wouldn’t cost the Government nearly so much money. The only money that you 
would actually have to put out, apart from the money that a few inspectors would cost to make sure that 
these things are done properly, would be the cost of making good any guarantees. If anybody ever defaulted, 
the Government would make good the guarantee, by taking over the land. So therefore, in place of the money 
paid out, it would have the land, presumably at fair market prices. It wouldn’t cost you a dime. This is the 
"Weatherald Plan." I think we should congratulate Mr. Weatherald, the Hon. Member from Cannington for 
his foresight and his wisdom in working out a plan for the Government. You are welcome to it, you can take 
all the credit you like, put it into effect. So what you would do is create the situation that you are seeking to 
create. If you are honestly trying to facilitate the transfer of land, then that’s the way to do it. 
 
This is a plan to facilitate the acquisition and disposition of farm land in Saskatchewan. That’s the headnote 
to the Bill, An Act to facilitate the Acquisition and Disposition of Farm Land in Saskatchewan. Obviously, 
disposition refers to the Government, because it has no intention of disposing of the land. But if you are 
sincere, in trying to pass land from father to son, from neighbor to neighbor, the very easiest way to go about 
it is to guarantee the loan of the purchaser. You will save money and you will save administration costs and 
you will create stability in our farm economy by having people who actually own their own property. As a 
matter of fact you would lower your administration costs. You are prepared to spend $640,000 to spend $10 
million on farm land, 6.4 per cent - for every $100 spent in land, $6.40 goes for the Government 
administration - 6.4 per cent, the highest possible cost. Anybody in the country can buy land for a fraction of 
that, including the lawyers’ fees. The only people more expensive than the lawyers are the Government, 
several times over. 
 
I am suggesting that the Government should let people make their own decisions. Owners will make their 
own decision on what they plant, how they farm the land, but the booklet put out by the Government 
indicates very clearly that there will be some sort of supervisory role by the Government. The eye of big 
brother will tell the people what to farm, how to farm it, what to grow, and presumably when to take it off. 
They will do so all on the strength of a yearly lease. I say that this is a yearly lease, that’s all it is. You are 
providing the people, you are providing the farmers, with a one-year lease. That’s all it is. The Hon. Member 
said, the Liberals do not believe in security for the farmers. Is it security to give a one-year lease when 
people have not the knowledge that they will be there a year later? Now remember, that’s all it is. When you 
have the right to fix the rent annually, as you are doing, what you are doing is creating a yearly lease. It 
doesn’t matter what the fine print says, the fine print can say a year or a lifetime or 20 years, that’s all it is, a 
one-year lease. As far as I can see you are placing a potential threat to our farm economy, and rural 
depopulation the like of which we have never seen. 
 
We believe in retaining a farm population. It won’t be done by creating a population of tenant farmers. Our 
position is clear. What you should do is do everything possible to 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2071 

facilitate the purchase of farm land at reasonable prices, at reasonable interest rates, to our farm population. 
If you do that you will find a lot of support in places that you don’t have support now. The way this Bill is 
drafted reminds me of what Sherlock Holmes said about Watson one day. He said, "Watson you have done 
everything wrong although you have hit upon the right method." Well, I don’t think that you are looking 
even at the right method and as a consequence, with much regret, you are not facilitating the transfer, the 
acquisition or the disposition of land, you are facilitating the purchase by the Government, the retention by 
the Government of the farm land of Saskatchewan and all the while our natural resources are going 
elsewhere. If you were to guarantee the loans, as I have suggested, you could take the $10 million, you could 
spend the money in the oil industry. If you want to nationalize the oil industry, you have an ample 
opportunity today to take $10 million, play in the oil fields for a year or two, see how you like it and see how 
you make out. But in the meantime don’t bother to use this money to purchase land which the farmers won’t 
accept. I am suggesting to you that you are making a big mistake. The Bill is badly drawn, badly conceived 
by a Government which shouldn’t be in its place and, therefore, I will oppose the Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FEDUNIAK:— I should like to ask the Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) a question. 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— I shall be glad to answer it. 
 
MR. FEDUNIAK:— I should like to ask the Member how many young farmers have been turned down in 
Saskatchewan by the Farm Credit Corporation whose interest is available at seven per cent and had to go and 
purchase land by getting money through the Credit Unions not only at 10 per cent but also at 11 per cent. If 
he can’t answer it I’ll tell him. It’s shameful. 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— I am quite prepared to answer that in this fashion. All those people who fit within the 
terms of his example, that is he’s got 960 acres - one third of these 960 acres he’s got summer fallowed each 
year, leaving 640 to be cropped. Now this 640 acres he says yield 40 bushels of wheat per acre; that’s what 
he has suggested. Now I am telling you there isn’t a farmer in the whole country that gets 40 bushels an acre 
year in and year out . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! If the Member agrees to permit a question, he should answer the question 
and not develop another speech. 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— I am telling him which . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— I have allowed a lot of leeway on this but I think we are getting away from leeway. 
 
MR. MacLEOD:— Now I want to tell the Hon. Member that not one of the people who farm the kind of 
land described in his example has 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2072 
 

ever been turned down by the Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
MR. J. G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to take up an argument of the 
Member from Albert Park. He referred to the desire of farm people to make their own decisions with respect 
to land tenure. I agree. However, a fundamental blindness on the part of the Liberals prevents them from 
realizing that in a capitalist society as it exists today, one cannot achieve independence by acting purely as 
individuals. Farmers have learned that through the New Democratic Party and through the farm movement. 
For generations they have worked to achieve power collectively through collective organization. The Land 
Bank is a manifestation of the desire of farm people to make their own decisions, to experiment with a new 
land tenure system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this juncture, we have before us the most significant piece of legislation of this Session, I 
will support it, as does the Waffle in principle. I have introduced explicitly the position of the Waffle on this 
legislation. I would like to table a document, a Land Bank statement sponsored by the Waffle Agriculture 
Committee and released at a Press conference held this morning. Membership of the Waffle Agricultural 
Committee, consists of Bev Curry, Orland Beach, John Gordon and Don Mitchell. I would like to table their 
document for the edification of the Legislature. 
 
I do not introduce the Waffle into the debate in a spirit of acrimony, in an attempt to deny credit to the 
Government for this legislation. There are, however, important historical facts which Members on both 
sides, Mr. Speaker, must understand. In 1934, the CCF program advocated public ownership of land. Since 
then, the idea remained dormant until the late 1960s. It was a significant contribution, of those who worked 
in the 1970 Waffle campaign for the leadership of the Saskatchewan NDP, to have reintroduced and 
reactivated the idea of public land ownership - in the form of the Land Bank - and achieved acceptability for 
the idea not only within the New Democratic Party but among the public at large. Credit is due to those 
people and it is with humility that I speak today on their behalf. I was not here at that time. It was not I who 
fought the struggle to popularize the Land Bank program and now that we have before us the legislative 
beginnings of the program, legislation whose detail I shall criticize in due course, we should give credit to 
those who pioneered this reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank addresses itself to a serious and tragic problem in rural Saskatchewan. It is easy 
for any politician, or economist, to come up with statistics to show that rural Saskatchewan, as we have 
known it for generations past in terms of the individual family farm, is verging on collapse. Policies to 
defend it that are based, as are those of the Members opposite, an old shibboleths about the sacredness of 
private ownership of farm land, about the adequacy of the Farm Credit Corporation, are doomed to failure. 
The Weatherald "scheme" which argues that what needs to be done is to increase credit available for land 
purchases - to create a provincial equivalent of the Federal Farm Credit Corporation - that scheme requires 
about five seconds of thought to elaborate, and another five seconds to realize its total inadequacy. It is not 
an alternative, Mr. Speaker. 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2073 

There are two ways in which to organize our thinking about the collapse of rural Saskatchewan. We can, on 
the one hand, talk about income problems - the absolute level of per operator net income which plummeted 
below $3,000 in 1970, the erratic fluctuations of farm income which prevent the creation of stable 
expectations upon which to build stable life styles, and thirdly, a point not sufficiently discussed, the 
growing income inequality in the farm community. Whatever the abuses committed in the name of the 
United States Homestead Acts and the Dominion Land Acts, they embodied a concept of equality - by giving 
equal portions of land to each settler. Mr. Speaker, I should like to quote from The Reconnaissance Survey 
of Agricultural Extension Division No. 8, a study on farm unit size which has recently been released. I quote 
briefly from page 4: 
 

Even though the average acreage per unit covered was around the 1,000 acre mark, the largest 
number of units fall into the three and four quarter size. This comes about because a few extremely 
large units bring the average up drastically. There are about 15 per cent of all units that are about one 
half section or smaller . . . 

 
What this report is indicating, and I don’t have to give any formal statistical index of it, is the growing 
disparity of farm size. By permitting a few very large farms and a number of very small farms, we are 
consequently destroying the homogeneity of our rural society. If that trend continues, Mr. Speaker, it will 
destroy any kind of progressive community in Saskatchewan. 
 
Having mentioned certain income problems, Mr. Speaker, there are on the other hand, demographic aspects 
of the farm problem. First, the age distribution with its unnatural skew. Given the high average age of 
farmers and the consequently large number who will have to retire in the next decade, there is an obvious 
need to facilitate the efficient transfer of land from one generation to the next, if we are to maintain, let alone 
increase, the number of rural farm units. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also give the statistics relating to the continuous decline in the number of Saskatchewan 
farm units since the 1930s. Politicians have talked about the decline endlessly. They have advocated one 
agricultural reform after another. But if we are honest, whether we are CCF or Liberal, we will allow that, to 
date, nobody, I repeat nobody, has been able to reverse this trend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Waffle supports in principle the Land Bank. How could it be otherwise since it was via the 
Waffle that the idea was re-introduced into the Party and gained its acceptance? However, more specifically, 
what are the principles the Land Bank should embody? 
 
1. The Land Bank should be conceived as a new land tenure system and not merely as the introduction 
of another financial instrument into the land market. There is always a temptation to reduce a defence of this 
program to the lowest common denominator of what will be acceptable to the maximum number of people, 
and to avoid stating fundamental principles. We in the Waffle shall not avoid the heart of the matter. We 
want to establish a new land tenure system because we do not believe that under the present private land 
tenure system family farming and rural communities can survive. We make no bones about 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2074 
 

that, and are not impressed by talk from the Members opposite about rental systems being something alien. It 
is a conclusion of this report of farm units from which I quoted, and from other surveys, that approximately 
one third of the land in Saskatchewan is now rented. To rent is not something foisted upon Saskatchewan 
people and of which they have had no experience. 
 
2. A second fundamental principle, Mr. Speaker, is that the Land Bank must serve as a device, to help 
revitalize rural communities and allow them to make some of their own decisions about land tenure in their 
region. To date, we have bewailed the trends outlined, for example, in the Federal Agricultural Task Force, 
but we have been powerless to reverse them. No amount of lamentations, however well intended, about the 
Federal Task Force on Agriculture and its embracing of current trends will reverse anything. The Waffle 
accordingly conceived local and regional control of the Land Bank as integral to the program. Local control 
should involve the setting of maximum farm sizes, the allocating of leases - subject, of course, to certain 
province wide regulations to prevent local abuses and patronage. 
 
Here are two fundamental principles, Mr. Speaker, that the Waffle believes must be embodied in any Land 
Bank program. 
 
The Bill that we have before us is primarily enabling legislation - apart from Section 18 which allows for the 
option to buy, and for Section 58 which specifies what is an implicitly centralized administration of the 
program. Therefore, apart from Sections 18 and 58, we have no particular quarrel with the Bill. But one must 
distinguish between the Bill, which is essentially enabling legislation, and the stated Government intentions 
about the program. The Bill allows Cabinet virtually absolute power with respect to a great number of 
matters relating to administration, lease policy, rental policy, purchase policy, etc. 
 
The option-to-buy clause should not pass totally unmentioned. Opposition to it has become the most 
publicized aspect of the Waffle’s position on the Land Bank. The Waffle has opposed the option-to-buy 
consistently. The 1970 NDP convention supported the Waffle position by defeating amendments to include 
an option-to-buy clause in the Party program. Although we admit defeat at the 1971 convention on this issue, 
the Waffle does not accept the 1971 position as the ultimate party statement on this issue. The Waffle will 
continue to campaign in the New Democratic Party against resale of Land Bank lands. We have five years to 
win our point given the option-to-buy clause as it is now written in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have another criticism of the program, based not on the Bill, but on stated Government 
intentions. Because we think this program should be an experiment in a new land tenure system - Crown 
leases with security - we believe there should be an input from the Provincial general revenue to make the 
rents more attractive relative to traditional mortgage payments on land purchase. Mr. Speaker, this is 
certainly not the last time that this House, or that the political scene in Saskatchewan, will hear of the issue 
of rent. Inevitably tremendous public pressure will build for the budgeting of general revenue to subsidize 
rentals. 
 
If one uses general revenue to reduce the rent one has to be prepared to justify it. Quite legitimately the 
ex-farmer, 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2075 

who is now the underpaid caretaker of a school in, say Saskatoon, is going to ask, "Why should general tax 
revenue be used to reduce the rent paid by my brother, who remained on the land, as opposed to being used 
to increase my salary?" The two people, the caretaker and the brother back on the farm, are probably both 
earning approximately the same low net income. Therefore, the caretaker has an important question. 
 
We, in the Waffle argue that the use of general revenue to lower rents is justified. 1. As an inducement to 
encourage farmers to adopt a new land tenure systems; and 2. Because it could, if appropriately 
administered, be the beginning of a net farm income policy provided lease land goes to poorer small farmers. 
However, if there is a subsidy on rentals, making it more attractive to rent than to buy, then there is a need 
for rigorous thinking as to who should get lease land from the Land Bank. 
 
That brings us, Mr. Speaker, to a third specific criticism. We do not feel that adequate provision has been 
made for local and regional control of the Land Bank program. Section 58, subsection (7), does allow the 
Minister to delegate to local Land Bank Committees such powers as he may deem fit, but there is no 
specification within the Bill as to what powers, if any, shall be so delegated. We argue that there should 
definitely be Land Bank committees in the sub-regions - elected by local farmers with proportional 
representation from those leasing land from the remainder of the local farm population. Local Land Bank 
committees should have to grapple with the problems of developing the leasing patterns appropriate to their 
communities. It may be easier to decide such problems in Regina, but if the Land Bank system is not 
integrated with the farm community and appears to farmers as one more bureaucratic program offered from 
Regina and Ottawa, it will inevitably fail. It will be a program of marginal impact. It will not have the 
dynamic revitalizing aspects which we in the Waffle hope it can have for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a procedural question. There has been controversy around this Bill No. 110, and 
the Foreign Ownership Bill No. 115 as to the correct procedures to be followed in dealing with the 
legislation, the holding of public hearings, and the implementation of the respective programs. 
 
The Department of Agriculture has been caught in a dilemma. On the one hand was its legitimate desire to 
move quickly to pass enabling legislation before the program got bogged down in the bureaucracy of 
government and before the new Government got bogged down in petty details preparatory for the next 
election. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 p.m. to 7:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before supper I was talking about the dilemma in which the Government finds itself. On the 
one hand the Department of Agriculture wants to proceed with all deliberate speed in order to prevent the 
bureaucracy from closing its heavy jaws around this program, and to get the program well under way before 
the immediate pressures of the next election militate against the Cabinet pursuing any controversial 
undertakings. 
 
However, on the other hand, to proceed at this speed has meant that much of the program remains to be 
specified by regulations, and has not been specified in the Act. Being 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2076 
 

unsure of what will be the political reception accorded the Land Bank - whether it will be accepted as a 
desirable radical reform or whether it will be condemned in a conservative reaction - the Government and the 
Party have neglected the necessary political organization on behalf of a radical Land Bank program and 
pursued a modest interpretation of the program. 
 
We need to have faith that Saskatchewan people can, if given the occasion, support progressive and radical 
changes in land tenure. 
 
I will support, in principle, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. C. WHELAN (Regina North West):— Mr. Speaker, this Bill presents in written form a policy for 
the use of land and the transfer of its ownership through a procedure never before introduced in any 
Legislature in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to maintain that it belongs, as a new idea, to one person in a former generation or someone in 
the present generation, would be inaccurate to say the least. 
 
The records of this House will show, Mr. Speaker, that in 1934 during the session that was held at that time, 
the then Progressive Member for the riding of Last Mountain, introduced a resolution that was seconded by a 
Conservative Member, I understand to accommodate him, and the resolution outlined ‘a use lease system of 
land tenure.’ Harried by economic circumstances, the Hon. Member set out in careful detail the plan for 
leasing land to farmers, on a grand scale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that when you read the old newspapers that the speech that was made at that time 
sounds like the Hon. Member for Saskatoon City Park. I recommend that he look up the old newspaper of 
the day, it’s 38 years old this month. I suggest that the Member for Last Mountain at that time, if anyone has 
any claim on the origin of the idea, has the first claim on it. I also want to make note that his motion, on 
division, and I have the division that was called, received exactly one vote. I think it’s pertinent, too, to point 
out that that vote came from a rural riding, the riding of Last Mountain. 
 
When the Co-op farms were being organized by the late J. H. Sturdy during the early years of the CCF, on 
Crown land, a 33 year lease was granted to the Co-op members. This caused a great deal of discussion and 
debate when the Co-op farm members asked for its withdrawal and the idea of the 33 year lease was 
abandoned. During the 1950s the Rural Life report suggested the Land Bank. In 1969 at a New Democratic 
agriculture convention at Yorkton the Land Bank idea became a reality. Mr. Speaker, in 1970, a year later, it 
was adopted at the NDP convention. 
 
During the 10 years that I had the good fortune to negotiate farm leases and mortgages in this Province, I had 
the opportunity to observe farmers buying and bargaining for land. Often they were faced with foreclosure. 
Many times the mortgage company 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2077 

was moving against them and the only chance they had of saving anything was the home-quarter protection 
provided by legislation administered under The Farm Security Act, an Act that was written by the farmers 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many instances rather than granting foreclosure on the home quarter, the practice was to 
negotiate a lease on the entire parcel of land when the farmer was in desperate straits and when he was faced 
with a foreclosure action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my experience gave me an opportunity to observe at first hand many different situations, 
foreclosures in areas like Shaunavon, Kelsey, Wilkie, Melville, Wadena. Mr. Speaker, farmers the length and 
breadth of Saskatchewan faced with foreclosure, negotiated a lease arrangement with the mortgage company. 
My observations and my experience, Mr. Speaker, at that time and during some of those years, I point out 
that four or five hundred mortgages were renegotiated each year, my observation was that farmers in 
negotiating the lease, insisted on retaining their interest in the land by writing in an option to buy. Time and 
time again, in spite of the conviction that the farmer would never be financially able to exercise the option 
and that he would have difficulty meeting the terms of the lease, he would operate successfully, exercise his 
option and purchase the land. In the last few years these farmers have indicated clearly that they bought the 
land and paid for it, have sold it and retired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who say that a farmer wants to lease his land without an option to buy, I maintain have 
never seen a farmer looking at the buildings he has built on the land he has owned when it is about to be 
foreclosed. 
 
I say to this House, Mr. Speaker, that when this legislation contains an option to buy, after a five year lease, 
it expresses accurately the kind of opportunity, the individual desire, the ownership aspirations of the 
average farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan. True, there are advantages to leasing without secure title to 
land. True, the burden of ownership can be excessive and unnecessary. Mr. Speaker, those who talk of 
leasing without ownership or the opportunity to obtain ownership, I maintain, do not know anything of the 
philosophy of ownership nor the desire for security that is inherent in the Saskatchewan farmer. 
 
Some critics say this Bill should be studied further, there should be a plebiscite. I say to them, no Bill has 
received more study prior to the time it was introduced and no Bill will receive more attention after it 
becomes law. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN:— Mr. Speaker, I doubt very much if you can proceed with any further studies until you 
actually operate the Land Bank itself. Those people who ask for a study or a plebiscite, I submit, are stalling. 
Too long farmers have needed a procedure to sell their land when they wanted to retire; too long there has 
been a need for a supply of funds, funds that could buy from a farmer who was ill or a farmer who was aged, 
or a farmer who had to sell for some other personal reason. This financial 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2078 
 

arrangement was not there but I can assure this House, Mr. Speaker, that time after time after time if finances 
had been available, and in many instances only a portion of the total amount was needed, the purchase of 
land could have been made when foreclosure was under way, that would have been advantageous to the 
farmer who owned the land and even advantageous in some cases to the people who wanted to sell it and 
who were trying to foreclose. 
 
To say that someone just thought up this idea now or within the last two or three years is preposterous 
nonsense. During the years that I was associated with the Provincial Mediation Board, the two Board 
members and the entire Board, time and time again, through correspondence and person representation, 
asked the Government to set up a fund to buy farm land, land that could be leased back and eventually 
purchased. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, 20 years later, written in this Bill, in this legislation before the House for second 
reading, is the kind of request that was made then spelled out the way it has been suggested, instigated first 
by a resolution in this House, as far back as 1934. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation only completes the history of farm transactions in Saskatchewan. It does 
nothing more. Those who argue for new credit arrangements, those who argue for special interest rates, those 
who argue for some other policy surely should know that interest rates were cut by mortgage companies to 
the bone during the ‘30s and ‘40s and there were reductions in principal but there was no method to purchase 
land, no money to buy land. Even today with land as it is and the economy in the shape that it is in, those in 
the younger generation who will rush into the breach to purchase land under the present arrangements, 
without a Land Bank, are few and far between. The idea of leasing at first is good, it is sound, it is practical. 
It will give the young farmer a chance to begin to work the soil on his own initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the criticism that there are too many regulations in this legislation, too many opportunities to 
misdirect through regulations and Orders-in-Council is not accurate. With new legislation, with breaking 
new ground, with trying out a new idea, with working out a transaction arrangement such as this for the first 
time, how else would you do it? How else could you write the Bill? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN:— I submit the choice would have been to abandon the idea and, Mr. Speaker, the people 
on this side of the House, the Members on this side of the House, do not intend to abandon the Land Bank 
idea. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN:— Mr. Speaker, the retired farmer, the farmer who wants to retire, the young man who 
wants to begin farming, are waiting. I suggest to the Members in this House that the need is urgent and it is 
absolutely essential that this program get under way immediately. 
 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2079 

How effective will it be, Mr. Speaker? I suggest it will be effective but there are some conditions that we 
should pay particular attention to. 
 
1. We should keep the administration of it in the hands of men with the highest integrity, recognized as farm 
leaders, recognized because they have a good knowledge of Saskatchewan people. 2. If administered fairly, 
objectively and in the best interest of those who need it most; and 3. If the cost of leasing or purchasing can 
be kept at a minimum figure, closely associated with the fluctuating income of the Saskatchewan farmer. I 
predict it will be a success. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN:— Mr. Speaker, to those who wrote the legislation, I think it is commendable. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN:— I think it deserves a try. To the Minister who introduced it, I think it is a milestone in 
agricultural history. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN:— To the young people who will lease the land, I say to them, try it. Don’t listen to the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is just one more carefully thought out Saskatchewan idea and it is a progressive idea. I 
commend the Bill to every Member of the House, wholeheartedly recommend unanimous adoption of it on 
second reading. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. C. McISAAC (Wilkie):— Mr. Speaker, my Hon. friend from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) at 
least agrees with the Opposition on one point that the land must be made available to the original lessees. I 
was interested as always in listening to my Hon. friend, he goes back 38 years this time, in digging up some 
history on this legislation. He lives in the past, mind you I was pleased to be reminded that he once worked 
for the Mediation Board. I don’t think there is any reference to the Mediation Board in this Bill. If not we 
should certainly try and remedy that. Then he went on to eulogize those who were good enough to write this 
piece of humanitarian legislation and in listening to him, Mr. Speaker, he put this legislation almost on a par 
with the Dead Sea Scrolls and various chapters in the Holy Bible. It was a rather interesting discourse by the 
Hon. Member from Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have expressed great pride, and the remarks of the Member from Regina North West 
are not peculiar in that regard. They have expressed great pride and great pleasure at the introduction of this 
legislation. One of the objectives of the Land Bank Bill that has been stated, not too often in the House, but 
in last year’s campaign, in the course of the Minister’s meetings, one of the objectives that has been stated is 
that the Land Bank will bring about a means of 



 
April 27, 1972 
 

2080 
 

facilitating father to son transfers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McISAAC:— Hear, hear, they all say! We haven’t heard any Member opposite expound on how and in 
what manner this is going to take place under this Bill. Indeed this is one aspect of the Bill that they have 
avoided discussing. They have avoided it, I am convinced because if they listen to the farmers who attended 
those meetings of the Minister, I didn’t attend any but I talked to dozens that were there, this was one of the 
major disappointments of this Bill. In no way is this legislation going to facilitate father-son transfers as far 
as . . . 
 
MR. MESSER:— It isn’t going to. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— It isn’t going to is right. I am saying it isn’t going to. That’s correct! It is not going to 
and yet this was one of the great promises held by the NDP in the course of the last campaign. Instead 
Members opposite, in the course of this debate, Mr. Speaker, stood up and they have extolled the virtues of 
leasing land for life, they have extolled the virtues of the young farmer leasing land for life. We have had 
some dandy illustrations, we have had some of that old socialist arithmetic from the Member for Turtleford 
(Mr. Feduniak), the Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins), I believe, and others trying to 
demonstrate what a great favor they are doing Saskatchewan farmers by allowing them the privilege to lease 
land for life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal more to say on this particular Bill. I beg leave at this time to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Wood that Bill No. 
118 - An Act to provide for the Making of Grants to Encourage the Building of Houses be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. E. F. GARDNER (Moosomin):— Mr. Speaker, on this particular Bill we find no major objection, 
chiefly because there is not too much in the Bill to object to. We find another case of a Bill that is pretty well 
meaningless without some specific dates and some specific income limits for the prospective applicants. 
 
A builder, for example, right now, though the Bill is in effect, doesn’t know whether he is eligible or not. If 
he wants to renovate his house tomorrow or start building a new house he has to wait for some regulations 
which may come some time in the future as an indication of whether he is eligible to participate in this plan. 
 
The idea we believe of the incentive grants for house-builders was to encourage construction, it was 
inaugurated by the former Government for that purpose. We believe that there should be some 
encouragement for house starts now, not some time in the future when regulations may be forthcoming. We 
feel that they should have been spelled out in the Bill. No amounts are shown in the Bill for the limits that a 
prospective builder 



 
April 27, 1972 

 

 
2081 

would have to meet. Regulations that we may get at a future date are not going to answer the questions that 
we or other people are asking right now. 
 
There have been some suggestions in various other speeches by the Minister, I believe, as to the amounts that 
might be included, but when it is not in the Bill, this is unofficial and we feel that he should have spelled this 
out more clearly. There would then be no doubt who was eligible and anyone who wanted to start 
construction or renovations would be able to proceed. We are a bit concerned also with this Bill and other 
Bills from the Department of Municipal Affairs that there appears to be no relief for renters in any way, no 
help for old age pensioners as there has been in Alberta and some other provinces, both regarding the home 
building grant and the property improvements grants. We would have some questions about the specific 
clauses in this in Committee and at this time I would indicate that we have no specific objection to the Bill. 
 
HON. E. I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a couple of things 
in regard to what has just been said. 
 
One thing is that I have said on two occasions that we would be making the income qualifications under this 
Bill equal to those under the Federal program. We would have them at least as favorable, and that at the 
present time is $7,000. I said that on several occasions. Anyone whose income is under $7,000 will be 
eligible. The date is April 1st, that it is open to go. There is no date set for the end of it. 
 
I can’t see where we are holding people up. I should also like to say that this Bill has not yet gone through 
the House. It is my understanding, it is a little difficult to have regulations gazetted when the Act has not yet 
been passed. If the Hon. Member who just sat down is objecting to the fact that we have not yet gazetted 
regulations when the Bill has not yet been passed, I think he is asking for something that is impossible. 
 
He is also complaining that this is not for renters. Well this is a house building Bill. If people are building 
houses, they won’t be renters. I think it is impossible to bring renters under a house building Act. I don’t 
think the former Government had any help for renters under their house building Act. I think it is rather 
peculiar to think that we should have renters under a house building Act. I will say that in regard to the Hon. 
Member also commenting on our Property Improvement Grants Act to say there was nothing in there for 
renters, the former Homeowner Grants Act had nothing for renters, but in our Act we do have payments to 
landlords which they can pass on to renters. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


