



















































Hansard: April 10, 1972


1602 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

32nd Day 

Monday, April 10, 1972 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

WIAAS STUDENTS 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you 

to the Members of this House a group of students in the Speaker’s Gallery from Kitchener School in the 

Regina Centre constituency. They are about 30 in number, they are students from Grade Seven and 

Eight. The visit is part of the Grade Eight Social Studies course. The Grade Seven students have an 

added advantage in that they have time away from their studies. We through you, Mr. Speaker, bid them 

welcome and express the hope that their visit with us today will live with them as part of their study of 

the process of democratic government in Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly I should 

like to welcome a group of students from Moose Jaw. They are a group of 29 students from the Palliser 

Heights School in Moose Jaw, Grade Five and they are accompanied by their teacher Mrs. Wood. Mrs. 

Wood has made numerous trips to this Legislature with different classes over the years. The class has 

already had a tour of the RCMP Barracks and the Leader-Post and a bus tour of the Wascana Centre. I 

know that they have found this part of their tour interesting, I hope they will find the visit to the 

Legislature enlightening and I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you at this time and to the 

Members of this Assembly a group of Grade Ten and Eleven students from the MacNutt High School. 

They are seated in the west gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher Mrs. Elizabeth Roe and their 

driver Mr. Andres. The town of MacNutt as some of you know is only three miles from the Manitoba 

border and so these people are almost Manitobans, so we are glad that they are here. We hope that they 

will enjoy their visit with us on this occasion and hope that their trip here will prove educational and 

valuable to them. I am sure that Members of the House will welcome them and wish them a safe journey 

home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I take the opportunity of introducing to you and 

expressing a welcome on behalf of the Assembly to a group of 30 high school students from the 

community of Rouleau, accompanied by their teacher Mr. Waldie and their drivers. I 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

1603 

 

certainly hope that they will find the afternoon Session most enjoyable and educational. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) 

it gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome 14 students from the Alvena High School accompanied 

by their teacher Mr. William Magus – I hope I have pronounced that right, I apologize if I haven’t. We 

welcome them and hope their afternoon is very informative and wish them a very safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add my words of welcome 

to the Member from Lumsden to the group of students from the Alvena High School. I do so because 

Alvena holds a special place for me in that it was the place where I was born. I should like to add my 

words of welcome. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I know that all of us were saddened to hear the 

news over the weekend of the death of the former Premier, the Honourable Woodrow Lloyd. 

Accordingly, I will move seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That this Assembly records its sorrow and regret at the passing on Friday of a former 

Member of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to this Province: 

 

Woodrow Stanley Lloyd, who died on Friday April 7, 1972 was a Member of this 

Legislature for Biggar from 1944 to 1971. He was born in Webb, Saskatchewan, in 1913, 

and received his education from Scott Collegiate in Regina, the Normal School in Moose 

Jaw and the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. He taught school near Rush Lake 

and was the principal of schools in Stewart Valley, Vanguard and Biggar. In the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation he was on the council for nine years, vice-president 

for one year and president from 1940 to 1944. He was also a member of the executive of 

the Canadian Teachers’ Federation from 1940 to 1944 and vice-president of the 

Federation of Home and School Clubs in 1938. From 1932 to 1944 he was president of 

the Saskatchewan Educational Conference and was elected to the Senate of the 

University of Saskatchewan in 1942. He was Minister of Education from July 10, 1944, 

until August 1, 1960; Provincial Treasurer from August 1960 until November 1961 and 

Premier and President of the Executive Council from November 7, 1961 until May 22, 

1964. He was Leader of the Opposition from 1964 until 1970. He also chaired the 

Saskatchewan Research Council for 14 years, the Archives Board for 12 years, the Centre 

of Community Studies for four years, was Minister in Charge of Libraries for eight 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

 

1604 

years and of the Public Service Commission for 12 years. During his term as Provincial 

Treasurer he was Minister in Charge of the Queen’s Printer, the Government Printing 

Office and the Purchasing Agency. He attended the 1954 General Conference of the 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association in Kenya. He was Vice-Chairman of the 

Committee in Charge of Saskatchewan’s Golden Jubilee in 1955. In November 1971 he 

was appointed as resident representative in Seoul, Korea, with the United Nations 

Development Program. In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, may I add a less formal word. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd was a friend of mine, he was one of the finest men I have ever met. It has been said of 

another and it is fitting to say of Mr. Lloyd that he was a prophet in politics. Throughout his 30-year 

career of public life he showed unwavering integrity and concern for people and the institutions which 

they built. He had an unshakeable faith in the innate decency of people. He believed, sometimes in the 

teeth of contrary evidence, that most people are decent and unselfish and that one only needed to explain 

the worth of a program that was for the greater good of all to have it accepted even by the minority who 

might not benefit from it. 

 

He was a strong supporter of the co-operative movement which he saw as a means by which people 

could exercise influence and control over the commercial affairs that governed their lives. He had a love 

of parliamentary institutions and of what they could contribute to permitting ordinary people a voice in 

shaping their political destiny. We have all heard him on many occasions. His oratory was not fiery, 

rather it was thoughtful seeking to persuade rather than to convert. 

 

His political style was one of establishing a comfortable rapport with his constituents. To travel with 

him in Biggar constituency was to see him meeting people in the warmest possible kind of quiet 

friendship, friendship with hundreds of his constituents. I said he was a prophet, he was certainly a 

pioneer of ideas. He advocated and advanced the idea of central schools in rural areas, a concept which 

brought to thousands of young people in rural Saskatchewan educational opportunities undreamed of up 

to that time. He had a concept of what a university rooted in the intellectual soil of this Province could 

do for an agricultural province such as ours. His Quantz Lectures on Education, produced in a bound 

volume, stand as a testament of his wisdom in the educational field. 

 

His role in the introduction of Medicare is well known. Let me recall a few aspects of it. From beginning 

to end he spoke and acted calmly and asked others to do so as well. As Party Leader he declined to 

support any efforts to mobilize any mass demonstrations in support of Medicare, feeling that these could 

only contribute to tension and passion when the situation called for calm and reason. He felt, too, that 

the situation held potential dangers for the process of democratic government and he was resolute in his 

stand that outstanding matters should be and would be resolved by the use of the democratic process. 

 

He was a pioneer, too, in his concern for our environment. 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

1605 

 

Older Members will recall his sponsoring of the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission and his 

many thoughtful and carefully researched contributions to discussions on protecting our environment. 

 

As Party Leader and Leader of the Opposition he continued to give the type of responsible leadership 

which reflected his deep concern for people and their political institutions. 

 

When he retired from active politics in this Province he – characteristically – decided to spend his 

energies and talents in helping those less fortunate than ourselves and he went with the United Nations 

Development Program. He died in this service. 

 

I don’t want to give the impression that Woodrow Lloyd was always or even was usually austere, he 

wasn’t. If I may be permitted, let me quote from a personal letter which arrived on my desk, about the 

same day that he died. I’ll just quote two brief passages, one in a serious vein, one dealing with the 

problems of bureaucracy. Firstly: 

 

So far as I can tell the developing countries are hell bent on making the same mistakes 

which we in developing countries made so significantly. The GNP (Gross National 

Product) is the Holy Grail. How to get some more social content into our programs at 

least, is bothering me much. 

 

That sounds like Woodrow Lloyd. Then again, talking about the problems of getting his speeches typed, 

he wrote: 

 

Would that I had studied typing instead of say, spherical trig or solid geometry. Right 

now I have to use a Korean secretary who can’t do shorthand. When we decided to bring 

in another secretary who could take shorthand in English, this produced a protest. Said 

the present girl – she would lose face and promptly developed a severe headache, and to 

make her point just stayed home. However, she is back now. And the cavalry is on the 

way in the form of a Dutch stenographer from New York who lists Welsh as her third 

language. 

 

That, too, sounds like Woodrow Lloyd. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd, wise, mature, principled and kindly. He was and is a man to remember. 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I consider it a privilege to join 

with the Premier in seconding this motion of condolence. 

 

Like everyone else in Saskatchewan and outside Saskatchewan, like I am sure many other thousands of 

people across the country, I was shocked when I heard of the very untimely and unfortunate passing of 

Woodrow Lloyd. I served with Woodrow, I suppose not with him but at the same time as Woodrow 

Lloyd in this House for nine years. Like people who knew him all over this Province from every walk of 

life and all sides of the political question, I developed a respect and a high regard for Mr. Lloyd. He was 

a very sincere and a very dedicated man. Certainly he has left his mark in our province in many ways, as 

the Premier pointed out, in the field of health and in the field of education. 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

 

1606 

Also there was more than one side to Woodrow Lloyd. I recall an incident here in this House that I think 

indicates in another way the kind of man he was. I was coming in the House one day as Provincial 

Treasurer when a civil servant, not a very senior civil servant, handed me a document to be tabled which 

I tabled without really looking at it. After I had tabled it, I found out it was a wrong document, as a 

matter of fact, it was some information that the Opposition had been trying without success to obtain 

from the Government for some time. The civil servant felt very, very badly and was very disturbed. I 

went to Woodrow Lloyd and I explained the situation to him and he very simply said, “Well we want 

that information Dave, but we don’t want it that way,” and he agreed to have the document removed 

from the table and the proper one put in its place. I am sure that particular employee of the Government, 

I’ve never forgotten the incident and I am sure he’ll never forget the incident. It was typical of the 

approach that Woodrow Lloyd took both as the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition to public life. 

 

His passing is unfortunate and he will be missed both in this Province and this country. I think it was 

indicative of the man that after having served in this Province for over a quarter of a century he 

volunteered to go out under the auspices of the United Nations to help people less fortunate than our 

people are here in Saskatchewan and in Canada. Of course, just beginning in that service he was 

unfortunately called to a higher service. 

 

Speaking for Members on this side of the House and I am sure both sides of the House and people all 

over this Province, we pass on to Mrs. Lloyd and to his relatives our sincere condolences. 

 

MR. E.L. COWLEY (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of sadness that I join with the 

Premier, the Leader of the Opposition and other Members of this House in paying tribute to Woodrow 

Lloyd. He represented the Biggar constituency from 1944 until 1971, which is a period which roughly 

parallels my life. 

 

Woodrow had a very deep interest in young people, both in his constituency and throughout the 

province. Indeed, it was through a youth club, which he was instrumental in setting up in the Perdue 

area, that I first became involved with this Party. I can recall, on looking back, how he sat and listened to 

the arguments and the points of view which we put forward. Arguments which I am sure he had heard 

many times before and arguments which he had drawn his own conclusions on many years before, and 

he still paid careful attention to ours, listened, sat puffing on his pipe, as if he was hearing them for the 

first time. 

 

Later on as a member of the Provincial Executive of the Party and as one of his constituents, I had the 

good fortune to work closely with Woodrow both in the youth movement and in the Party. One of the 

things which I most admired about him was his deep belief in the role of the Party in formulating policy 

and the direction that the Government, and then when he was Leader of the Opposition, that the 

Opposition, should take. And even when decisions were made which he didn’t agree with or when 

people let him down when he, I’m sure, felt that it should have been clear to all what the proper 

direction was, it seemed 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

1607 

 

only to strengthen his belief that people should make their own decisions. 

 

His influence on education became evident to me when I entered the teaching profession. In talking to 

teachers who had worked with him through the ’30s and the early ’40s when they were struggling to 

establish their professional organization, and those who had watched him as Minister of Education, I 

came to see the extremely high regard in which Woodrow Lloyd was held by teachers. 

 

I suppose one of the aspects of his political career which is least known in the Province and in the 

country was his work in the constituency which he represented, to which the Premier briefly referred. I 

can assure the Members of this House that he was held in very high and close regard by the people 

whom he represented. There are many reasons for this regard. One of them, of course, is the things 

which he stood for, such as medicare. More important was his close attention to the affairs and the 

people of his constituency; wedding anniversaries, graduations, special occasions, none passed by 

without a short personal note from Woodrow. 

 

I can recall just a little over a year ago we had a meeting in Biggar and he travelled to it, but on his way 

he had to go to a 50th wedding anniversary which was at Sonningdale, which was not on the best of 

roads as it was very icy that day. He made the trip and he was in the ditch three times, but he made the 

anniversary and he made the meeting. That’s the kind of man that Woodrow was when it came to his 

constituency. 

 

I received an even closer insight into the rapport which he had with people after I was nominated in 

1970. He took a week off from a very busy schedule to travel throughout the constituency with me and I 

was surprised at his intimate knowledge of the people in the constituency. 

 

Even though he had been a Cabinet Minister and Premier and Leader of the Opposition for all the time 

that he had sat in the Legislature and had been an extremely busy man in Regina, he maintained very 

close contact with the people. You would be driving along somewhere on the border of the constituency, 

where it was hard to find where you were going and he would say ‘turn left up here by that big tree’ and 

we would turn left and we would be in somebody’s yard and we would get out. Woodrow would get out 

and the people would come out he would call them all by name and introduce them to me. I don’t think 

there was a single place we called that we weren’t invited in. Between that time and the election he was 

back again and again to lend me a hand. That’s the kind of a man that Woodrow Lloyd was. 

 

It is difficult to describe the high esteem which the people in the constituency hold him. During the past 

few months I have been asked literally hundreds of times how Woodrow was doing in his new job and 

how he liked it and what I had heard from him. I know that he had kept in contact with many of his 

friends in the Biggar constituency. It seems a shame to me, and I am sure to everyone, that a man who 

still had so much to contribute is no longer with us. 

 

On behalf of the people of Biggar constituency I’d like to express our sadness and our personal sense of 

loss at the 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

 

1608 

passing of Woodrow Lloyd and to extend our condolences and our sympathy to his wife and family. 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, this is a sad day for all of us. 

Words of an old rancher friend of mine when he lost a very valuable and honoured neighbour, he said, 

“The Old Man upstairs must have been short of top hands when He called him.” I, personally, have not 

met a finer person. Woodrow has many, many friends, not all political. The great respect that people 

bestow on him was well earned. 

 

He was the first Saskatchewan son to become Premier of this Province. He had the wind and the sun of 

southern Saskatchewan in his bones and his blood. You didn’t know Woodrow very long before you 

realized that; that he was intimate with Saskatchewan and part of it. He enriched our lives and the lives 

of all those people who knew him. He inspired many to greater things by his own example and his 

integrity. He was a good father and a good husband. His family certainly knew how much love there was 

in him. His friends also knew. They knew that beautiful, dry and quick sense of humor that many people 

in the province did not know. Certainly this Province and Canada and the world is a better place because 

Woodrow passed this way. He was a builder. We can only regret that he didn’t build longer than he did. 

 

I should like to recite this short poem by an anonymous writer called “The Builder.” 

 

A traveller passing along his way, 

Came at the evening cold and grey, 

To a chasm vast and wide and deep; 

The traveller crossed in the twilight dim, 

The sullen stream had no fear for him. 

He stopped when safe on the other side 

And he built a bridge to span the tide. 

“Good friend,” said a fellow pilgrim near, 

“You’re wasting your time in building here, 

You never again will pass this way 

Why build you this bridge at the close of day?” 

The traveller lifted his fine grey head, 

“My friend in the way I’ve come,” he said: 

“There follows after me today 

A fair-haired youth who must pass this way; 

This stream, that has been as naught to me, 

To that fair-haired youth may a pitfall be. 

He too, must cross in the twilight dim; 

Good friend, I’m building this bridge for him!” 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, if we are to attain the goal we all 

share on this sad and difficult occasion we must first define the man we wish to honor. There is no other 

way to pay honest tribute to a man than first to discover what he was. And so we examine the clues that 

are available to us. 

 

We consider the evidence of Woodrow Lloyd’s public accomplishments. We think about his struggles to 

bring about equality of opportunity in Saskatchewan’s education and health care system. We remember 

him out ahead and leading us along what Robert Frost called “the road less travelled by.” We 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

1609 

 

remember the bitter opposition which he faced – and faced down – in both these struggles. That memory 

leads us to think about his courage and his dignity. 

 

It takes a special kind of courage for any man to walk alone, to go out ahead of his fellows and scout the 

lonely road, but I would suggest that such a courage demands even greater courage of a man who enjoys 

and is strengthened by human companionship. Was Woodrow such a man? Many of us know he was. 

For those who lack that personal knowledge, I suggest that the proof lies in the quality of his integrity. 

 

Some men wear integrity like a suit of armor to protect them from the world’s temptation and from their 

own foolishness. Woodrow Lloyd carried his like a hiker’s stout staff. He used it to steady his own 

footsteps on uncertain and treacherous grounds. But more often it was used for others, held out as a 

means of additional support to fellow mortals whose own staves were less sturdy, less reliable. 

 

That is the kind of man we are honoring today. A man whose talents, whether gained through birth or 

early training, were not used to advance his own welfare or fortune. Instead they were held in trust and 

invested for the benefit of others. The fact is that the key was Woodrow Lloyd’s deep reverence for the 

work and traditions of this Chamber. To him this Assembly was a means through which he could 

become an instrument for achieving the needs and hopes of his constituents and of all Saskatchewan 

people, and for the people of Canada because Woodrow Lloyd believed in people. 

 

He had a basic distrust of machines. Sometimes when a machine functioned as it was intended to do he 

would exclaim in astonishment, “Hey, it works!” But he was never astonished when people performed 

well. He expected them to do so and because of this expectation people who worked with him tended to 

perform beyond their own estimates of their potential. 

 

In time there may be other monuments raised to the memory of our dear friend and former colleague. I 

believe though that the most worthwhile, fitting and enduring monument will be one that he wrought 

himself. 

 

All over this world there are men and women striving harder than they might otherwise have done and 

by nobler means to accomplish more worthwhile ends. The people I speak of are doing so, because at 

some time in their lives and in their careers Woodrow Lloyd’s example has shown them what a human 

life can amount to and his faith in them as individuals, has challenged and inspired them to make their 

own lives more meaningful. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd left an indelible mark on our lives and especially on those who knew him and knew 

him well. He was a good and wise man. We shall miss him greatly. We shall miss his ideals and 

idealism, his sensitivity and understanding. 

 

May I join with others in expressing my deepest sympathy to his wife, his two sons, his two daughters 

and his relatives and his many friends. 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour and Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a very few 

words of my own 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

 

1610 

in recognition of one of the most outstanding people whom I have been privileged to know. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd set a high standard of performance for himself and he expected performance and he 

expected efficiency from those who worked for and worked with him. 

 

During his entire involvement in the public life of Saskatchewan he carried a heavy burden of 

responsibility and he went about his job with a bare minimum of fanfare. As Minister of Education he 

transformed the face of Saskatchewan with a fundamental objective always in view, that of making a 

high quality of education readily available to all Saskatchewan residents. His concern for people 

continued to manifest itself during his term of office as Provincial Treasurer and as Premier. 

 

Few people in public life can lay claim to the degree of dedication, integrity and honesty that Woodrow 

Lloyd possessed. He had a depth of understanding and a compassion for the deprived others. His life can 

well be regarded as an example to progressive people everywhere and I want to take this opportunity of 

joining with Members on both sides of the House in an expression of sympathy to Mrs. Lloyd and to the 

Lloyd family. 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, we are all saddened by the 

passing of Woodrow Lloyd. I had the privilege of knowing Mr. Lloyd quite well. I travelled in his 

constituency with him on a few occasions and I had great respect for him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, death is part of life. We all know that. We all know that’s a fact which is true, but 

nevertheless death always comes as a shock. Perhaps this is basically because it comes with such sudden 

finality. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd contributed a great deal to the life of this Province and therefore, indirectly to the life 

of this nation. 

 

Most of us, Mr. Speaker, are guilty of standing up rather vigorously for our rights and we are also often 

guilty of falling down rather badly in relation to our duties. One person with dedication in his sense of 

duty is worth 99 persons who simply have interests. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd was a man dedicated to a duty. A duty related to public service and public 

administration. This showed up with startling clarity in the difficult days of the medicare crisis in 1962. 

His sensitivity to the needs of his fellow men in Saskatchewan, in Canada and throughout the world are 

recorded in history. We shall miss him, though we shall best honor him by a dedication to the principles 

which he has espoused in terms of public administration and public service. 

 

Like all Members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I wish to express my sincere condolences to Mrs. 

Lloyd and all the members of the Lloyd family. 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I feel that men who are only exposed to 

each other in political arenas sometime miss an opportunity to become well acquainted. 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

1611 

 

My acquaintance with the late Hon. Woodrow Lloyd dates back prior to the 1944 days when we were 

both active in the Kinsmen Association. At that time I can’t recall if we ever had political discussions. I 

doubt it very much because we were both more interested in the activities of our clubs and the welfare of 

our community. However, because of his community activities it was but natural that Mr. Lloyd would 

gravitate into politics and give it the same dedicated interest as he did to his service club. 

 

Most politicians find their careers relatively short, for various reasons, including elections, but Mr. 

Lloyd wasn’t in that category. His political career was long-lasting. One with a growing image and one 

which he left of his own volition rather than going down in defeat. 

 

Our Premier has so ably recalled his contribution to this Province that I couldn’t begin to add anything 

to it. He worked quietly and efficiently as an MLA, he worked effectively as a long time Minister of 

Education, he worked coolly and deliberately in times of turmoil and strain. He debated well but only 

when he felt he had a worthwhile contribution to make. He was considerate and showed respect to 

Members on both sides of the House. Mr. Speaker, the people of this city and the citizens of this 

Province will long remember Woodrow Lloyd as a fine gentleman. I join with other Members in this 

House in expressing our sympathies to Mrs. Lloyd and her family. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to pay tribute to the late Woodrow 

Lloyd, I want to say that I concur with what has been said here today. I sat with Mr. Lloyd for over ten 

years in this Legislature and whether we agreed with him or not there is one thing that I always admired, 

his uprightness. You had to respect him for what he said and the way he said it. He was also great for the 

rookie Members who came into the House. He made them feel at home, something that is very 

important for new Members when they come in. 

 

As I saw him in the Legislature, there is another thing I want to give him credit for. He sat, and if you 

were speaking, he was looking at you and he paid attention to what you were saying. He paid careful 

attention to anyone speaking in order to try and understand the viewpoint that the speaker was 

expressing. And that didn’t matter whether it was on this side of the House or the other side of the 

House. That was Woodrow Lloyd trying to understand everybody, so that he could do the most for them. 

 

His most outstanding characteristic was his concern for people and his total service to his province, to 

Canada and to the world. And for the good of this world, I would say, Thank God for men like 

Woodrow Lloyd. I personally want to express my sympathy to Mrs. Lloyd and his family. 

 

MR. F. MEAKES (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, today we mourn a great man. Two years ago this 

spring I introduced Woodrow Lloyd to a meeting as Canada’s greatest statesman. To have worked with 

him was to know his greatness, his deep human feelings for other people, his compassion for those in 

trouble and his love for his fellow men was part of his greatness. His dedication to his beliefs, his refusal 

to compromise those beliefs and his determination to fight for those beliefs made him the great 

statesman he was. 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

 

1612 

If one word could describe him it was selflessness. Always he was thinking of the good of others. It was 

a privilege to know him, a pleasure to work under him and to call him friend was a great honor. 

 

We mourn with his family and for them. I am reminded of the Scriptures, “Today in Israel a prince has 

fallen.” Certainly his death leaves a void in the lives of all who knew him. Saskatchewan has reason to 

be proud of him as a native son. We all owe him so much. I think that his life should be an inspiration to 

those of us left behind. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Premier and other 

Members of the Assembly in expressing regret at the passing of the Hon. Woodrow Lloyd. Unlike those 

Members opposite the majority of us on this side of the House did not have an opportunity to know Mr. 

Lloyd personally nor to have the opportunity to grasp the full content of his personality and his warmth. 

All we had was the opportunity to view him objectively from the other side of the Assembly but that in 

no way deprived us of the opportunity of gathering respect and admiration for him as a parliamentarian 

and as an individual. Every once in a while, I suppose in life, there comes along a very special individual 

and that individual leaves a very special mark on his community, on his province and his country. I 

suppose Woodrow Lloyd was one of that kind of persons, Sir. 

 

First he had two very distinguished careers, one in the field of education as a teacher and as a leader in 

his own profession, second as a parliamentarian where he achieved the full height that any man could 

aspire to. As a Cabinet Minister, as a Premier and as Leader of the Opposition. No one could achieve a 

greater height in this Assembly. He was embarking on a new career, a third career. It was a very unusual 

thing and certainly it must have been a mark of Woodrow Lloyd that at 58 years of age he would then 

leave his home province where he was born and raised and had contributed so much to go overseas to a 

place called Korea where he felt the need was greater, to begin a new career at the age of 58. It is 

unfortunate and certainly with a great deal of regret I suppose that the people of Korea will not have had 

the same advantage that we have had. 

 

There is one other thing about Woodrow Lloyd that I will remember him for. I guess it was a great 

philosopher who said that ideas have consequences and I suppose that ideas in the political field in many 

ways are more productive than many other ideas. Woodrow Lloyd was one of those persons, he was an 

idea man. It was also certainly a mark of his ability and capability that he always presented those ideas 

with dignity, with integrity and with a great deal of firm dedication. And so as a Member who sat 

opposite him in this House I want to join with all of you in a mark of respect and to offer sincere 

condolences to his wife and to his family. 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I am young and lack the years of 

experience which many Members have. However, I slept under Woodrow’s roof; I ate his food; I 

listened to his words, and I subjected him to mine. We disagreed on many items but I have learned a 

great deal about politics from Woodrow Lloyd. 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

1613 

 

One small item I would like to mention to the House. At the foot of his bed there hung a political 

cartoon dating from 1964. It depicted Woodrow surmounting a series of hurdles; Medicare, educational 

reform, and others. In the foreground it showed Woodrow in the process of surmounting the hurdle of 

the 1964 election, which of course Woodrow did not surmount, and which our movement did not 

surmount. Since 1964, Woodrow kept that cartoon, and it reminded him as it reminded us when we lived 

in Woodrow’s house, of failure. But the cartoon had a significance more subtle and more important than 

as a reminder that the NDP had failed to surmount the hurdle of the 1964 election. It was the question of 

how high we set the hurdles. I think that in 1971 we set the hurdles – our goals – higher than in 1964 and 

that is in no small part due to the influence of Woodrow Lloyd on our movement in the intervening 

years. 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to add my words of 

condolences to those of the Members of this House who have spoken previously. 

 

The passing of a former Premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Lloyd, presents a tragic loss for the people of 

Saskatchewan. For over 30 years he served the people of this Province and his dedication and principled 

leadership earned him great respect which has extended far beyond any party lines. I had the privilege of 

sitting in the Legislature with him for close to seven years. His high integrity and his compassion for the 

people were qualities which he continually displayed. He served as Education Minister of this Province, 

I believe for some 17 years. And under his leadership our education system was transformed into one of 

the best in Canada. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the former Premier’s concern for the people will not be forgotten. I am 

sure we will always remember Mr. Lloyd’s perseverance in bringing Medicare to Saskatchewan. It was 

fitting that he lived to see Medicare extended to every province in Canada. His latter appointment, the 

appointment to the post with the United Nations was a fitting tribute to this man and it reflects the high 

esteem in which he was held by his fellow men. I should like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to add and to 

extend my condolences to Mrs. Lloyd and their family. Service to mankind was Woodrow Lloyd’s 

commitment in life. I am sure he will be missed by all. 

 

HON. E.I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I feel that I would be remiss if I 

did not add a few words of my own in regard to honoring the memory of Woodrow Lloyd. Woodrow 

Lloyd is a native of my part of the country. He was born at Webb, which is just a few miles west of 

Swift Current. He was one of quite a large family, there were some girls but mostly boys. They became 

quite noted in the area as being a family of ball players. They had their own baseball team and 

Woodrow, along with the others, was quite an athlete and notable baseball player. 

 

After he finished his education down in Regina he returned to teach in that area. His first school was at 

Swan Lake just northeast of Swift Current. He went on to be principal of the school at Stewart Valley 

and when in that area he married a local girl, one Vicky Leinan of the family for which the hamlet 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

 

1614 

of Leinan has been named, which is again right in our area. Woodrow Lloyd and his wife were products 

of our community and ones of which the community has every reason to be very proud of. 

 

I have had close relationship with Woodrow not only from the time that I first became a Member of the 

House here in the session of 1957 but more particularly when he asked me to join the Cabinet which he 

was forming in the fall of 1961 when he became the new Leader of the Government of Saskatchewan 

upon the retirement on Mr. Tommy Douglas. 

 

As a rookie Member of the Cabinet at that time I became quite well acquainted with Woodrow Lloyd. I 

have a great deal of appreciation for him and I have many reasons for appreciating him. One little 

episode in Cabinet, which I think I will be forgiven if I betray confidence after all these years, I think it 

establishes and shows the humility and the sense of democracy that Woodrow had. He ruled the Cabinet 

satisfactorily, he was not a weak man, he led, but I remember one day as the Minister-in-Charge of the 

Liquor Board he brought in legislation proposed. He brought it to Cabinet for Cabinet consideration and 

as I recall that day we turned down every item that he brought in. He smiled rather ruefully and said he 

guessed he hadn’t done his homework the way he should have. At any rate it illustrates I always thought 

that this was not a man who ruled with an iron fist but who placed a great deal of confidence and 

reliance upon the democratic principle and I think this speaks for the man throughout his life. 

 

He had a wonderful sense of humor. It wasn’t one that he carried about as a badge on his arm. It would 

take one quite a while before one would realize that he had a wit and it came out at times when it was 

entirely unlooked for but nevertheless was one of the keenest that I have known in a man. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without being able to describe Woodrow Lloyd the way I should like to, I think what has 

been said about him here today is much more appropriate than anything that I might be able to say. But I 

feel that he was a man who had a very fine sense of those things which make a man great. Such things as 

courage, honestly, integrity and loyalty and I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that this loyalty was something that 

was reciprocated by a great many. As a member of his Party, as a Member of his side of the Legislature, 

and one of his Cabinet, I had upon many occasions reason to seek the privilege of talking to him 

privately. On such occasions I always found him to be warm and sincere. The sense of meeting with him 

was always good, something that was appreciated afterwards. 

 

In spite of his warmth and innate goodness Woodrow never did suffer fools gladly and I think that this 

part of his character served to bring out more clearly the fact of his appreciation for other people. Mr. 

Speaker, I should like as other Members at this time to join with them in bringing condolences and 

expressions of sympathy to the family and I think we all realize here today, Saskatchewan, Canada and 

the world have lost a brave champion. 

 

MR. A. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Premier, and the Leader 

of the Opposition and other Members of this House in paying tribute to a great man, the late Honourable 

Woodrow S. Lloyd. To me, and to many of the people of Saskatchewan 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

1615 

 

Mr. Lloyd was a sincere friend, held in great respect. He became known to us as Woodrow. 

 

His untimely passing was a shock to me because I have known him quite intimately – as a Premier, as a 

Leader and as a friend. He left a mark on me as a man of profound sincerity and unquestionable integrity 

and as a man of unswerving dedication, and as a man cool and thoughtful in decision. No question, he 

had the qualities of a model public servant. 

 

Some 30 years of public life is a long span of service. It was life that called for sacrifice to himself and 

his family. Woodrow remained conscientiously dedicated. He did not shirk his responsibility to duty at 

any time. As a matter of fact it went beyond that. What he undertook, he did well. He did not look for 

glory nor publicity. His humble desire was to serve and to do all he could to help bring social and 

economic justice to our society. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd had a kind heart. People, particularly the less privileged, meant so much to him. He 

concerned himself to help them, truly a great humanitarian. In the House, Woodrow Lloyd, at all times 

debated issues in an objective and responsible manner and regarded the Speaker and the rules of the 

House with respect. He is often referred to as a true parliamentarian. 

 

Mr. Lloyd’s passing is a loss in many ways. Firstly, to his family as a husband and father, and then to 

our society as an educator, administrator, a philosopher, a statesman and a humanitarian. 

 

Death has cut short many of the things Woodrow Lloyd had the desire to do. I do recall him telling me 

that when he retired and had more time to himself, he would like to do some writing. His work with the 

United Nations in Korea had just begun to unfold. A tremendous challenge – or as he may have called it 

“an inspiring opportunity to be of help.” Society is less rich now that Woodrow Lloyd is gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to express my sincere sympathy, along with the other Members of this House, to 

Mrs. Vicky Lloyd and the family in their deep bereavement. 

 

MR. D.H. LANGE (Assiniboia-Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, Woodrow Lloyd has been a personal 

friend of our family for many years, my father having met him in university. 

 

To me, Woodrow Lloyd, was one of the most compassionate men I have ever known. He was a man 

who had an uncanny understanding of that which motivates other people and an unending patience to 

wait for inexperience to mature. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd had a philosophy of life from which we can all learn. He was humble, earthly, 

appreciative of the aesthetic and concerned only in the service of others. He is the only man whom I 

have ever known whose image to me was, physically and mentally, Christ-like. 

 

Since Saturday I have pondered about why a man of his charisma should die at 58. I would personally 

like to believe that his passing is not a tragedy but occurred, perhaps, because 



 

April 10, 1972 

 

 

1616 

his consciousness had reached a level of understanding beyond which no man can go in this world. He 

has served himself, his family, his friends and the world well. I do not grieve at his passing, but only at 

his loss. 

 

HON. F.A. DEWHURST, SPEAKER (Wadena): — I would ask the House before I put the question if 

I could have their indulgence by just adding a word or two to this motion. 

 

It has been my privilege and pleasure to have had Woodrow S. Lloyd as a colleague and as an advisor in 

this Legislature for some 26 years of the service he spent in public service in this Legislature. 

 

Throughout those entire years I always found Woodrow Lloyd to be understanding and always ready to 

give help and guidance and advice. He was a man who never asked anything for himself nor who fought 

too hard for his own rights, but would fight hard for the rights of others and the privileges of others. 

 

I wish to add my words to the words of condolence to his family, his wife and his friends on this 

occasion. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the 

memory of the deceased Member, be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of 

this Assembly by you Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, just before moving adjournment, I should like briefly to advise the 

House of some tentative arrangements which have been made. 

 

My information is that there will be a private funeral for members of the family only some time this 

week – later this week – and there will be a memorial or remembrance service next Sunday at 2:00 

o’clock in the afternoon, tentatively scheduled for Hanbidge Hall, Centre of the Arts. There will be 

further information about this as the persons making the arrangements are able to communicate more 

effectively with Mrs. Lloyd. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:37 o’clock. 


