
























































Hansard: April 25, 1972


1935 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

43rd Day 
 

Tuesday, April 25, 1972 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 
 WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. G. B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park):— Mr. Speaker, through you to the Members of the 
Legislature I would like to introduce a Grade Three class from Massey Road School. These children and 
their teachers are really early risers. They are under the direction of Mrs. Horseman and Linda Dickson, a 
student teacher. We welcome them to the House today. I know that they had a very interesting tour, in fact I 
accompanied them and I learned a few things about the Legislative Buildings that I hadn’t known before. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
 QUESTIONS 
 
 FOREIGN OWNERSHIP OF AGRICULTURAL LANDS IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone):— Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). 
 
Could he tell me or could he clarify the situation as far as this Bill, that declares that any Canadian living 
outside the boundaries of the people’s republic of Saskatchewan, including all the people who were born, 
raised and lived in Saskatchewan, and have had to move for some reason, is it their intention to make this 
Bill retroactive? 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! That Bill is before the House for second reading for debate and 
discussion. I don’t think we can have discussion on Orders of the Day now. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, this is a very important question which relates to anybody in the 
Province of Saskatchewan and who wishes to make a will. Anybody in the Province of Saskatchewan who 
wishes to plan their retirement. Anybody in Saskatchewan who has or wants to spend money. Is it the 
intention of the Government, Mr. Speaker, . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! I think that all Members are aware that when a motion is before the House 
and the motion is that this Bill be read a second time, and it is debatable, it must be raised at that time. I 
don’t think that we can have debate on the Orders of the Day of any Bill. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I do not wish to discuss the principle of the Bill. I 
wish to ask the Government 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1936 
 

whether it is their intention to make that Bill retroactive to the first of April in order for them, even though 
they do not intend to pass that Bill for one year . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order! Those questions can be raised while in second reading of that Bill. Questions 
can be asked and the Minister in closing the debate can answer all the questions, but we can’t discuss second 
reading of Bills or questions arising from the Bills on Orders of the Day. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, just one more point on the Point of Order. Mr. Speaker, this Bill may 
not well be decided for two or three weeks and right now the whole agricultural situation and the transfer of 
land in Saskatchewan is in a state of limbo. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— The Chair has no knowledge of when a Bill will or will not be decided. The Chair 
cannot permit the discussion of a Bill to take place on the Orders of the Day. 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I rise on a Point of Order and would like to say that 
the Members on this side of the House regard this Province as part of the monarchy of Canada and we 
frankly resent these suggestions that denigrate the Queen and the Crown, as just suggested by the Member 
opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, we will take the thoughts of Chairman 
Blakeney into consideration. 
 
 RESOLUTIONS 
 
 RESOLUTION NO. 19 EXCESSIVE PROFITS BEING EARNED BY DRUG INDUSTRY 
 
Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University) moved, seconded by Mr. Owens: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its serious concern at the excessive profits being earned by the drug 
manufacturing industry, and urges the Saskatchewan Government to implement, at an early date, a 
program to reduce the price of pharmaceutical drugs to the Saskatchewan public. Such a program 
should be administered by an agency capable of: 

 
(a) Working in co-operation with representatives of the pharmacists and physicians in preparing a 
formulary of core drugs, and in assuring the quality of drugs handled; (b) Issuing tenders for core 
drugs on a bulk basis; (c) Distributing, if necessary, drugs to retail pharmacies and hospitals 
throughout the province; (d) Securing alternative sources of supply of certain pharmaceutical 
preparations if bulk tendering does not result in significant savings to the public. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party in 1971 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1937 
 

committed itself to reduce drug prices to the Saskatchewan public. As an indication of our intent to fulfil this 
promise at the earliest possible opportunity, I introduce this Resolution that is before us. 
 
That the previous Government as all Members will know earned headlines in 1966 when the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) announced that we would soon have a drug program. This brings back certain 
similarities, Mr. Speaker, certain fond remembrances of the 1919 resolution by the Liberal Party, assuring us 
that we would soon have Medicare. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to give substance to what is a simple election pledge I should like to go into 
some detail about what is the nature of the drug manufacturing industry and how we, the New Democratic 
Party propose to solve the problem of the exorbitantly high retail prices which are charged to people for 
pharmaceutical products. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the first items that I think that we should have before us is just some very simple 
indications of what are the breakdowns of cost in the drug manufacturing industry. I do not vouch that these 
are definitive figures. I am sure that there are percentage point changes here and there, but the source is 
absolutely impeccable. It comes from the United States Congress Sub-Committee on Anti-Trust and 
Monopoly. Hardly, Mr. Speaker, a socialist source. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me give you the figures of how United States Congress broke down the dollar earned 
by the pharmaceutical industry. The actual cost of the product sold amounted to a mere 32 cents. 
Administrative costs amounted to 11 cents, Mr. Speaker, selling costs which includes outrageous advertising 
and detailing amounted to 25 cents of every dollar earned, and research and development, which the drug 
industry use as the excuse to justify the exorbitant prices it charges for drugs, amounted to 6 cents out of 
every dollar. That is one quarter of what they spent on promotion. Taxes in the United States amount to 13 
cents, leaving a net profit after taxes of 13 cents on every dollar, of their income. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit there is some small indication in these figures that just perhaps - just perhaps - 
we could do better and we are going to try. I should like at this point to show people an example of the kind 
of expenditure which we, the drug purchasing public, have to pay for. I quote here from the Canadian 
Medical Association Journal and this commemorating the great Canadian who discovered insulin - Banting. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, in this professional journal, not any puff sheet put out by the drug industry, but fully 
32 pages out of 122 pages in this document, Mr. Speaker, solely to drug advertising. We have glorious 
pictures embossed of church steeples over the Prairies, advertising drugs. That, Mr. Speaker, is clinical 
information which allows a precise physician to learn scientifically about the drug industry? Multi-colored 
embossed paper which you and I as the purchaser of drugs finally have to pay for and that is part of that 25 
cents which goes to drug selling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can do better. There are items which should be of interest to Canadians concerned about 
their economy. Canadians may be interested to know what is the nature of 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1938 
 

Canadian input into the drug manufacturing industry. I quote, again, from a highly competent, highly 
respectable and in no sense a muck raking organization. I quote from Drug Merchandising in March 1972. 
 

First it was the Canadian giants and then the medium sized companies and now the most recent 
vintage of medium and small companies to the extent that the pharmaceutical industry has now 
become 92 per cent foreign controlled. 

 
And they proceed to list, and I would like to give you some of these examples, of takeovers which have 
occurred in the Canadian drug industry as Canadians have lost control of an important technological 
industry. 
 
Anca Laboratories has been purchased by Wander Company of Switzerland. Ayerst purchased by American 
Home Products of the United States; Bell-Craig Limited purchased by Denver Laboratories of the United 
States; Canada Duphar Limited purchased by Bristol Laboratories; Elliott-Marion purchased by American 
Home Products; Frosst purchased by Merck, Sharpe and Dohme; Gelatin Capsules purchased by Scherer 
Incorporated; Hartz Company purchased by Wander; Horner purchased by Carter Wallace Incorporated of 
United States; Ingram purchased by International Bonds Incorporated; Intra Medical Products Limited 
purchased by Penick Incorporated; Shuttleworth purchased by Pitman-Moore of Dow Chemical of the 
United States; and most recently, Mr. Speaker, we have had Analco-Octo-Canada purchased by Alcon 
Laboratories of the United States. We have had Diamond Laboratories purchased by Diamond Incorporated 
of the United States; we have had Marsan purchased by International Chemical and Nuclear Corporation of 
the United States; Saunders purchased by American Incorporated of the United States; Sterilab Corporation 
purchased by Damon Incorporated of the United States; Winley-Morris purchased by International Chemical 
and Nuclear Corporation, and finally the most recent and what was the pride of our generic drug industry we 
have had Empire in the last couple of months purchased by a Mr. Panich - we have a panic in our midst, Mr. 
Speaker - a Mr. Panich of Pasadena, California, the manager, the owner of International Chemical and 
Nuclear Corporation. 
 
Here is but a small list in one particular industry of what is happening to the Canadian economy. Mr. 
Speaker, we can do better. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are problems in the manufacturing end, as do exist in the merger and the takeover 
and the concentration of the manufacturing industry into ever smaller, every fewer number, of foreign 
companies. There are also problems, of course, at the wholesale and there are also problems at the retail. The 
retail I would like to quote, Mr. Speaker, for the edification of the people and Members of the House. 
 
A certain memo coming forth from a proprietary drug firm referred to suggested tactics of how retail men 
should proceed to sell largactil extensively used in care of psychiatric patients. Now what they were trying to 
do, Mr. Speaker, was they were trying to get a fairly large share of the market and they were prepared to 
lower the price if it were absolutely necessary. They were willing, for example, and I quote, and this is the 
plan of action laid out to the retail men. 
 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1939 
 

1. Visit all hospital pharmacists as soon as possible. 
2. Determine their annual consumption of largactil tablets. 
3. Find out the brand and prices paid for the products they are using at the present time. 
4. Attempt to determine at what price they are willing to purchase a year’s supply of largactil. 
5. Point out the advantages of being able to obtain the original product which is being sold at 

what is a non-profitable price for a research company. 
 
Note the typical expenditures spent on research, Mr. Speaker, of approximately 6 cents out of a dollar, of a 
research company. However this is being done because we believe it is unfair to treat some hospitals as 
privileged customers while asking the general hospitals to pay more than their privileged sisters. 
 
What is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that there have been complicated degrees of monopoly worked out by the 
drug manufacturing companies and that these have been partially broken by certain powerful institutions 
when hospitals have banded together to try and secure lower cost drugs for their patients. 
 
As the wall is crumbling, Mr. Speaker, largactil and the proprietary owners move in and they realize that 
they are going to have to equalize things among all hospitals. That doesn’t apply to you, however, the person 
who is paying for this product over the counter at the pharmacy. This applies because certain hospitals had 
gotten a deal and they now have to expand the deal. Of course, they want first to learn if they have to expand 
the deal, first find out what price they are paying and what price they would be willing to pay. Don’t come 
down unless you have to come down. This is where we are at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, in Saskatchewan we have over 300 pharmacies scattered across the province at the retail level. It is our 
concern, very much, to protect the problems of the retail pharmacist who in turn has also been done in - if 
that is the appropriate expression, Mr. Speaker, - by the drug manufacturing companies which have at every 
turn tried to get the maximum out of him and have been grossly unconcerned about the pattern of collapse 
and change at the retail end of the industry. 
 
When we come to look, however, at problems at the retail end, I think it would be most illuminating if 
Members read March 1972 issue of Consumer Reports. There they will learn about what happened to a 
certain O’Neil drug retail chain store which had the nerve to print what would be the retail prices for a 
certain number of large selling pharmaceutical products. The experience of O’Neil Pharmacy is something to 
behold. That we had colleges of pharmacy in the United States advising and threatening their students that 
they must not work for this company. We had States passing legislation which prohibited the display of 
prices of pharmaceutical products. We had a whole range of restrictive trade practices which were applied to 
this company in order to discourage it from serving the public in terms of lowering drug costs. I very 
sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that as we in Saskatchewan move on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, to 
lower the price of pharmaceutical products, that we do not have this kind of display from the drug 
manufacturing industry. 
 
I very sincerely hope that they will realize that the time in which they can earn their unbridled monopoly 
profits and 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1940 
 

engage in the ludicrous degree of marketing and the ludicrous system of marketing which they now have is 
at an end. 
 
Once again, the Saskatchewan market is obviously in itself, relatively insignificant - we are talking about 
three, four, five per cent of the national market - but again it is not the absolute or relative size of the 
Saskatchewan market which is the key to understanding the significance of this program. The significance of 
the program lies in the fact that once again Saskatchewan is prepared to take the lead, to take the lead in 
using public government and in using the elected representatives of the people of Saskatchewan to pioneer in 
something which will be of value across the continent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. RICHARDS:— That as with Medicare, as with all the other health reforms, it fell to the NDP to bring 
forth and do something about this problem. All the facts and the figures and the tables that I can cite are 
irrelevant in terms of introducing new knowledge. Anybody who has had any technical knowledge about the 
drug industry has known this for a decade. Some of the figures that I have quoted date back to the Kefauver 
hearings of the United States Congress in the early 1960s. This information has been public knowledge but 
no government in Canada has had the courage to act, no government in Canada has been prepared to 
challenge the drug manufacturing companies. Fortunately Saskatchewan people have a government which is 
so prepared. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you might think that this is just socialist talking about major multi-national corporations 
and there is nothing significant in this for the public. I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that such is not the case. Let 
me quote to you some of the price differentials which now exist in drug prices. Let me quote to you for 
example, Bristol’s price for a certain antibiotic at 13 cents a capsule for 250 milligrams and I have here a 
small sample of it. Thirteen cents per capsule. Let me now quote you a price of a certain generic company’s 
brand - 2.7 cents for the identical capsule and the identical formulation in terms of number of tablets and 
identical strength. We have a price range there of nearly 4 to 1. This is not untypical, Mr. Speaker. 4 to 1 is 
the price range which now exists. Later I shall come to explain why patients, the drug purchasing public, do 
not get the advantage of these lower priced products. But it is illuminating to realize this and, again, my 
sources are absolutely impeccable. These are figures published by the Ontario Government in its Parcost 
program and distributed to every physician in the Province of Ontario. 
 
A 4 to 1 price differential, Mr. Speaker. Let me refer to another drug, let me refer to the largest selling single 
item in terms of value of sales in the country, Valium used as a tranquillizer. That until very recently Valium 
was the monopoly of drug corporations and this is the proper chemical name of the drug, but the brand name 
was Roche, which was the company which had the monopoly of this drug, and their name was Valium, 
which I am now referring to and they sold a five milligram size at the present price of seven cents per tablet. 
Seven cents, Mr. Speaker. They have recently been challenged by a second company. The second company 
has lowered the price to four cents. This is Horner, Mr. Speaker. But we have information from reliable drug 
companies which indicate that from foreign sources, 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1941 
 

we might be able to reduce the price, not from seven cents to four cents, Mr. Speaker, but we could bring 
that price down to 5 per cent of that four cent figure. That instead of having to pay $40 per 1,000, which is 
the Horner price, we might be able to bring this price down as low as $2, to which, of course, would have to 
be added the cost of prescribing the drug, the pharmacist’s fee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this brings in another aspect of the drug industry and that is the fact that we have got to be 
prepared to look to foreign sources of supply in order to break certain monopolies on certain drugs such as 
diadopham in which there is not adequate competition. The two companies are just sharing the cream and 
they are trying to keep up the price. In order to get a certain share of the market Horner has lowered its price 
substantially. We are going to have to be prepared to go to foreign sources of supply. 
 
This raises certain interesting problems, Mr. Speaker. Because given the power of the drug lobby over the 
Federal Government, it is not the easiest thing in the world to undertake to import quality foreign 
pharmaceutical preparations. Due to recently passed legislation, it now becomes possible to secure what are 
termed as compulsory import licences. But that is just one bureaucratic hurdle to overcome. Once one has 
secured one’s compulsory import licence from the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs - and it’s 
worth a footnote here, Mr. Speaker - that the Federal Government believes that one can combine a 
Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs as if the interests of the two were identical. We did not 
make that mistake here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. RICHARDS:— It is interesting to note that they do think their interests are identical. Once one 
overcomes the hurdle of the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, one has to overcome the hurdle 
of the Food and Drug Directorate under the Department of Health and Welfare, and the hurdle that the drug 
manufacturing industry has its tentacles holding the members of the Food and Drug Directorate in its loving 
grip. 
 
The Food and Drug Directorate have various classifications of drugs. And although, diadopham, for 
example, has been on the market for many years, it is still classified as a new drug which requires 
complicated testing ranging in the order of $50,000 to $100,000 plus six to twelve months time duration 
before anybody else can try and market any additional brand of diadopham. A $50,000 to $100,000 barrier 
plus a six to twelve month barrier is a very effective barrier to entry into that industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It may be argued that we are solely concerned here about quality, but I submit that there is something more 
afoot than that. It is precisely this problem. It’s the problem of the control of the drug manufacturing industry 
over entry into the industry and their attempts to prevent it. Because, Mr. Speaker, I would like now to come 
very briefly to talk about the question of drug quality. 
 
A great deal is talked about this on behalf of the PMAC (Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association of 
Canada) in which 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1942 
 

they claim that the exorbitant price differentials of four or five to one are justified on the basis that there is 
not equivalence between the two products. This, Mr. Speaker, is baloney. There may be differences, and 
again I refer to highly competent, highly authoritative documents which I will be willing to table at the 
request of Members. We refer now to the Food and Drug Directorate’s bulletin RX July, August 1971. In 
addition, the Task Force on prescription drugs has found that the lack of official standards has been grossly 
exaggerated as a major hazard to the public health. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the claims by the major 
drug manufacturers that the products of the smaller generic companies and of the foreign suppliers are of 
inferior clinical quality do not stand up. 
 
92 to 97 per cent of the different brands of drugs sold in Canada are sufficiently observed to be clinically 
equivalent. The experience on drug availability in Canada summarized by A.B. Morrison is that problems 
with drug availability cut across company brand names and types of product. There are some big companies 
that do an excellent job but some who don’t do so well. And the same holds true for little companies. In 
other words, Mr. Speaker, there do exist problems of quality of drugs, there do exist problems of clinical 
equivalency, but there is no indication that this has anything to do with price. That we, Mr. Speaker, when 
we come to establish our own program shall be highly concerned with drug quality. We shall not proceed to 
market any drug which is not to our satisfaction and to the satisfaction of pharmacists and clinical experts 
whom we will employ. We will not market any such product which has not been sufficiently scrutinized by 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I gave certain references to Parcost which is the Ontario Government’s attempt to introduce 
some program to reduce the cost of drugs. Now, it’s a noble experiment, Mr. Speaker. We must give due 
credit where credit is due. What they have proceeded to do is they have requested from all drug 
manufacturers what they conceive as their list price for drugs and then proceeded in a very attractive form to 
distribute this information to all physicians in the province with the hope thereby that physicians will 
prescribe low cost products to their patients. At least physicians will have available to them in a handy 
manner what are drug prices. 
 
However, the system fails, Mr. Speaker, for a number of fundamental reasons. There are three crucial 
elements in any prescription in terms of who makes it. There is the physician who prescribes it, there is the 
pharmacist who dispenses it and there is the patient who purchases it. And of these three the only person 
having to bear the brunt of the cost is finally the patient. Because of the way of the economics of this 
transaction, it is of no crucial concern to the pharmacist and physician as to which product he prescribes or 
which product he dispenses depending upon his profession. And accordingly there is a considerable 
incentive through disguised kick-backs from the drug manufacturing companies to the pharmacists, in fact, 
to abort the whole process of trying to reduce the cost of prescriptions to the final consumer, the patient. 
Because the companies which list their prices at very high prices have got very comfortable margins with 
which to gauge various under-the-counter kick-backs all along the line. These may be very open and above 
board in the sense that the physician receives very attractive offers if he proceeds to prescribe the appropriate 
drug. 
 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1943 
 

And we have here, for example, Special Deals for Physicians. Only buy 25 millilitre vials of kenolog injector 
and you get a Panasonic clock. Deal No. 33 - buy 36 vials and you get a radio or transistor radio. Or, Mr. 
Speaker, Deal No. 4 - if you buy 50 vials you get a cassette tape recorder. Now this is not, Mr. Speaker, 
purely clinical information made available by the drug manufacturing industry to the purely clinically 
interested physician. And given the human failings of all of us, the physician might be concerned and might 
be interested because of his teenage son in getting himself a cassette tape recorder. It is just conceivable that 
this might have some bearing upon the product which he would prescribe. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, far be it from me to suggest that we should outlaw this kind of advertising. Far be it from 
me to suggest that this is inefficient. This is the way of the world, Mr. Speaker, as Members opposite will tell 
you. Cassette tape recorders are an integral part of progress especially in the drug manufacturing industry. 
But I would submit that in order to reduce the costs of drugs to the final consumer, that cassette tape 
recorders are not an integral part of the process. And when the Saskatchewan Government enters in the area, 
we will not, I can assure the Members of this House, be offering special deals in terms of getting cassette 
tape recorders for the dispensing and the prescribing of products which we may secure. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. RICHARDS:— Not even to the Members of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is one reason why the Ontario plan has failed. Again to come back to another 
organization which has received a certain amount of criticism from me this morning, I come back to the 
Food and Drug Directorate and now I should like to give them a certain credit. They have very fortunately 
introduced what they call their quad program, their drug quality testing program which is taking the major 
drugs in terms of volume of sales and they are proceeding to test all companies which market brands of these 
major pharmaceutical products. They are proceeding to get comprehensive kinds of analysis of the chemical 
composition of the drugs in terms of the quality of the plants in which they are manufactured, in terms of 
cleanliness, in terms of quality of chemical analysis, etc., etc. And this credit must go to the Federal 
Government for initiating this program which will be highly helpful to us here in Saskatchewan and will 
mean that we will not have to undertake the massive expenditure on our own drug testing program. 
 
Let me come now and talk in more detail about what we in Saskatchewan hope to do. In the resolution which 
I would like now to give, you have in that resolution the general framework of what we hope to achieve. We 
hope that working in co-operation with representatives of the pharmacists and physicians in preparing a 
formula of drugs and ensuring the quality of drugs handled, we hope to issue tenders for drugs on a bulk 
basis, we hope to distribute, if necessary, drugs to retail pharmacies and hospitals throughout the province, 
and we hope that, if necessary, we can secure alternative sources of supply of certain pharmaceutical 
preparations if bulk tendering does not result in significant savings to the public. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me first talk about the quality. We 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1944 
 

are highly concerned about the quality of any products which we, the Saskatchewan Government, will have 
to deal with. And I assure the Members of the House that we will establish highly competent drug testing 
committees which will review the literature which will pass on any product with which we shall deal with. 
That goes without saying. This will be done in co-operation with the professionals in the health industry, the 
pharmacists and the physicians of the province. 
 
Now let me talk very briefly about the question of bulk tendering. There are savings to be had by bulk 
tendering, Mr. Speaker. Let me just give one very simple example of a certain anti-biotic, ampecillin, of 
which I have here some 500 milligram capsules and anybody may be glad to see them. The price of these is 
not cheap, Mr. Speaker. For 500 of these tablets, according to the Empire price list, you would have to pay 
$182, well over 30 cents a capsule. That’s not cheap. And Empire, of course, is not one of the expensive 
companies. This is one of what are called generic companies, one of the low cost companies. Also it is one 
of the companies which has just been purchased by an American company which, of course, will be to the 
betterment and advance of the drug industry in Canada. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Government 
via central purchasing will be able to procure these ampecillin capsules at $124.55 for 500 capsules which is 
a significant saving. However, I would submit that that is not as far as we can go. If you happen to be lucky 
enough to be a physician, you can get a discount on these capsules which amounts to purchasing them for 
$78.72 per 500 capsules. This is the kind of mess that we have in the pricing of pharmaceutical products. 
We’ve got prices ranging from $182 down to less than half of that - $78.72. There is obviously a need to 
secure the advantages which now go to special customers for the entire people of Saskatchewan and not to 
restrict it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we come to the wholesale question, to what extent we should deal with the existing 
wholesale mechanism, to what extent the Government will have to be involved, this is a discussion which is 
currently underway with the various interested parties and no final decisions have been made. 
 
At the retail end our interest is to protect the interest of the retail pharmacist who is like the small 
businessman who has dealings with major multi-national corporations. We have a situation now with 
pharmacists in which they spend over half their time not in professional activities but, in effect, in running 
small stores. And this situation cannot in the long run persist. 
 
We are also going to have to assure that we get the co-operation of the retail pharmacies, that we do not have 
a repeat of the kind of situation which has happened in Ontario. In Ontario what happened with participating 
pharmacies was that they agreed to charge the list price which was distributed to the physician plus a 
prescribing fee which was specified by negotiations between the pharmacies and the Provincial Government. 
But now, Mr. Speaker, the Ottawa Citizen in a recent article, dated November 25, 1971 conducted a small 
experiment. And I will refer again to one drug which we have been talking about diadopham. It’s a 
tranquillizer, largest selling single drug in the country, sales in the order of $11 million. According to the 
maximum which was allowable given the purchase of the most expensive brand specified in the Parcost 
manual, adding to it the $2 dispensing fee which had been negotiated between the 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1945 
 

Government and the pharmacies, the maximum price which the purchasing public should have had to pay for 
the prescription in question - 24 tablets, five milligrams - should have been $2.96. Keep that figure in mind, 
Mr. Speaker, as I list down what the Ottawa Citizen had to pay when he took a sample prescription around to 
a number of pharmacies in Ottawa. First, Astley’s Drugs Limited, 244 Laurier East - $4.20; Canterbury 
Pharmacy $4; Coulter’s Drug Store - $3.75; Doctors Building Pharmacy - $3.10; Freedman’s Pharmacy - 
$3.20; Linwood Pharmacy - $3.08; Medical-Dental Pharmacy - $3. And now, Mr. Speaker, we go to those 
who charge the price below what was the maximum specified, we have on the good side, Miracle Mart 
Pharmacy - $2.40; Super Save Drug Mart - $2.72; Towler’s Store Pharmacy - $2.68. Incidentally, I have 
been assured by Mr. Stan Wright of the Community Clinic in Saskatoon that were the same prescription 
presented to him, he would charge the patient if he were a member - $1.75 and if he were not a member of 
the clinic - $2.75. One up for the Community Clinic in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I very sincerely hope that we shall not have that kind of situation arise in Saskatchewan. I hope 
that we will not have the phenomenon of certain pharmacies not respecting the spirit of the program which 
our Government is going to try and introduce. 
 
I’ve talked perhaps too long, Mr. Speaker, I will now move the motion which I hope will be very well 
received by both sides of the House and I hope that in the very near future the citizens of Saskatchewan will 
receive the fruits of yet one further advance by this Government acting on behalf of ordinary citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. A. TAYLOR (Kerrobert-Kindersley):— Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the problem raised by the Member for 
Saskatoon-University (Mr. Richards) is one with which we are all concerned. We have all probably been in 
contact with people having to spend $40, $50 and more dollars per month to keep themselves supplied with 
drugs. We’ve also probably all had occasion to come in contact with people leaving the doctor’s office with 
a prescription in their hands and ripping it up because they knew they could not afford to have the 
prescription filled. I doubt if there is any industry which spends as high a proportion of their intake on 
promotion as does the drug industry. And yet, it seems to me, there is no industry that should need to spend 
less. If a product such as the drug is effective it ought to sell itself. The type of promotion has been 
mentioned by the Member from University, the idea of giving away radios if a doctor will prescribe their 
particular drug. We know of the promotion men who call around to the doctor’s office, and who on walking 
into the office hand him half a dozen golf balls as a good will gesture, maybe they are supposed to be 
symbolic of pills, but they would be a bit hard to swallow. So that we can give further consideration to this 
important matter, Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
 SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1946 
 

by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill No. 110 - An Act to facilitate the Acquisition and Disposition of Farm 
Land in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, this Bill stands in the name of the Hon. Member for Touchwood (Mr. 
Meakes) who is now taking his seat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAKES (Touchwood):— Mr. Speaker, I had a long run. When I adjourned debate last night just 
prior to that the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) had been speaking on this Bill. One of the 
things that really surprised me was when he started taking about low cost loans for farmers. Of course he 
wasn’t around in the late 50s and the 60s when the CCF Government did start, I’ll admit, a very modest 
program, in conjunction with Co-op Trust a program designed to assist young farmers to start out in the 
business of farming. The Liberal Party at that time, I can well remember and I realize he wasn’t in the House 
at that time, but the Liberal opposition of that day said this was a program that was too small, it was peanuts. 
They went on and they promised in the election of ‘64 they went out, and promised to bring in a big 
program, they promised to do something about this problem of getting young people on the farm. Then they 
were elected and at that time my Hon. friend was elected too. 
 
What did they do then? They actually did away with the program. They did away with it completely. I 
wouldn’t have minded them doing away with it completely if they had replaced it with some kind of a 
program. Now he has the gall to stand up and to suggest that this is what we should be going into. And as I 
say the Liberal Party in 1964 election and again to a lesser degree in the ‘67 election went across this 
Province, stood on every platform there was, talking about the need for a program to assist the small young 
farmer to get established. Just another broken Liberal promise. Really what he was suggesting as I said 
yesterday evening, he is really just suggesting another Farm Credit Corporation. And I see no sense in a 
Provincial Government running competition to the Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
Let us just look for a moment at what his suggestions would mean if we did follow out his suggestions. It 
would mean that another generation of young farmers would spend a lifetime paying for the land, the same 
as their fathers and their grandfathers had done prior to that and in turn they would have to turn around and 
sell it to their sons so that they could retire gracefully, so that generation could turn around again and have to 
buy the land again and spend a lifetime . . . 
 
MR. LANE:— Why bring in The Gift Tax Act? 
 
MR. MEAKES:— It so happens we are debating, not The Gift Tax Act and if I was to answer you, I am 
sure, Mr. Speaker would call me out of order. 
 
As I was saying it will be another generation paying or repaying for the land. And in so doing what has 
happened in the last 25 or 30 years, farms will continue to grow bigger and 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1947 
 

bigger and fewer and there will be less people on the farm and less people in the rural communities. I suggest 
his speech betrays the same usual actions of the Liberal Party of promising everything, talking lots and doing 
nothing. 
 
I should like to turn, Mr. Speaker, to what I had intended to say in this regard. I personally, am very pleased 
to add my support to this Bill that we are debating. In my opinion it is one of the most, if not the most 
important piece of legislation to come before this Legislature at this Session. Indeed more important than any 
bill that has come before this Legislature in the last 20 years. 
 
Since 1945 great changes have came over the industry of agriculture, some of them good and some of them 
not so good. With the advent of mechanization and new scientific and technological information, agricultural 
practice has changed. Less manpower has been necessary. Farms have grown bigger, land prices have risen 
as have machines and the cost of production. Because of the higher cost of land and the higher investment 
needed to farm, fewer young people have been able to turn to farming. The result has been that potential 
young farmers have turned to the city to seek employment. 
 
This trend has meant that the average age of a Saskatchewan farmer has increased until now it is 57 years. 
Unless something is done to change this trend within the next decade that average will be close to 65 years. 
There has been another trend operating as well. As farmers have retired or changed occupations their land 
has not gone to another small farmer so that his operation might become more economical. But because the 
large operator has had the money to purchase the land, he’s purchased the land for sale and in so doing his 
farm has become that much bigger. As that bigger farmer becomes older and wants to retire he is forced to 
sell to another farmer and it becomes the same old cycle again. Many farmers who want to retire have sons 
who would like to farm but have no money to buy from father. The father would like the son to have the land 
but needs to sell his farm so he can retire in some comfort and security. This problem has been facing 
governments for years and they have done little or nothing to solve the problem. And I am convinced that if 
nothing is done to reverse this trend, I see in the next decade a large growth of large corporate farms, owned 
by absentee landlords, operated by men who like to farm but without the necessary wherewithal, they must 
be hired men. 
 
After all, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not the only place facing this problem. In fact, because the farming 
areas of the United States were settled earlier, it has happened already there. One can see the results. The 
National Farmers’ Union, the United States Farmers’ Union back in 1967 commissioned a study of the 
problem and the result of that study was a book published by the Union called the Corporate Invasion of 
American Agriculture. Every Member of this House should obtain a copy and study it. 
 
I would like to deal with some of its findings because I believe they are relevant to our problem here. 
Perhaps we can learn something from their mistakes and benefit from their findings. I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
this is completely relevant to the Bill that I am discussing this morning, setting up a Land Bank. Let me say 
at the outset that this book proves to me the danger is real. To quote Tony Deshant, the union president, the 
United States union president in the introduction of the book and I 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1948 
 

quote: 
 

Rural America is being invaded. It is not an invasion of tanks or troops, it is a subtle invasion driven 
by engines of financial and political power. Indeed the takeover is so quiet that the very use of the 
word invasion seems forced and inappropriate. But it is leaving behind wasted towns, deserted 
communities, depleted resources, empty institutions and people without hope and without future. Its 
power is so enormous, so impersonal and ruthless. Its progress so inevitable, that it may already be 
too late to stop it. The urban society has long since been dominated or surrounded, restless generals 
are studying greedily the weakened flanks of rural America. Area by area, commodity by commodity 
the silent assault moves forward. The Panzer divisions of corporate power becoming more 
depersonalized with each celebration of victory are mopping up the countryside, isolating the social 
and the economic body of America. So far it has been easy. The disparity of power is so great. 
National Farmers’ Union President, Tony Deshant, has said how can they fail? It is not just the 
weakness of the agricultural sector that makes it easy for corporations often subsidized and protected 
in other sectors of the economy to take over. Deployment of political and social opinion is warm and 
friendly and welcomes the invader. Politicians accept the contributions of money and influence of 
corporations and then do their bidding in the legislative halls of the nation. The mass media makes 
heroes of the new generals and tells the peasants that the takeover is inevitable. The urbanites do not 
understand what is at stake. 

 
This study was a widespread one. It covered many states of the country. It looked at agriculture all the way 
from the producer to the processor through to the consumer. Very, very soon it was apparent for all to see 
that the invasion was at all levels and all fronts. The ultimate aim was the eventual ultimate takeover of all 
the food production and control it all the way to the mouth of the consumer. The report cites many incidents 
of corporate interference in the market. Incidents of infiltration into production processing and retailing. 
Quoting again from the corporate invasion on page 26: 
 

In its August 26, 1967 issue, Business Week advised its readers that buying farm land for 
weekending or retiring could be good business. Some farm machinery and capital improvements will 
even qualify for the seven per cent investment credit. And losses can offset other taxable income. 

 
I might say here that was one of the things that I am glad the Federal Government is suggesting they may do 
something about. One effect of this buying activity is to price the land from under the local farmers who may 
need to expand. This was a complaint by Edgar Langel of Burlington, Colorado in a letter that appeared in 
the Denver Post of December 21, 1967. Mr. Langel, noted that Gates Rubber Company was buying land at 
such a rate in Yuma county that land prices were going up so that young farmers who would like to get a 
foothold were in effect priced out of the market. Mr. Langel commented on the apparent secrecy of the Gates 
invasion. The company had started out 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1949 
 

saying it was buying 5,000 acres. Already Mr. Langel noted they had bought 6,700 acres. In early June 1968, 
Gates purchases had gone to 9,000 acres in the Yuma county and at least another 640 acres in an adjoining 
county. There had been no public announcement of the fact however. For obvious reasons such corporate 
invaders operate under a cloak of secrecy. T.C. Kennedy of Newman Grove, Nebraska, was contacted by the 
agents of an insurance company asking if they could use his name to buy land in the area. He refused, a 
reaction now being shared by others. The Rocky Mountain Farmers’ Union told its members in the 
December, 1967 issue of its paper, "Hang onto your land. Why do you think the big corporations are trying 
to buy." Because there is a better day coming that’s why. The buying continues, some of it is direct and some 
indirect. Adrian Gregmiles a rich fellow from Missouri came into southern Iowa and bought some 10,000 
acres of land. The DesMoines Sunday Register of April 28th, 1968, reported that Gregmiles had transferred 
2,750 acres of this Missouri farm to the giant C.P. Kay Incorporated, a diversified corporation that has 
announced it is in the process of acquiring 80,000 acres of land from Texas to the Canadian border. It is 
phasing out its garment making and asphalt business to finance its farming operation. 
 
The New York Times of May 5th, 1968 reported that Doan Landco Incorporated of St. Louis affiliated the 
Doan Agricultural Service and set up a $200,000 fund to acquire suitable farm co-operatives. This report 
also shows the takeover of the cattle feeder industry and I again quote: 
 

The postscript comes from Roy Sulley the farm manager of Shinrone of May 21st, 1968. He is a tall, 
lean, friendly Iowan who comes out of the big farm to shop, wearing grease smeared overalls. He 
explains that they are nearly through building a feedlot for 10,000 cattle. "We are growing 5,200 
acres of corn", he said. Has he ever fed cattle before? "No", he replied, "but you don’t do these things 
by yourself any more. We’ll use a computer and feed them to optimum weight". The new computer 
is at Ames Iowa at Iowa State, thus does the Land Grant University contributed to the new 
agriculture. Why should it be assumed that the only market being affected is in the livestock market. 
Sugar beet growers north of Denver see their bargaining power with the big sugar companies 
slipping away, for them it’s the Gates Rubber Company contracts to grow 5,000 acres of sugar beets 
in Yuma. But that’s another story. 

 
Members in this House may say it will not happen here, I suggest that it is happening and it will continue to 
increase unless we as legislators are prepared to act and act now. I see this Bill as one step in keeping 
agriculture in the hands of family farmers, men who will want to till the soil, preserve the soil and not mine 
our most important resource, agricultural soil. 
 
Let us see what is already happening in Saskatchewan. Every once in a while we hear of blocks of land being 
sold to someone or other. The Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Hanson) or the Member for 
Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) can tell you of large land exchanges. A year or so ago it was in the Tisdale 
area. Who are these buyers? They are strangers to the area. I ask you are they the undercover buyers for large 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1950 
 

corporate giants? We don’t know, but in the early years the corporate takeover in the USA these same tactics 
were used. The Farm Union Study revealed disturbing statistics. They made several studies of towns that had 
not been invaded by the corporate giants. Let me deal with two towns. These two towns are both situated in 
the general Great Central Valley of California and I should like to quote just a little bit from this report, page 
48. This study was made in 1946 of the two towns, I quote: 
 

The two towns are much alike. Both are located in the Great Central Valley of California. Each is 15 
to 20 miles southeast of one of the Valley’s principal cities, Arvin to the southeast of Bakersfield, 
Dinuba southeast of San Francisco. Each gets about ten inches of rain a year and thus is dependent 
on irrigation. Grapes are important to both although other crops are produced. In the Arvin area the 
diversification includes cotton and oil. In Dinuba the diversification tends towards fruits and 
vegetables. Temperatures are a little higher in the Arvin area. The average temperature in January is 
50 degrees, July 87. The growing season is 348 days with frost occurring only in the first part of the 
year. Temperatures are practically identical. But from this point on the similarities of Arvin and 
Dinuba end. Arvin is an area of large corporate farms in the location of the DeGeorgeo and Giumarra 
holdings. In the DeGeorgeo area most of the farms are small and operated by families. It was this 
difference that was the subject of the study. 

 
I won’t go into it but he compares the two communities. He questioned the occupants of ten per cent of the 
houses in the towns and surrounding areas and here is what he found: 
 

Certain conclusions are particularly significant to the small businessman and to the understanding of 
the importance of his place in the community. Not only does the small farm itself constitute small 
business but it supports flourishing and small commercial business. The small farm community 
supported 62 separate business establishments to but 35 in the large farm community. The ratio of 
small farm community of nearly 2 to 1. The volume of retail trade in the small community during the 
12 month period analyzed was $4,383,000 against $2,535,000 in the large farm community. Retail 
trade in the small farm community was greater by 61 per cent. 

 
I’ll quote further on: 
 

Physical facilities for community living, paved streets, sidewalks, garbage disposal and other public 
services are far greater in the small farm community. Schools are more plentiful and offer broader 
services in the small farm community. The small farm community is provided with free parks for 
recreation. The large farm community has a single playground owned by a corporation. The small 
farm town has more than twice the number of organizations for civic improvement and social 
recreation than its large farm counterpart. 

 
I could really go on and on but this was in 1946, Mr. Speaker. When Mr. Goldschmit went back to look at it 
again in 1967, he found a very different situation. He said and I quote: 
 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1951 
 

You drive through miles of great vineyards, southeast from Bakersfield to Arvin there is poverty in 
the landscape that defies the logic to the blooming desert. The acres of trestled grapes, the 
grasshopper legs of oil wells pumping lazily. An occasional air-conditioned car that moves along the 
highway with its occupants inspecting the riches of the field. The houses along the way are poor, 
violating the riches of the land. Old cars sit in the yard, they belong to migrant laborers that come 
into the area to work in the vineyard where the United Farm Workers organizing committee has a 
strike in progress. 

 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that all of this is very relevant to this Bill. I ask you why I’ve quoted this? I believe that 
unless governments are prepared to stop the growth of bigness in the agricultural community that this can 
well come about. I suggest that these kinds of conditions can happen here. Who are we to say with absolute 
surety that the Land Bank will be a success but we shall be able to say that this Government is prepared to 
try to stabilize the growth of farm size. We are prepared to try to stop the takeover of farm land into large 
corporate farms. I believe that this Bill that we are debating, which incidentally may well be the death knell 
of the Liberal Party because they are opposing it, is just one step in keeping our rural communities a good 
place to live. I believe that, but we have certainly not said and are not saying now that it is the answer to the 
whole agricultural crisis. We had said from 1964 to 1967 when we were on that side of the House and we 
were talking about the need to do something about turning over the land from one generation to the other. 
I’ve spelled out the reasons why it was practically an impossibility in recent years even with the Farm Credit 
Corporation. I do believe this Bill can be one step in keeping our rural communities as a good place to live. 
 
It gives me, Mr. Speaker, great pleasure to support this motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse):— Mr. Speaker, last evening a few games were played in this House respecting the 
Land Bank legislation. I feel that it is legislation which cannot be taken light-heartedly and in the manner 
that it was taken last night. I am very happy with the remarks of the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) 
today because at least he tells us where he stands on this Land Bank proposal. The performance last night by 
two of the more senior Members of this House makes one wonder if they, themselves, are afraid of what this 
Bill is going to do to them when the next provincial election comes along. Down deep they don’t like this 
Bill and they didn’t have the courage last night to speak for or against the Bill. Each one in his remarks was 
apologetic. Sure, the Bill isn’t perfect. Sure, we’ll make mistakes. The first mistake that was made was when 
the Minister introduced this Bill last Friday. The Member from Pelly (Mr. Larson) spent all his time talking 
about Federal agricultural policies. I might remind him that this is a Provincial Land Bank Bill and not the 
Federal Land Bank Bill and I am sure that when the Federal Land Bank Bill is proposed it will far outweigh 
the benefits received in this one here. 
 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1952 
 

The Member from Melfort-Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) talked about education. He seemed to feel that because 
society was paying for our children’s education it should also pay for our farm land. All of society’s children 
benefit from education, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that there is any way that we can justify asking a plumber 
in Regina or a hairdresser in Saskatoon to buy land so that my son can farm. 
 
Getting back to some of the comments made by the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes), he said that 
larger farmers were buying up the land in this Province and it was going to the big corporate farms. Might I 
maintain, Mr. Speaker, that this will continue to happen even with this Land Bank legislation. The 
Government is not providing enough funds to purchase all the lands that are going to come up for sale within 
the next two or three years. This has been clearly indicated by the report just out of Moose Jaw. Where will 
these retiring farmers go, where will they turn to? The only alternative they’ve got is to the large 
corporations, is to the big farmers. If the Minister included in this Act the opportunity for young farmers to 
purchase land immediately and help them by stating that purchase money will always be available to 
purchase land from those who wish to retire. This can be incorporated very easily and I suggest that it be 
done by my suggestion which I made and which I proposed in my maiden speech in this House. That the 
Government guarantee or co-sign a mortgage of the young farmer with Farm Credit Corporation. I should 
like to deal with this a little bit later on in my remarks. 
 
Land Bank legislation which we now have before us is a very disappointing piece of legislation. There have 
been no meaningful changes made from the initial proposals that the Land Bank booklet has stated. The 
Minister had told us that changes were being made, that he had listened to the people and was in the process 
of making changes according to their recommendations. He stated that this was the reason for the delay in 
the presentation of this legislation. We have now waited two months. The changes that I can see in this Act 
could have been made in two days. The changes that have been made clearly indicate that he was not 
listening to the people of this province. He conceived and drafted the legislation last summer, put it in 
booklet form and went to the people. Ten months later he comes back to this Legislature and inasmuch tells 
the people of this Province to accept this proposal as such or else. Take it or leave it. The entire concept of 
regional meetings was a waste of time and a hoax on the farmers of this Province. This Act that is before us 
now does not take into account the recommendations and concerns raised by farmers throughout this 
Province. 
 
Let’s just take a look at some of the changes that he did incorporate into this Act. He has removed the 
compulsory aspect of crop insurance, with which I agree. But why did he remove this aspect from the Act? I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it is because by the time the farmers are in a position to begin operating that land 
it will be compulsory for all farmers in this Province to take out crop insurance. I suggest as well that it is an 
admission by the Minister that rental rates are too high as compared to purchase and ownership. With the 
added burden of compulsory crop insurance the cash outlay by a young farmer when combined with taxes 
and lease fees would just not be acceptable when compared to purchase and ownership. The Minister 
mentioned in his remarks that the farmers in this Province over the years have made tremendous sacrifices to 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1953 
 

mortgage companies, banks and so on. Tremendous sacrifices by these farmers forced to pay high interest 
rates. This I feel is a very hollow statement by the Minister in his attempt to justify this Land Bank. 
 
What will this young farmer who enters into a lease arrangement with this Government be forced to do now. 
His lease fees payable to the Government as prescribed by the Minister will go 100 per cent towards the 
payment of interest. This is how the rental fees will be set. He will have a continuous burden for the entire 
length of time that he farms that land and that will be an interest burden, Mr. Speaker. They will be based 
solely on the interest charges on which this Government has to pay. The young farmer in turn will now be 
making tremendous sacrifices to this Government in its determination to nationalize the farming lands of this 
Province. It is a devious scheme designed to make the farming industry of this Province cut its own throat by 
subsidizing this Government’s determination to nationalize the farm land of this Province. There is no way, 
Mr. Speaker, that I can support a piece of legislation such as this. I am sincerely disappointed in the 
legislation which we now have before us. This Government had the opportunity to bring before this House 
one of the greatest pieces of legislation that could have benefited the entire farming industry of this Province. 
It could have been legislation that could have helped the young farmer of this Province instead of helping the 
Government in its farm nationalization program. I feel that one of the major problems facing the rural 
communities of Saskatchewan today is the transfer of land and farm units from one generation to another. I 
feel very strongly that every young farmer in this Province should be given the opportunity to begin farming 
if this is his desire. He should also be given a meaningful opportunity to own that land. We have before us an 
Act which does not give them a meaningful opportunity to own that land, and in turn does not give him a 
reasonable opportunity of building a farm which he can call his own, nor does it give him a meaningful 
opportunity of building an estate. 
 
If a young man has an opportunity to own his farm he then has a desire to improve this property and to 
expand his operations. His desire to make a success out of his farm unit would be much greater. A security 
which he can build on. Ownership, Mr. Speaker, is one of the keys to a successful farm operation. 
 
There are many reasons why I am opposed to this Land Bank proposal. Let me just name a few. First, this 
piece of legislation along with Succession Duty legislation and The Foreign Ownership of Land Acts all 
complement each other. Each is designed to achieve the goal of nationalization of all farm land in this 
Province. Second, it does not give a young farmer a reasonable nor a meaningful opportunity to own the 
land. According to the figures used by the Minister the proposed saving of $186 per quarter of land will not 
give this young farmer enough cash nor accumulated savings over a period of five years so that he can 
purchase this land for cash from the Commission. Third, this legislation along with The Foreign Ownership 
of Land Act does not give this farmer a meaningful base of security which is needed for the obtaining of 
credit for the purpose of expansion and improvement of his farm. Fourth, there is no guarantee to this young 
farmer that his rental fees will not be increased each year. The Minister has stated that rental fees will be set 
on a yearly basis that each February a new schedule of rentals will be determined. He stated that the basic 
criteria for rental charge will be the 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1954 
 

cost of money by this Government. If interest rate are to be increased, so will rental fees. This Act is not 
geared solely to production and marketing capabilities of the land nor the economy. It is a dictatorial 
situation in which rentals will be determined by regulation, determined on the whim or the dictates of the 
Minister and the Cabinet. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE:— The clause still remains in this Act which gives the Commission the power to dictate to the 
young farmer the use which can be made of the land which he operates. It takes away his freedom of choice, 
his individuality and in turn, Mr. Speaker, his initiative. 
 
Sixth, the allocation of land to a young farmer and the decision to purchase the land from a retiring farmer is 
again determined by regulation. The Minister and Cabinet has the final say on who can lease a particular 
piece of land and who qualifies to sell that land. There is too much room in this Act, Mr. Speaker, for 
political patronage. Regardless of which Party is in power the temptation will always be there and will 
certainly be abused, no matter how sanctimonious a government may try to be, politics could always be 
involved in the purchase and allocation of land. 
 
Seventh, Mr. Speaker, it will mean an extra tax burden on the people of this Province in terms of 
administration and operating costs. A commission is to be set up which is to be comprised of six regions, 
manned and staffed, along with 12 sub-regions which as well are manned and staffed. This I feel is 
unnecessary. The Farm Credit Corporation has offices already manned and staffed throughout this Province 
to adequately handle the transfer of land fro, those who wish to sell to those who wish to purchase. A 
department to allocate and supervise leases, the Land Branch by the Provincial Government is also manned 
and staffed to facilitate those who wish to lease as compared to purchase. 
 
Eighth, the Minister has stated that one of the purposes of this legislation is to allow a farmer to retire with 
dignity and financial security at a time of his own choosing. This I heartily endorse. Under this proposal this 
will not be the case for all farmers in Saskatchewan. The Minister has stated that there will be priorities set 
as to who qualifies first to sell his land to the Commission. Again this is determined by regulation. Another 
drawback is the fact that only $10 million has been allocated for the purpose of buying the land. While it 
sounds like a lot of money, in a province of this size and the average age of present farmers, this money will 
not go very far. Here again is a good example of why land should be sold and not held by the Government. It 
will allow a turnover of funds to always ensure money is available to purchase land from anyone who wishes 
to sell, regardless of his qualifications. It will give a ready market for those wishing to sell and to retire. I 
should just like to mention here as well, Mr. Speaker, that I think this is where the Minister of Agriculture 
has misread the general farming public of this Province. Sure he had great attendances out at his meetings, 
but these were people who were wanting a market place for their land. How many young men were at those 
meetings? Can he give me a count of the young men that were there? I can tell you that the majority of the 
people 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1955 
 

attending those meetings were people who were in retirement age or close to it wanting to find what 
proposals this Government had to make in that regard. 
 
The Minister in his opening remarks accused this side of the House of destructive criticism and condemned 
us for not giving any meaningful alternative. I can assure the Minister he will not receive from us any 
alternative that will agree with his determination to nationalize all farm land of this Province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE:— If the Minister is able to remember that in my maiden speech in this Legislature when I 
criticized this present legislation, I also presented at that time a meaningful alternative. I said then and I say 
now, that every young farmer in this Province should have the opportunity to begin farming. I maintain that 
every young farmer should have the choice immediately as to whether he wishes to purchase the land or 
whether he wishes to lease the land. I maintain that if a young farmer wishes to lease farm land that this 
Government should give him that opportunity under legislation similar to this. I maintain also that lease fees 
should not be geared to interest costs of the Government but should be geared to the productivity of the land, 
should be geared to the economy of the country. Lease fees should be determined by the type of crop which 
is produced in a given year and that the farmer is not thrown to the mercy of mother nature. 
 
I also maintain that a young farmer be given the opportunity to purchase the land, not after five years, but 
whenever he wishes. The Government should facilitate and help him in that purchase. We now have the 
facility set up in this Province under the Farm Credit Corporation that will make the money available to the 
young farmer at low interest rates. These payments stretched over a period of 29 years will cost very little 
more and in some cases less than what the rental fee would be through the Land Bank Commission. Anther 
advantage of this would be that his cost per year would remain constant. It wouldn’t be subject to increase 
each February at the whim of the Minister or of the Commission. The only restriction now to this young 
farmer in obtaining the money from the Farm Credit Corporation is the lack of security or guarantee. Under 
the Farm Credit Corporation if security is adequate or a co-signer is available, a young farmer can obtain the 
entire amount needed to purchase that land. I should like to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that a young farmer can 
obtain the entire amount needed to purchase the land from the Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
Some young men in this Province are fortunate enough to have a father who is able to co-sign or guarantee 
that mortgage. However, there are many, many more young farmers who are not this fortunate. If this 
Government has enough confidence in a young farmer to lease land to him, it should as well have enough 
confidence in that young farmer to guarantee and co-sign his mortgage. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE:— This would then qualify any capable, up and coming, 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1956 
 

young farmer in Saskatchewan to purchase his own land at the same costs per year as it would be to lease 
that land. This, in turn, would make more money available for the retiring farmers of this Province to be able 
to sell their farm and retire at a time of his own choosing and not at a time when money is available by the 
Commission. 
 
I should like to spend a bit of time to comment on the comparisons which the Minister made regarding 
purchasing by a young farmer as opposed to leasing. The Minister stated that lease fees will be based on the 
cost of money to the Government each year and that lease fees will be adjusted each February according to 
the market value of the land and the cost of money for that year. This then means that if land values go up 
and interest rates increase, this young farmer’s rental cost will increase as well. From experience in the past, 
we can safely say that market value of land over the next 30 years will definitely increase. Interest rates as 
well will fluctuate. The Minister, I am sure, realizes that the cost of long term money to the Government is 
not 7 per cent as he suggested but rather 8 or 9 per cent. He also stated that his Government will not 
subsidize the interest rate. Therefore, a more realistic figure of 8 or 8½ per cent should be used. This then 
means that 320 acres at $75 per care will make the young farmer’s rental fee either $1,920 or $2,040 per 
year. And this is subject to change each February. Over a period of 29 years, if the rental fee does not 
increase the young farmer will subsidize this Government’s farm nationalization program by over $59,000. 
 
Let’s look at the other alternative of purchasing land through the Farm Credit Corporation with a guarantee 
or co-signing by this Government. The Minister used the figures of 320 acres at $75 per acre for a total cost 
of $24,000. Under the Farm Credit Corporation where the interest rate is 7 ½ per cent, this would come to an 
annual payment of $2,052 for a period of 29 years. An extra cost of $1 per month or the opportunity and the 
privilege of owning that land. I should like to remind the Minister that this annual cost of $2,052 is constant, 
that regardless of the increase in land values, regardless of the increase in interest rates, regardless of the 
increase in productivity, regardless of the increase in the farmer’s net income, this annual cost remains the 
same and it is not subject to increases in interest rates, it is not subject to the whim of Cabinet or to the whim 
of the Land Bank Commission. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE:— He will as well after that period of 29 years, own that land. He will be able to take 
advantage of the capital gain and increases in the value of that land. He will own and receive the benefits of 
the improvements which he has made to that land. In closing, Mr. Speaker, I maintain that the proposal 
which we have made is a much better alternative to helping our farming industry in this Province and in turn 
the young farmers of this Province. I urge the Minister to make these changes and allow the young farmer the 
opportunity of the alternative to lease from this Government or to buy with a guarantee by this Government 
through the Farm Credit Corporation. If he is determined to push this present Bill through the House as 
presently written, I will definitely oppose it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1957 
 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon Nutana Centre):— Mr. Speaker, may I preface my main remarks on the 
Land Bank Bill with an observation or two with respect to contributions, if they may be termed as such, from 
the Members of the Opposition. I notice that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) made a statement the 
other day when the Land Bank Bill was introduced when he said that it would stop all farm sales 
transactions. However, the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) said the Land Bank Bill would not stop farm 
sales and that the farms would get larger and larger. Obviously, they haven’t got very good communication 
one with the other. I also note that the Member for Morse for whom I have a considerable degree of respect, 
as I think he makes a reasonable contribution to the debates in this House, talked about capital gain. (We’ll 
write a poem about the lilliputian leprechaun from Prince Albert shortly.) If we check the records with regard 
to the average pricing of land, we find that for long periods in Saskatchewan there were no capital gains in 
terms of ownership of land. I think the Member from Morse should keep this in mind. 
 
I took the time and trouble to take a course in economics - in land resource economics - at the University this 
past winter and in that course and in the discussions relating to that course, we looked at price movements in 
terms of markets related to prices of land. A drop of one cent a bushel in the price of wheat actually means a 
drop of $2 per acre in the price of land in this Province. We have had a drop of some 20 cents a bushel in the 
price of wheat in the last short while. Actually, the price of land has come down very appreciably in the last 
three years. It is a fluctuating item and of course, this is obvious. However, one should not assume that one is 
automatically going to get a capital gain simply because he owns land. Incidentally, if the Leader of the 
Opposition is critical of the fact that I am an urban Member, I should also notify him that I am an owner of 
land, that I work that land, and that last Saturday I hauled out 3,600 bushels of grain. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— I don’t think the Leader of the Opposition would know a shovel from a snowshoe. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— He understands the shovel all right. 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— I think, Mr. Speaker, it is very important that we clearly define the need. We all know 
that agriculture is the basic industry in this Province. We all know that agriculture is experiencing extreme 
difficulties. As the Member for Melfort-Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) mentioned in his speech, the average age of 
farmers is such as to indicate a necessity of facilitating a rapid transfer to younger persons, particularly in the 
next decade or ten years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is clearly a need for a new approach to bring about a required adjustment in 
Saskatchewan agriculture. I have always believed that expansion in agriculture should occur within the line 
fence. An approach which goes along with larger and larger farms accompanied by greater and greater 
capital inputs for more sophisticated and more expensive machinery, 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1958 
 

is in itself, self-defeating. It speeds depopulation of the rural areas and the subsequent demise of the smaller 
trading centres. The problem of increasing capital requirements per farm for business viability and income 
adequacy is admittedly a severe one. One of the difficulties in introducing Land Bank legislation is that the 
expectations of people are at a high level. It is obvious the Land Bank will not solve all of agriculture’s 
problems nor should it be designed to do so. It is essentially a transfer mechanism to permit younger persons 
to get into farming and older persons to retire. A major requirement is to permit low income operators to 
convert land holdings into disposable income without necessarily giving up their local, economic and social 
ties. Older farmers as proposed in this Bill, can transfer title to their land in exchange for a specified annuity. 
Annuities utilized can readily be designed to be paid in full when the farmer reaches a specified age. Retiring 
farmers in such instances could retain occupancy rights to the farmstead until actual retirement is reached. If 
a farm operator is 60 years of age and he selected a term annuity to normal retirement age of 65, when Old 
Age Security and Canada Pension Plan payments become available and rented the farm back on a cash rental 
basis, it is clear the annuity would make a major contribution to his disposable income to the end of its term. 
The assured income for a known period of time would facilitate personal planning for retirement, and permit 
time for disposition of machinery and livestock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might say a few words about that. I hold in my hand a current list, April 3rd in fact, of annuity 
rates related to age levels for both males and females 55 through to 70 on a guaranteed and a non-guaranteed 
basis and also using specified terms. If, for example, a 60 year old farmer has a section of land which he 
might dispose to the Land Bank, let’s assume at an average price of approximately $66 an acre, which could 
be reasonably assumed in present day markets, he would secure about $45,000. If, however, he takes an 
annuity of $400 a month which he could procure with that $45,000 with a ten year guarantee attached to it, 
he would be assured of a minimum payout of $48,000. The annuity, of course, would be paid as long as the 
individual lived. If he wants to get a real bargain out of it all he has to do is be stubborn and keep on 
breathing for a long period of time. The minimum payment would come on the basis of the ten year 
guarantee. On this basis the individual would not utilize a cash settlement and on that basis many annuities 
could be issued to a goodly number of farmers and you would appreciably enhance the probabilities of scale 
in relation to the use of the Land Bank Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is vitally important that satisfactory arrangements for transferring land resources from one 
generation to the next be achieved now. This is what the Opposition does not seem to understand. They are 
willing to bring in propositions, in fact last night’s paper says, "Liberal MLA offers Land Bank alternative." 
They didn’t identify him. I don’t know which one it was who offered the alternative, but they had seven 
years to do something about it and they let the market take over and matters drift. The Liberal Opposition 
reverts to its old practice of using outworn shibboleths. At the time car insurance was introduced in 
Saskatchewan, a Liberal Member, the then Member for Moosomin, described it as "the greatest hoax ever 
perpetrated on the people of this Province." They now defend the auto insurance plan 25 years later. They are 
slow learners, Mr. Speaker. They took the same rigid stance in relation to 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1959 
 

hospital insurance and medical care. Now they support them. Probably by the turn of the century, Mr. 
Speaker, the Members to your left, will be attempting to convince the voters of Saskatchewan that they 
originated the Land Bank scheme and even nurtured and promoted it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should clearly understand that the primary objective of the Land Bank is to facilitate the 
transfer of land. Experience has shown that land ownership does not guarantee an adequate income or 
security of tenure. Land rental is an important component in Saskatchewan land tenure. It does not cause 
significant inefficiencies in land resource use. The Land Bank will assist in the transfer of land from very 
small and from very large farms into more economically viable units. It is not the be-all or the end-all here 
and no one on this side has suggested that it is. Operators who participate in the trade-land-for annuities 
approach coupled with lease back arrangements will facilitate their own retirement and the necessary transfer 
of land holdings from the older generation to the younger generation, and that, Mr. Speaker, is what the Land 
Bank is designed to do and it is absolutely vital that this be done. 
 
No one on this side, Mr. Speaker, has argued that the Land Bank will cure all agricultural ills. It is essential 
that we secure national action in relation to markets and prices. I note that the Hon. Otto Lang is doing his bit 
in terms of using up the surpluses of grain. He had a bake sale in Saskatoon last Saturday morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments with respect to comments of the Member for Cannington 
(Mr. Weatherald) when the Bill was introduced the other day. The Member for Cannington tried to make 
some points I think with respect to the fact the Minister of Agriculture had made a statement that $372 is the 
amount which the farmer would save annually by renting instead of purchasing. He made some comments 
with respect to the $600,000 that was set aside in terms of administration of the fund and claimed this could 
have helped 1,612 farmers. I used Simpson, Pirenian and Crenshaw mathematics and finance tables and did 
a little bit of calculation. Now I admit that this is a liberal interpretation but surely the Member from 
Cannington cannot object to a liberal interpretation in relation to this particular item. The $372 saved per 
year, if we assume that to be the case, for the first five years under a leasing program at current market rates 
in terms of investment would result in $2,139 being available to that individual if he set it aside in an 
investment. However, if he went the full length of term of 29 years which is tied in with the maximum term 
of a loan from the Farm Credit Corporation, $372 a year set aside at current market rates would result in 
$32,494.20 in cash being available to that individual. However, the Member from Cannington said it would 
only buy one cow and he said it wouldn’t even be a very good cow. Well I know they have some objections 
to rental but if he bought one cow with that $372, and if we assume that he is willing to rent a bull, over that 
29 year period that one cow based on the assumption that half of the produced calves would be male animals 
and would go to market and the remaining half would be kept in the reproductive process, would result in 
488 animals being available through the 29 year period. If we assume that they brought $200 a piece not 
$372, they would bring a total of $97,600. If we deducted off of that for labor, management and feed input 
$63,192 calculated on the basis of a scale related to land resource utilization of land in intensive 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1960 
 

farming, we would still have $34,408 left over. 
 
Now I said in the beginning, Mr. Speaker, that the assumptions are liberal and obviously the Member from 
Cannington can’t object to a liberal assumption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly support this Bill. 
 
MR. KRAMER:— Keeps shooting the bull . . . 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— That’s why they can’t get any production, they are shooting the bull all the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Opposition Members have made much of individual New Democratic candidates’ promises in 
the election last June. One promise I made was that I would work for security and viability of the family 
farm, on the basis that it is absolutely essential to the provincial economy. I look at the Land Bank Bill as a 
step in this direction and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly and enthusiastically support this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. MATSALLA (Canora):— Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank Bill introduced last week in my opinion is 
one of the most important pieces of legislation brought into this House. It will be a milestone marking a bold 
effort on the part of this Government to maintain the family farm and save our rural way of life in 
Saskatchewan. It is in this context I give my full support to the principle embodied in this legislation. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) in his remarks, Mr. Speaker, called for regulations covering this 
legislation. I, and other Members of this House, should like to know what the regulations are going to be as 
well. Might I suggest that perhaps the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) would like to be absolutely 
certain about the regulations. The only way to obtain certainty, and I believe the Leader of the Opposition 
knows it, is to first approve the legislation in principle. This is normal procedure. This procedure was 
followed by former governments including the Liberals of the past. The procedure is nothing new. 
 
One of the arguments raised by the Leader of the Opposition was that the Government through its Land Bank 
program won’t give the farmers a chance to buy land and the Government wouldn’t allow people to own 
land. This statement cannot be further from the truth. I want to suggest that if the Leader of the Opposition 
would listen to what is said, read what is in the legislation, use good judgement, and then speak in honesty, 
he would find that in the first place farmers do not have to sell their land to the Land Bank and the 
Government. This is absolutely voluntary. Secondly, the farmers can continue to own land if they so desire. 
When they lease the land from the Land Bank they do so on an option to buy. What’s wrong with that? 
Doesn’t this mean that farmers can own their land and doesn’t this mean that farmers can buy land? 
Certainly it does. But the spokesman for the Liberals and the Members opposite would prefer to distort the 
contents of the legislation and destroy the true concept of the Land Bank. 
 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1961 
 

It is very evident, Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition is doing everything in its power to condemn the Land 
Bank through perverse and fear tactics. They have done this in the last election campaign, during the 
campaign and now after the campaign. The people just won’t hear the Liberals. The people are intelligent 
and they know better, and they proved it too, Mr. Speaker, on June 23rd last by giving the New Democratic 
Party resounding support, which seemed to say, Mr. Speaker, "the Land Bank is a good idea. We want you to 
set it up. We believe the plan will work." 
 
The Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) when he spoke indicated that the Liberal Opposition 
believes in the principle of private ownership of land rather than in a rental plan proposed by the Land Bank. 
Might I suggest to the Hon. Member that he must be either thoroughly confused or extremely inconsistent in 
his philosophy and principle of land ownership. I want to make reference to what the Hon. Member said 
during Agriculture Estimates when he suggested and urged the Government of Saskatchewan to buy up some 
18 sections of land in the Kisbey area. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD:— On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker, I think I have the right to, rather than have 
him misinterpret my remarks, as I said I urge the Department of Natural Resources and the Minister of 
Agriculture to look at the piece of land and take into consideration the possibility of adjoining the park and 
the possibility of making it community pasture. That is very much different than the Land Bank proposal. 
 
MR. MATSALLA:— Mr. Speaker, it is noted that he said this and I find this in the Leader-Post, April 15, 
1972 and I quote: 
 

I am concerned that a large American concern may purchase the land and it would then be lost to the 
local people forever. 

 
Now doesn’t this mean that he suggested that the Government buy the 18 sections of land in the Kisbey 
area? Certainly it does. You will note, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal Opposition speak with two tongues. 
With one tongue, it says we are against Government getting into the land business and holding control of 
farm land, and the other tongue says we are concerned about Americans buying up the land. I ask the 
Opposition, where do you stand? Do you know what your position is on this issue? This House wants to 
know, and so do the people of Saskatchewan want to know. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MATSALLA:— The Members to your left, Mr. Speaker, will have to make a decision. The alternative 
proposal put forth by the Hon. Member for Cannington yesterday is a joke. There is nothing new about the 
proposal. What he is saying is that the Government of Saskatchewan should set up another Farm Credit 
Corporation. We have one Farm Credit Corporation, why do we need another one? I don’t want to seem as if 
I am belittling the Farm Credit Corporation. I believe the Corporation has done a good job and still is doing a 
good job. There is a place for a farm loan agency in our agriculture industry and the Corporation 



 
April 25, 1972 
 

1962 
 

should continue its function. But the farmers of Saskatchewan want an alternative program - a program 
through which they are not forced to borrow large sums of money in order to stay above water. They do not 
want to get mortgaged to the limit in order to get into farming or to stay in farming. They want a program 
that will provide the easy transfer of land from father to son and one that will give young farmers a chance to 
farm without having to invest a large sum of capital in land purchases. 
 
The New Democratic Party is in close touch with the farming community of our province. Over the past 
years the New Democratic Party recognized the farm problem and the need for an acceptable land transfer 
and lease plan. Now as a Government we have come up with a plan which we believe is acceptable. Mr. 
Speaker, the farmers in Saskatchewan played a very important role in developing the Land Bank program. I 
speak from my own experience in the Canora constituency. We held four Land Bank workshops. All four of 
them were well attended. Of those attending I would say that 25 to 30 per cent of the people were 
non-supporters. I believe this to be very significant. What is more significant and inspiring is that all of the 
people attending including the non-supporters participated in the discussions in an intelligent and very 
constructive manner. The workshops gave me the impression that amongst the people of the farming 
community a strong feeling existed that the Land Bank program is the alternative. The ideas and suggestions 
put forth by the workshops were compiled and sent into the office of the Minister of Agriculture. The 
farmers had pride in that they themselves had a part to play in designing their own program, and that’s the 
way it should be. 
 
When the Members opposite speak of another Farm Credit Corporation in Saskatchewan it is a clear 
indication how far out of touch they are with the grassroots farming community of our province. They are 
completely out of tune with the times. In the words of the Hon. Member of Pelly (Mr. Larson), they are 
playing the same old gramophone record of gloom and doom and they are too regressive to even change the 
needle. The farmers and the people of Saskatchewan had to make a choice. Their choice was either to 
continue farming under the conditions as they are, that is, gradually go broke and face mortgage foreclosures, 
leave the farms, and go into cities where we already have over-crowdedness and unemployment. With the 
eventual takeover by mortgage companies and corporations, contract farming and a new feudalism would be 
the order of the day. Peasants would work for a wage for large corporation landlords. Farm family life would 
become a thing of the past. Or their choice was to look toward a new land program that would provide for 
convenient land transfers, sale of land for preparation for retirement in the case of old farmers, and for a way 
to help young farmers get established in farming without having to invest capital in farm land, and hence 
maintain the satisfying rural style of living as we know it. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan made their decision of choice on June 23rd last. They chose to elect the New Democratic 
Government that would give them an alternative, a new image in a farm program that could have a 
significant effect in maintaining the family way of farming in our province. 
 
I might say that the people’s choice is now our Government’s obligation and responsibility to carry out the 
proposed Land Bank program. This legislation, Mr. Speaker, means an honest effort by this Government to 
make farming a family way of life and as such deserves the support of every Member of this House. 
 



 
April 25, 1972 

 

1963 
 

It is my intention, Mr. Speaker, to make further comments on this Bill. I therefore beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. B.M. DYCK: (Saskatoon City Park):— On behalf of Mr. Brockelbank the Member for 
Saskatoon-Mayfair I would like to welcome to this Assembly 70 students from Caswell School in Saskatoon. 
I hope that they have an informative afternoon here. I understand that they are accompanied by their teachers 
Mr. Rathgaber and Mrs. Korpan. I hope that you find this afternoon’s proceedings educational and have a 
safe trip home to Saskatoon-Mayfair. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
 MOTION 
 
 BILL NO. 128 - An Act to Amend The Medical Profession Act. 
 
MR. A. TAYLOR (Kerrobert-Kindersley):— Mr. Speaker, it seems as though an error was made earlier 
today when I introduced a Bill which apparently includes a money matter. 
 
It is therefore moved by myself and seconded by the Member for Elrose (Mr. Owens), by the leave of the 
Assembly, that the order for seconding reading of Bill No. 128 - An Act to amend The Medical Profession 
Act, be discharged and the Bill withdrawn. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


	1.  Visit all hospital pharmacists as soon as possible.
	2. Determine their annual consumption of largactil tablets.
	3. Find out the brand and prices paid for the products they are using at the present time.
	4. Attempt to determine at what price they are willing to purchase a year’s supply of largactil.
	5. Point out the advantages of being able to obtain the original product which is being sold at what is a non-profitable price for a research company.

