



















































Hansard: April 07, 1972


 

1556 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

31st Day 

 

Friday, April 7, 1972. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF SPECIAL GUESTS 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a good deal of pleasure to introduce to you 

and through you to this House some special guests who are seated behind the rail. I should like to 

introduce Senator L.D. Christianson, the minority leader in the State Senate of the State of North 

Dakota. With him are Mrs. Christianson and their three children, Jill, David and Kirk. I know that all 

Members of the House would like to extend a particularly warm welcome to Senator Christianson and 

his family both because we extend our greetings to them personally and because we wish to extend our 

greetings to them as representatives of the neighborly and friendly State of North Dakota. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. P.P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to this House, a group of 

boys on your left, of Grade Eleven and Twelve students from Allan School, accompanied by their two 

teachers, Mr. Flahr and Mr. Darichuk. Now, Mr. Speaker, you may or may not know, but if not, I am 

going to tell you that Allan is the potash, swish and kuhah capital of the world. The last one you eat. 

Now it is my hope that they enjoy their visit to Regina this afternoon and gain first-hand experience on 

how the Government of Saskatchewan operates. I know that we all wish them a safe and happy journey 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you a 

group of Grade Ten high school pupils from the town of Kelliher under the care of their teacher, Mr. 

Ledingham and their bus driver, Don Volman. I hope that their stay here today is educational and we 

wish them all a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce once 

again a group of high school students from Birch Hills High School. They are led there today by their 

teacher, Mr. Grant Gets and Mr. Dick True. The bus driver is Mr. Lyn Cox. They visited the University 

this morning and I know that their trip here will be very educational and I certainly wish them a safe 

journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1557 

Mr. E.F. Flasch (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to this Assembly 

a group of some 50 students from the Prelate School representing the Grade Seven, Eight and Nine 

classes in that school, who have come some 240 miles to witness this Legislature in Session. They are 

accompanied by two of their teachers, Mr. Engel and Mr. Kot, who are also with them in the east gallery 

behind me. They are also accompanied by a group of drivers and some of their wives seated in the 

Speaker’s Gallery. I should like to welcome on behalf of the Legislature the whole group. We would 

hope that they will have an enjoyable and an informative day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon-Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to perform a double 

introduction today while I am on my feet. There are two groups of students from schools who came 

together to Regina today. One group is from Mayfair constituency and I believe the other group is from 

University – Cardinal Leger School. The group from Mayfair constituency are from McNab Park 

School. They are accompanied by three teachers, Mr. Froese, Mr. Birtsch and Mr. Cook. I am sure that 

all Members of the Assembly will join with me in wishing these two groups of students a good day in 

the Legislature, an entertaining day and an informative day, and a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

POLITICAL COMMENT OF A CIVIL SERVANT 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct 

a question to the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer). Two days ago I asked a question in this 

House regarding the political comment of a civil servant in a Department of Natural Resources pamphlet 

put out. The Premier left the impression that it was an irresponsible action on the part of that civil 

servant and that he would check into it. It has left the impression with the public of Saskatchewan that it 

was the responsibility of a civil servant. I should like to ask the Minister of Natural Resources, did he 

write this particular pamphlet or did he give instructions that it be printed in this bulletin? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will answer in part because I find that the bulletin that I got the 

photostatic copy of is not as I understood the Member to represent it. He suggested that the words 

complained of were written by a public servant. In fact what has happened is that a departmental report 

has been sent out quoting the departmental Minister. This has been traditional in this House and in this 

Government for many, many years. For good or ill there have been many departmental reports quoting 

the Minister. This one quotes the Minister of Natural Resources and I think that this is no departure from 

principle and accordingly I think the comments made by the Member for Milestone against this 

particular public servant were unwarranted. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1558 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — In reply, Mr. Speaker, this particular report is prepared by the Conservation and 

Information Service, Nolan Matthies, Supervisor. It mentions nothing about the Minister of Natural 

Resources on this information. It’s a Resource report. “Saskatchewan Department of Natural Resources 

for immediate release, Volume 6, No. 48”. It is not prepared, it is not printed, it is not sent out from the 

Minister’s office. It is sent out by the Department of Natural Resources and it is a verbal attack 

commenting on a debate that proceeded in this House. Mr. Speaker, I also find a remarkable similarity 

put out by the Minister of Natural Resources in all the newspapers in southern Saskatchewan, letters to 

the editor, signed by Eiling Kramer, Minister of Natural Resources. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this was 

under the instructions of the Minister of Natural Resources, a direct summation of a letter to the editor 

printed by him in every newspaper in southern Saskatchewan to make a verbal attack at the Member 

from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I need no lectures from the 

Member from Milestone as to how to run the Department of Natural Resources and what’s more, 

regardless of how the information gets about I make no apologies for the letters I’ve sent out. When a 

Member of this House deliberately misinforms the public and the Press continues to carry that story in 

headlines which is factually incorrect information and information which should have been prefaced by 

information that the Member well knew was a fact that those policies were laid down by the former 

Government that he complained about, I think regardless of what channels are used the public ought to 

be informed as to what the facts of the case are, and I make no apologies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Natural Resources telling this House and the people 

of Saskatchewan that from time forward he will use the Government Information Services to reply to 

political debate in this House. Is that what you are saying? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think that the question was raised the other day by the Member and it has 

been raised again today. Answers given may or may not be satisfactory but we can’t permit a debate at 

this time. If further debate is necessary it can be raised in Estimates or by substantive motion. 

 

ROMANIAN TRACTOR COMPANY 
 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). In view of the severe criticism from the city of 

Saskatoon and representatives of the Romanian Tractor Company for the Government’s failure to 

announce the site of this firm, would the Minister inform us if the Government is still favoring Moose 

Jaw and if so when we can expect an announcement in this regard so that the cities of Saskatchewan will 

quiet their vendetta against each other brought upon by the Premier’s 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1559 

statement that he wants the firm to go to Moose Jaw even though it has started in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry): — Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Member for Athabasca is not 

going to begin an attack on the Romanian Tractor proposal as the Members did last night, belittling 

foreign made tractors, belittling our participation in this venture. I want to say in reply to the question he 

poses that these premature and unwarranted comments made by certain individuals and groups are likely 

to lose the Romanian Tractor project, not the actions of the Government of Saskatchewan. I want to 

point out to the Members opposite that it is in the interests of the province if the partners in this project 

are allowed to proceed without any unnecessary and uninformed publicity. The Government of 

Saskatchewan is attempting to pursue the question of location and other matters with its partners, Unizal 

Tractor and Autotractor in a rational and objective manner despite the unfavorable publicity which 

comes from, as I say, uninformed sources. 

 

Now the Members surely are aware that in December of last year the partners signed an agreement 

undertaking to commission a feasibility study, undertaking to make a joint application to the Department 

of Regional Economic Expansion. That is under way. 

 

We are going to assess the question of location on hard economic facts. Now we can’t make a unilateral 

decision on location. I make no apologies for the fact that the Government has expressed concern about 

the need for industrial development in Moose Jaw. I don’t think any public-minded citizen in 

Saskatchewan would deny that Moose Jaw has suffered more loss in economic terms in recent years 

than any of the two larger centres in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now at this time the Romanian officials have indicated that they prefer Saskatoon, the Government has 

indicated that it prefers Moose Jaw if that is feasible. The Government and the Romanians both feel that 

these preferences have been expressed on the basis of preliminary and general impressions and both 

agree that the final decision should be based on economic facts. In order to achieve that objective we 

have invited the Romanians to send a team of technical experts here and we understand they will accept 

our invitation. And on our part we have commissioned a special study by consultants to assembly 

economic data for the consideration of the technical experts when they arrive. 

 

I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan does not intend to close the door 

on industrial development for any community in the province. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to point out for the future that the Minister in giving his 

reply went three minutes and forty-five seconds and I would hope that we would have the same leeway 

when we ask questions in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that statement is not called for. I try to allow latitude and an answer sometimes 

takes longer than the 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1560 

question. I hope all Hon. Members will bear with me, I’m trying to give fair play. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

SIMPSON FLYERS HOCKEY TEAM WIN 
 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw 

attention to the House of the outstanding accomplishment of the Simpson Flyers Hockey Team in 

winning for the fourth year in a row the Provincial ‘D’ championship. In addition they also won the Last 

Mountain hockey league. Ken Freeman is their coach and his team has the distinction of having eight 

members from one family on it, the VanThyne family from Simpson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 – HISTORIC OBLIGATION OF RAILWAY COMPANIES 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. M. Feschuk (Prince 

Albert East): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to remember the historic obligation of the 

Railway Companies to transport agricultural products to markets, and recognize the importance 

of exports, particularly agricultural exports, in providing national income and employment and 

earning foreign exchange, now give direction, assistance and instruction in all aspects of 

grain-handling and transportation with initial and particular attention to the utilization and 

re-organization of railroad facilities and grain-handling and loading facilities. 

 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, the present problem at the West Coast is that grain is not 

being delivered to the terminals by the railways in sufficient quantities to meet the export requirements. 

Otto Lang and his officials have been forced to admit that we have lost grain sales due to this inability to 

meet the demand requirements. But what have they done about it? They promised an improved port 

facility at Prince Rupert. We welcome this action as it fulfils the Liberal promise going back to 1919 – 

better late than never! But we do not welcome the attitude of the Liberal Members in this Saskatchewan 

Legislature. We point out that measures must be taken now to move grain this year. Sales lost this year 

will be difficult to pick up in the future. Farmers not only lose millions this year from lost grain sales, 

they also have to pay the demurrage charges on the ships lined up in Vancouver Harbor. If you look at 

the number of ships that have been lined up from February 25th to March 23rd of this year, you will find 

that they range from 16 to 28. The average is 22 ships per day. If you take the average demurrage charge 

as $4,000 per day then it has cost our farmers $88,000 a day demurrage. This last month of Otto Lang’s 

bungling has cost farmers over $2.5 million. What do the Liberals say about this? The Member from 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) stated the other 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1561 

day in this debate and I quote: 

 

The storage capacities and handling situation and the cleaning facilities are the number one 

priority. 

 

He wishes us to believe that the situation is that there are boxcars lined up at the doors at the Vancouver 

terminals. He wishes us to believe that there is more grain being delivered to the West Coast than can be 

handled or stored or cleaned by those facilities. This is certainly not the case. If you examine the facts 

you will find that the problem is not that boxcars are lined up outside the Vancouver terminals. The 

situation is that there are workers waiting for boxcars to arrive at the Vancouver terminals. Otto Lang 

has told us that we must unload 800 carloads a day at the Port of Vancouver to meet present 

commitments – 800 carloads a day. In the month from February 25 to March 23 how many days were 

there 800 carloads dumped – 20 days out of that month, 10, five? No, the answer is two days. These 

carload reports are public knowledge. The Member for Milestone should be able to find it in the Western 

Producer on page 2, where they are published in every edition. And if he found these reports he would 

also find the reason why there were not more boxcars unloaded. The reasons are the slides which 

occurred on the present rail routes. The explanation given in the Western Producer for the first week of 

March is, and I quote: 

 

The railways were only able to deliver about half enough cars to ensure continuous unloading 

operations. The manager of the Pool Terminal Elevator at Vancouver reports that car dumpers 

sat idle for many hours because cars were not available for unloading. 

 

But in the second week of March the explanation was: 

 

Grain shipments from Vancouver still remain erratic because of a lack of grain arriving at the 

Port to sustain maximum operations. Daily car unloads are still far below the target of 800 cars. 

 

The report for the third week of March was equally grim and I quote: 

 

The terminals continue to operate at only partial capacity and were without cars on several 

occasions last week. 

 

I repeat, again, the problem is that the railways have not moved the grain. Extra unloading, cleaning and 

storage capacities sit idle waiting for grain to arrive. Mr. Speaker, I give you the example of the Pool 

Elevator at Vancouver. This elevators with two dumpers, working 16 hours a day, can unload 200 

boxcars a day. This elevator has a 24-hour cleaning capacity of 200 loads a day. From March 1st to 

March 29th on only one day did the Pool receive 200 cars. Instead of averaging 200 boxcars a day they 

only averaged 117 boxcars a day. Some days the two dumpers instead of working 16 hours had enough 

cars for only two hours. 

 

On March 2nd, instead of 200 boxcars, 36. On March 3rd instead of 200 boxcars, 11; on March 9th 

instead of 200 boxcars, 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1562 

14; on March 22nd instead of 200 boxcars, 14. Even on days when they received an average number of 

cars their dumpers were out of operation for many hours. The daily report for March 16th reads: 

 

118 cars, both dumpers out of cars for six hours. 

 

The daily report for March 21st reads: 

 

110 cars, both dumpers out of cars for eight hours. 

 

Now the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) wants the farmers of Saskatchewan to believe that 

Otto Lang is doing a great job moving grain. 

 

I want to tell the Member for Milestone and the Members opposite that the farmers are better informed 

than they are. They know that the grain is not even getting out to the Coast. They are interested in seeing 

grain sent down the Pacific Great Eastern From Prince George. They are interested in seeing a 35-mile 

rail link joining the CN and the PGE near Kamloops, thereby avoiding the major slide areas. 

 

The Members opposite ask: who is going to build it? They find it hard to conceive that railways could 

build another 35 miles of track when they have already built 46,000 miles of heavy duty track in 

Canada. And surely now they are attempting to take thousands of branch lines out of Saskatchewan, 

surely they can build 35 miles of track to get the grain to Vancouver. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this morning’s Leader-Post the following article came to my attention. The heading is 

“Unit Train Future said Dim.” And it quotes W.S. Beaton, the Grain Movement Co-ordinator for the 

Canadian Transport Commission. In North Battleford he said Thursday: 

 

There is no foreseeable future for the use of unit trains to move Prairie grain. Mr. Beaton said in 

an interview that the only way a successful unit train operation into bulk loading facilities into 

Vancouver could be achieved would be if ships would be waiting at the pier each time a unit 

train is unloaded. 

 

And he is quoted as saying: 

 

As far as future trains are concerned I don’t think there is any definite scheduling in the near 

future. 

 

This was primarily because, quote: 

 

We are not fully utilizing the conventional facilities at Vancouver yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what he said is true. The conventional facilities are not being fully utilized at present and 

we think they should be. But I would go further to say that it is no excuse at all to put aside this proposal 

of unit trains, to say that ships must be waiting at the pier in order for this unit train system to work. 

 

Over the last month there was an average of 22 ships waiting at the harbor. Surely if there are 22 ships 

waiting in the harbor they can arrange to have one of those at the pier to have 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1563 

a unit train unloaded into it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Federal Government is to be condemned by both sides of 

this House for their lack of co-ordination of transportation facilities – transportation facilities that are 

needed to ensure that we retain our markets and furthermore that we increase them. I am pleased to 

support this motion, Mr. Speaker, and I hope the Members opposite will do likewise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, just before the vote is taken on this matter, I 

feel that I should say a few words with respect to this very important issue. 

 

I think this is one of the very important resolutions that is before this Assembly for consideration. This 

Resolution calls on the Members of this House to bring to the attention of the railway companies their 

obligation with respect to agricultural products and to make sure that the agricultural products are 

transported to market. 

 

I don’t think that language is overly aggressive or overly abrasive as far as the railway companies are 

concerned. This year, I think, has been a very difficult year with respect to the movement of grain. It has 

been difficult, the railway companies say, because of circumstances beyond their control. In fact, it has 

been suggested by some Hon. Members in this House that statements by the Government, indeed this 

Resolution, is somehow unwarranted simply because the delays are due to snowslides and weather 

conditions. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that for years now the route – the normal and traditional train 

passage – to the West Coast has always had a slide problem. There have been a considerable number of 

lost days because of this type of weather condition. I remind the Members of the House that lost time is 

almost unrecoverable time. The number of boxcars, that cannot be delivered and the amount of grain 

that cannot be unloaded sometimes and very frequently never is caught up. The result is that the 

facilities, very frequently, in Vancouver are left underutilized. 

 

When I was there recently in the middle of February at the height of the crisis there was some 

considerable storage capacity at our own Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, something in excess of two million 

bushels left idle. They hadn’t moved nor unloaded very many boxcars. I am very concerned about the 

attitude of the railway companies and the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The railway companies seem to argue that the reason for this failure to move grain is basically because 

they don’t have diesel power. They say they don’t have enough boxcars. They say there is not enough 

trackage. All of this amounts to an implied argument, and in some quarters even expressly stated, that 

there is an onus on governments of the day to provide the railway companies with the necessary finances 

to provide the increased diesel power, the increased boxcars, increased 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1564 

trackage and so forth. 

 

We all know that movement of grain in Canada is regulated by the Crow’s Nest rates. These rates are 

favorable to the Western Canadian farm producer and rightly so. I am very concerned about this 

particular plea by the railway companies because I have said outside this House, and I repeat again, that 

I think we see here the beginning of a not so subtle argument on the part of some executives of railway 

companies, or perhaps subtle argument depending on your point of view, that there should be a change 

in the rates on Crow’s Nest. The obvious argument or answer, every time that we say we need more 

diesel power and more boxcars, is for the railways to say that we need more finances in the hands of the 

railway companies. And how do we get more funds and revenue into the hands of the railway 

companies? We increase their freight rates. And how do we increase their freight rates? By taking off 

the statutory protection of the Crow’s Nest rates. And that is how I think the basic argument is shaping 

up and beginning to shape up from the railways’ point of view. 

 

Now some people have suggested in this House that the sort of theory that I have advanced is 

impractical. With respect to the Members who would think that I say that all you have to do is take a 

look at the statements of the various railway officials, I say that this crisis is being used in some quarters 

by railway companies as the beginning of a building argument to justify in the appropriate corridors of 

power some move to change Crow’s Nest rates, notwithstanding the denials from the railway companies 

to the contrary. 

 

I say, therefore, this Resolution is, in fact, very timely because we remind the railway companies that it 

is their historic obligation, their legal obligation, and their social obligation to this country to make sure 

that grain being hauled to the West Coast can be hauled and is hauled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some Members opposite have tended to belittle statements made by the Government 

respecting the use of the PGE. This is the so-called third rail route into Vancouver. In fact some Hon. 

Members in this House didn’t know that there was trackage going into Vancouver. They argued against 

this particular aspect. They said how could it be done because the Hon. Minister who was speaking – 

namely myself – didn’t even know that we had to build 38 miles of trackage. That was the argument. I 

am very glad that they realize now that in fact the trackage exists; that in fact there has been a haul of the 

wheat to Vancouver through the PGE. But this involves the co-operation of the other major railway 

companies, the CPR and the CNR. It involves the co-operation of the PGE. Above all it involves some 

motivation on the part of the Federal Government to be able to divert the boxcars over that necessary 

third route, if required, and get the wheat to port in Vancouver. 

 

This route, I am informed by my officials, is relatively slide free. During the time that the troubles were 

continuing on the traditional routes when something in excess of two weeks of train time was lost, over 

the PGE route the total time lost due to weather and slides amounted to something in excess of four 

hours. 

 

I don’t argue that this is an ultimate solution. I think an ultimate solution is much more fundamental and 

much more 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1565 

basic and requires a great deal of thought and study by all governmental agencies. But I do say that a 

great deal of thought and responsibility can be placed on the shoulders of the railway companies and the 

appropriate Federal authorities for failing to have directed that this movement of grain should be 

diverted over the third rail route. We could have moved substantial boxcars and gotten substantial 

numbers of bushels of wheat to the Port of Vancouver. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now Members obviously have read the question of the Prince Rupert terminal 

elevator and the recent announcement by Mr. Jamieson, that Prince Rupert was going to be expanded 

and increased and I welcome this on behalf of the Government. 

 

I welcome it and I am sure the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) welcomes it as well. We all 

welcome it, belated as it may be. But what actually happened at Prince Rupert, Mr. Speaker? From 

August 1st to December 29, in the first five months of the crop year some 4.7 million bushels were 

shipped from Prince Rupert. On December 29 there was 1.2 million store and between December 1971 

and March 15, 1972 3.5 million bushels were shipped from Prince Rupert and the in-storage position 

had dwindled to 422 bushels, Mr. Speaker. Thus in the eleven week crisis period, Prince Rupert received 

some 2.2 million bushels of grain from the Prairies, yet its total unloading capacity in that same period 

was not 2.2 million but somewhere in the order of 13 million bushels of grain. 

 

The question to be asked about Prince Rupert is similar to the query with respect to Vancouver, the PGE 

and the activities of the railway company. Why was not grain diverted when the CP and the CN lines 

were blocked as a result of the crisis to make full use of the Prince Rupert facilities? 

 

There was gross negligence here, I say to the Members of the House, gross negligence either at the 

doorstep of the railway companies or to be laid at the doorstep of the Federal Government and the 

Minister-in-Charge of the Canadian Wheat Board. I want to emphasize that to the Members of the 

House and to the people of this Province, that the railway companies are not meeting the needs of the 

Province of Saskatchewan and grain producers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — They are not sensitive to our needs. We have to build a transportation system which 

has margins for errors built into it, margins for errors such as slides and weather conditions; margins for 

errors with respect to ship tie-ups; margins for errors with respect to rail tie-ups. There are going to be 

three of those. It is inevitable in human affairs. 

 

The problem is that the Federal Government and the railway companies have failed to construct the type 

of grain delivery system that allows this type of error margin for manoeuvring this margin for the people 

and the producers of Saskatchewan. And to that extent I say, again, there has been gross negligence for 

which the prairie farmer will pay far in excess of any 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1566 

strike or another stoppage that may result. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the Hon. Member opposite that I feel, and quite sincerely, that most of them also 

recognize the work and the need of this particular motion to draw the problem to the attention of the 

railway companies. I want to remind all Members of this House that sometimes we think that because 

we are legislators or because we are in Government we wield power and I suppose in some respects we 

do. 

 

In my eight months of office I don’t think I have had more frustration than in the area of trying to deal 

with railway companies, whether it happens to be on the question of grain movement or freight rates or 

whatever. This is a very difficult and complex job. Wherever our officials discuss it with them, wherever 

we speak of the issue politically, somehow the railway companies appear to be insensitive to the needs 

of Western Canada and to the needs of Saskatchewan. 

 

People can talk about separatist feelings in other parts of Canada, I hope those feelings are not accepted 

by this House, and in fact those developments do not occur. But I can certainly say from my travelling 

and experience the activities of the Canadian Pacific Railway in particular and the CNR as well, and 

some of the actions taken by those officials, has been a great source of Western Canadian dissatisfaction. 

 

I commend the Hon. Member who brought forward this Resolution. I commend him for asking the 

Members of this House to be reminded of the historic obligation of the railways and for bringing this 

issue before this House and allowing the Members to debate it, because it is only with a united voice, 

rallying behind this Resolution, that we can put another arrow in the bow and try to impress the railway 

companies with the force of the needs of the Western Canadian producers in Saskatchewan, Manitoba 

and Alberta. 

 

I urge all Members to support this Resolution. I certainly will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to enter into this debate until I heard the 

remarks of the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow). 

 

We were not, the Members of the Opposition, were not questioning the possibilities in previous debates 

about alternate trackage. We disagree with the impression given by the Attorney General that this 

relatively slide-free trackage already exists, which it does not. We also question the misleading 

impression given by the Attorney General that the so-called PGE, as he refers to it, would take this grain 

transportation and the freight of grain without taking into consideration the Crow’s Nest Pass agreement. 

 

We are starting to wonder now, after statements in the previous debates and the statements today about 

the PGE, the Pacific Great Eastern Railway, I believe it is, that the Attorney General is the one who has 

been holding himself out as the expert on rail transportation of the Government. And Members opposite 

seem to agree. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1567 

Well, I’m going to tell the Members opposite that there is no such thing as the PGE and if the Attorney 

General was aware of the situation that the British Columbia Government changed its name sometime 

ago and it is now the British Columbia Railroad. But the Attorney General seems to have forgotten that 

little aspect. That’s how much in touch he was when he went out to Vancouver to discuss this problem. 

He didn’t even know with whom he was dealing. The Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, is quite right 

when he says that there has been negligence on the part of the railways in the question of grain 

transportation. The railways have a tradition especially in Saskatchewan since 1905 when we became a 

Province in having benefits accruing to the railroads which were completely unjustified and for which 

they did not compensate adequately the people of Saskatchewan. We are only questioning, Mr. Speaker, 

the misleading impression that the Attorney General has been giving that this whole problem is 

railroads, a lot of the problem is railroads, not all of it. We question the impression and the statements 

made by the Attorney General that the Government of Canada is grossly negligent. If the Attorney 

general would take the rational approach of Otto Lang who has accomplished more in the last three 

years to try and rationalize the grain transportation system in this country, then maybe we would get 

something done and that type of approach is the approach that this House should be taking. 

 

Mr. E. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — I believe the main thrust of this Resolution before us must be to impress 

on the Government of Canada the extreme urgency to act quickly towards reorganization and 

rationalization of our entire transportation and grain-handling system. We are now moving into a period 

where our grain sales in the prairie region are nearing 900 million bushels per year and may in fact reach 

one billion bushels per year in the very near future. Developing markets for increasing amounts of 

potash and livestock and livestock products will be competing with the grain industry for the use of 

rolling stock and diesel power. The need for immediate response to the problems facing transportation 

facilities can no longer be ignored. Only recently we have been told by Wheat Board officials that we 

are unable to commit ourselves to further sales contracts because of inability to deliver. A number of 

factors seem to be responsible for this impasse. 

 

No. 1. The argument of the railway companies that many of their branch lines are uneconomic and that 

they are losing money under statutory Crow’s Nest rates. 

 

No. 2. The inefficient assembly through use of outmoded equipment at elevator points and the 

unnecessarily large number of assembly points. 

 

No. 3. The problem of moving freight to West Coast terminals in winter due to adverse weather 

conditions. 

 

No. 4. The inadequacy of dock facilities at terminals which add to loading time. 

 

No. 5. The inefficient use of the Port of Churchill as a delivery point. 

 

No. 6. The lack of direction regarding priorities. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1568 

The necessity of early and effective action by the Government of Canada is important not only to 

Western Canada but to the entire nation. Export of western grain, livestock and potash contribute to a 

very high percentage of our earnings of foreign exchange and in providing national income through 

providing steady employment in many service trades related to these sales. Any slow down in sales must 

immediately be reflected in lost income in those areas. The Hon. Member for Milestone the other day 

blamed the antiquated collection system for the lack of grain arriving at Vancouver. Mr. Speaker, I agree 

that our collection system may be somewhat obsolete, however it has for many years been able to load 

the required amount of cars to provide at least 700 cars per day to Vancouver, if it could be moved 

through the mountains. This is a far cry from the average of under 300 cars per day which has been 

arriving at the terminals on many days ever since the first of this year. I am advised that there have never 

been less than 6,400 cars loaded and enroute to Vancouver and this at times has reached a high of 7,800. 

These cars are ready to move through the mountains any time that they could be taken through. Surely 

this indicates that the main problem is not in the collection system. He also blamed the lack of storage 

and cleaning facilities at Vancouver for much of the present tie-up. I agree that there is a lack of storage 

space. However, I would point out to him that terminals in Vancouver have the capacity to lean grain as 

fast it is can be unloaded at the terminals, up to 750 cars per 24-hour shift. I should further like to 

remind him that a number of years ago when similar lack of storage and terminal facilities was evident, 

a great deal of pressure was brought to bear on the Federal Government to build additional storage. But 

they steadfastly refused to do so. It was not until 1968 when the farmers of Saskatchewan through the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool decided they could no longer wait for Government action and that they 

themselves built the terminal at their own expense costing somewhere in the neighborhood of $22 

million. If it were not for their prompt action at that time the situation at Vancouver would now be near 

total chaos. 

 

We are looking at a similar situation today. Surely the Federal Government will not once again renege 

on their responsibility in this regard. I believe that we are going to have to accept the fact that there will 

have to be some rationalization of rail and elevator facilities in some of our rural areas. The cost of 

maintaining assembly points at sidings six or eight miles apart regardless of availability of alternate 

services is no longer economic. The arguments of railroads with regard to the cost of maintaining 

hundreds of miles of track just for grain assembly cannot be entirely ignored. In many areas almost the 

only freight now carried by railways is grain. We also have the problem of the elevator companies who 

are facing reconstruction and renovation of a large part of their grain assembly system. In order to meet 

tight delivery schedules and to move large volumes of grain in a short time it is absolutely essential that 

these companies be permitted to rationalize their industry so that expensive renovations be carried out in 

locations that have a long term future in our changing society. Because this type of rationalization 

involves not only the economic considerations of the railways and the elevator companies but also 

encompasses a whole host of social implications, it is essential that this rationalization proceed with 

maximum participation of all parties concerned. This would include the railways and elevator 

companies, Federal Government and Provincial Government but most of all the communities 

themselves. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1569 

I am convinced that a very substantial rationalization could take place with very little disruption of 

community service if the proper consultation takes place and I emphasize, that if the proper consultation 

takes place. The whole question of running rights of one railway company’s rolling stock on another’s 

tracks could become part of this problem. In some cases new lines may be required to link large service 

centres to other trackage when a line is abandoned. It is unlikely that railway companies which are, of 

course, interested only in what the balance sheet shows will on their own do any kind of reappraisal of 

this nature. I believe that the Government of Canada under whose jurisdiction this falls must move 

quickly to meet this urgent social and economic problem. Every year that goes by and every piecemeal 

effort on unorganized rationalization will only serve to make the whole problem more difficult to 

resolve. The time to act is now. The rationalization of the assembly system however is only the first part 

of a larger problem. The need to develop a reliable year round delivery system to export positions is 

equally urgent. With trackage being reduced and with greater volume on existing lines it is becoming 

more and more obvious that some arrangement has to be made wherein the Board of Transport 

Commissioners can direct that the running rights of one railway company be available to the other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — The logical solution of course would be nationalization of the CPR, so that the whole 

railway jungle could be straightened out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — The negligence of the Federal Government in not using the Port of Churchill to its 

maximum capacity is also to be deplored. Here we have a real logical port outlet for our farm produce 

through a channel which is almost a thousand miles closer to European markets than the Lakehead ports. 

With modern radar facilities the length of the shipping season has been increased substantially and grain 

exports could very easily be increased substantially and grain exports could very easily be doubled if the 

proper facilities were installed and used to capacity. It is regrettable indeed that the Federal Government 

has not seen fit to make the necessary improvements in harbor and storage facilities to make this added 

capacity possible. I urge this Assembly to do all in its power to convince the Federal authorities to act 

quickly to correct that situation. The announcement that port facilities at Prince Rupert were being 

improved and extended to provide an alternate outlet during the winter months is most welcome, 

however we have heard promises of this kind of development before and we will be watching with a 

great deal of interest to see if this is really going to develop or if it is just another pre-election 

announcement. 

 

There can be little doubt, Mr. Speaker, that one of the main reasons why the Wheat Board is having 

problems getting enough rolling stock from the railway companies to move our agriculture products is 

because of their objection to moving grain at Crow’s Nest rates. There is much evidence to indicate that 

there is a deliberate attempt on their part to slow down the rate of grain movement in Western Canada in 

order to bring pressure to bear on the Government of Canada to remove these 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1570 

statutory rates. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of Canada through the Board of Transport 

Commissioners should once again very firmly remind the railways of their long term obligations to 

provide proper transportation services to the people of Western Canada. I believe they should be 

reminded once again of the very valuable concessions granted to them under the Crow’s Nest Pass 

agreement with respect to land and mineral rights in Western Canada. These concessions have over the 

years and still continue to provide substantial returns to the railways. Because the Port of Vancouver is 

and will probably continue to be the major export centre for grain for some years to come one of the 

obligations that the Federal Government must accept is the immediate need at the Port of Vancouver for 

the updating of proper facilities. There is need for much better loading facilities and for greater storage 

capacity to take care of surge situations so that grain can be stored at dock side before the difficult slide 

problem arises. The increased use of inland terminals to clean and store export grain could possibly be 

of some service here. The question of alternate routes linking the major railways to the PGE to bypass 

the slide area is one that must have top priority. The closing of this link may be costly and may take 

some time but one thing we can be sure of we will continue to have bad slide years year after year on the 

existing routes and we just cannot afford the loss of sales and our reputation as a reliable exporter. The 

price we are paying for the lack of this alternate route is very substantial indeed and can be expected to 

escalate. In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the time is past for political manoeuvring and 

procrastination. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Changes in the entire grain assembly and transportation structure must be made at the 

earliest possible date. However, where rationalization of the assembly system takes place we must 

assure that not only the needs of the railway companies and grain companies are satisfied but that the 

social implications have a major priority when this rationalization takes place. Mr. Speaker, I will 

support this Resolution. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 – OPPOSING PROVIDING OF PRINTING CONTRACTS TO SERVICE 

PRINTING CO. 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Guy (Athabasca): 

 

That this Assembly go on record as opposing any policy of the Saskatchewan Government which 

would provide printing contracts to Service Printing Co., which is solely owned and operated by 

the CCF Publishing Co. Ltd., which is owned by the membership of the NDP Party 

(Saskatchewan division). 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: 

 

That all the words after the word “as” in the first line be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

favoring a policy of providing, as near as practical, an equitable opportunity for Saskatchewan 

printing 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1571 

companies to obtain printing contracts regardless of political affiliation, provided they are 

capable of doing such work on a competitive basis under fair wage and working conditions. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Are you placing the amendment or the motion? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am placing the amendment. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, I’m not certain but I think you said moved by the Minister 

of Public Works. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The amendment was moved by the Minister of Public Works, moved by Mr. 

Brockelbank, seconded by Mr. Meakes. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I thought I misheard you and just didn’t want to be tagged 

with that. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Just a few words, Mr. Speaker, in closing the debate. I don’t think for 

one minute that the people of Saskatchewan will accept this amendment. If the Members opposite wish 

to see this amended motion passed in that way this is all the more reason why they will stand 

condemned before the people of this Province. Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell 

Members opposite that the people, regardless of what Members opposite say, the people of 

Saskatchewan will not tolerate and will not approve of a political party who through its own printing 

company are receiving the taxpayers’ dollars. This is exactly what is going on. Members opposite can 

get up like the Minister of Public Works and say it is a great company and we think printing should be 

spread equally and that Service Printing is no different than any of the other printing companies but the 

people of Saskatchewan know full well that this is not true. The Service Printing Company is owned 

completely and entirely by the NDP of Saskatchewan. And therefore it is absolutely wrong ethically and 

in every other sense to take the taxpayers’ dollar, and then turn it directly and I emphasize, directly to 

their own political party for their own political use and, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know 

this is happening. They condemn it and they do not condone it and never will. So therefore regardless of 

what happens to this motion the people of Saskatchewan will not stand for that type of political 

chicanery pork barrel . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — How are you going to vote for it? 

 

Mr. Guy: — We are going to vote against it. We are going to vote against your amendment because as I 

say there is no way that the Liberal Party will ever be associated with a practice that is unfair, that is so 

politically biased as to take the taxpayers’ hard earned cash and funnel it directly into their own political 

party for their own political fortune. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, will the Member permit a question? 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1572 

Does the Member say that in voting against this amendment and this motion that is now before the 

House that it is the Liberal Party’s position in Saskatchewan that political affiliation will be considered 

when contracts for printing are considered if they should be the party in power? 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, we are talking and the Member had a chance to speak in this debate and I 

think it is significant that he refused to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I think it was significant that he refused to stand up as one of the Treasury Benchers who 

has the responsibility of taking the money from the people of Saskatchewan and putting it in his own 

political party. Now the question he asked was, do we worry about political affiliation? And we do not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — No, no, because we are not talking about political affiliation. We are talking about political 

ownership and the Service Printing Co. is owned solely by the NDP. It is much more than an affiliation. 

We don’t care about affiliation of individual share holders in any printing company but we condemn 

most strongly any political party that will use its own printing company to take the taxpayers’ money for 

political purposes. I hope this answers the Hon. Member’s question and I regret that he didn’t have the 

intestinal fortitude to stand up and make a speech on behalf of using Service Printing. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it answers the question that the Liberals still consider political 

affiliation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, the Attorney General had the opportunity to get into 

this debate, chose not to very obviously . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I don’t think we can permit to continue questions from the Minister. The debate 

is now closed on the motion before the House on Resolution No. 1 as amended by the amendment which 

has been dealt with earlier this afternoon. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 38 

Messieurs 

 

Blakeney Dyck Meakes 

Wood Romanow Messer 

Snyder MacMurchy Pepper 

Michayluk Thorson Whelan 

Kwasnica Carlson Taylor 

Faris Cody Gross 

Mostoway Comer Rolfes 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1573 

 

Bowerman Kramer Thibault 

Larson Baker Brockelbank 

Engel Tchorzewski Owens 

Robbins Matsalla Cowley 

Lange Hanson Oliver 

Kaeding Flasch  

 

NAYS — 14 

Messieurs 

 

Steuart Loken Guy 

Grant Boldt MacDonald 

McIsaac Gardner Weatherald 

MacLeod McPherson Lane 

MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) Wiebe  

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

INTERIM REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE REVIEW OF LIQUOR 

REGULATIONS IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Faris: The Interim Report 

of the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor Regulations in Saskatchewan be now concurred 

in. 

 

Hon. J.E. Brockelbank: — I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to take part in the debate on the Motion before 

us. 

 

The Motion reads – ‘That the Interim Report of the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor 

Regulations in Saskatchewan be now concurred in’. 

 

I had the good fortune to be selected the Chairman of that Special Committee on Liquor Regulations, 

Mr. Speaker. I found during the time that I was Chairman I received good co-operation from the other 

members of the Committee. I believe a fair amount of credit for the Interim Report must be given to the 

staff, especially the secretary who worked so diligently in recording the deliberations of the Committee 

and in preparing drafts for the approval of the Committee. 

 

In its deliberations the Committee made an early basic decision about the manner in which is would 

proceed. It was decided that the Committee would deal in the Interim Report with the items which 

would receive unanimous approval of Committee members. As it happens the recommendations that 

were drawn by the Commission have received the unanimous approval of the Committee members. In 

the main they are recommendations dealing with the area of our day to day existence when we may be in 

contact with a consumption of alcoholic beverages. Consequently people over the age of majority are 

offered, by these recommendations, a more convenient service, if these recommendations are accepted. 

Conversely, those under the age of majority will have less opportunity to publicly consume alcoholic 

beverages. I believe it is safe to say that the Committee agreed to leave the moral decision making up to 

the persons that consume the beverage and/or society at large. The Committee believes and stated that 

they thought greater expenditure will have to be made, particularly in the field of alcohol education and 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1574 

rehabilitation of persons of Indian ancestry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the final report of this Committee which I hope will be delivered some 

time later this year. I suspect that that Report, Mr. Speaker, without judging it in advance, may display at 

its conclusion recommendations which are more likely to be identified with the individuals on the 

Committee. I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I believe the Committee will deal, in its final report, with 

items that are not so concrete as those dealt with in the Interim Report. Consequently views of the 

Committee members will vary accordingly. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I should be remiss if I did not put on the record what I believe to be the 

unanimous thanks of the Committee to the people of Saskatchewan for responding to our request for 

briefs as well as they did. I was pleased to note that we had more than 150 briefs and about half of them 

were presented orally at public hearings at five different locations throughout the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I feel that the Government of Saskatchewan will no doubt bring in legislation to put a 

number of these recommendations into the law books of Saskatchewan. I want to recommend this 

Report to the acceptance of the House secure in the knowledge that it represents public opinion of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to say a very few words. I 

want first of all to congratulate the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor Recommendations. I 

agree, I concur with nearly all the recommendations in the Report. There is one minor objection I have 

and I should like to put it on the record and that is Recommendation No. 3 that the Government of 

Saskatchewan consider increasing the penalty to licensees for serving alcoholic beverages to minors and 

the penalty to minors for entering licensed premises. 

 

I think that I would agree that the penalty to minors for entering licensed premises could in fact be 

increased. But I do not think that it is wise to increase the penalty to licensees. My reasons for this, that I 

think when a minor enters a licensed premises he knows that he is breaking the law. I think that it is 

often very difficult for the licensee to determine whether an individual is a minor or not. I don’t think 

that the penalties to licensees should be taken off completely. I think they have some obligation. The 

licensee has some obligation to attempt to determine whether they are minors or not but I don’t think 

increasing it would particularly help and as I say the minor knows he’s breaking the law. The licensee 

has to decide whether someone is or not. The minor may produce some form of identification and it puts 

a very heavy onus on the licensee. I admit they have an obligation but I don’t think the penalty should be 

increased to the licensee. 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I’m not at this time going to comment on the 

substance of the Report. I think the Committee was in general agreement with the initial part of the 

Report. I would, 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1575 

however, like to go on record as saying we feel that the hearings were certainly held in a very fair 

manner. The original chairman and his replacement were certainly capable and very careful to ensure 

that everyone who appeared before the Committee was given the complete freedom to express their 

views. I should also like to comment that everyone who presented a brief and didn’t appear, that the 

substance of their briefs were also very carefully considered by the Committee. I should also like to say 

that the members of the Committee carried on their work in a non-partisan manner and I’m sure that the 

subsequent hearings will be held in the same high plane. 

 

Mr. H. Owens (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on this Report. I cannot 

wholeheartedly accept all the recommendations as they have been presented by this Special Committee. 

I think that possibly now is as good a time as any to let these feelings be known. 

 

Recommendation No. 4, serving beverages in dining rooms on Sundays. I don’t think that this is 

acceptable to me personally although this, I agree, has been the consensus of opinion as picked up by the 

Committee through their hearings throughout the Province. Sundays, it seems to me, is the day that a 

good many people would like to take their families into a dining room, or have dinner out and the 

surroundings, I believe, are not as acceptable, or would not be as acceptable if liquor was being served, 

in those places. 

 

Recommendation No. 8, where it proposes to have the Liquor Board stores remain open until 2:00 

o’clock a.m. This to me is a bit out of line. I think that all the liquor that anyone requires can certainly be 

bought long, long before 2:00 o’clock in the morning. 

 

Recommendation No. 10, where the premises may be open until 1:30 o’clock a.m. with the option to 

close not before midnight. Again, Mr. Speaker, I think that these hours are exceptionally long. 

 

Going back to Recommendation No. 1 where the age of majority takes over, I said at the time of The 

Age of Majority Act that I had my reservations about this age. I still do, especially when it comes to the 

use of liquor. It seems to me that if these recommendations were all accepted that there would be no 

restraint in the procuring or the drinking of alcoholic beverages at any time. It has been said that what is 

not available you crave for. If it is readily available the craving fades. Only time will tell whether this is 

true regarding the use of alcoholic beverages. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D.H. Lange (Assiniboia-Bengough): Mr. Speaker, I rise at this moment to express my opposition 

to the third Recommendation which advocates increasing penalties to licensees serving alcoholic 

beverages to minors and to young people entering licensed premises under age. 

 

In any research I have undertaken, it has always been made clear to me that the practise of public 

drinking should be approached in a medical and social vein rather than as a criminal-legal problem. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1576 

As Legislators, we have a first class opportunity now to alter our approaches to the usage of alcohol. 

Instead, I find in this Recommendation a distressing step backwards. Once again, we are treating alcohol 

as ‘forbidden fruit’. In the ethos of youth, a minor often looks on drinking as an act of rebellion. Studies 

have shown that problem drinkers on the average, start drinking at a later age and their first experience 

was prompted out of rebellion to parental authority or community standards. This Recommendation 

simply aggravates this harmful trend of keeping young people in a state of perpetual immaturity. 

 

Will an increase in financial penalties arrest the current state of under-age drinking? Hardly. People 

drink because they want to and because they want to, nothing will stop them from doing it. 

 

Will it teach young people to use alcohol responsibly? That is questionable to say the least. From a 

medical point of view our Committee has found that there is a direct correlation between problem 

drinking and psychological distress on the part of the affected individual. 

 

I suggest that if we want to break an individual, who already has the proclivity to drink alcohol, if we 

want to lead him down the skid row trail then we should support this Recommendation. In fact, maybe 

we should increase fines even more. 

 

A Commission on the study of alcoholism which was funded by the American Government, reported 

that one important way of improving the mental health of an alcoholic or a person susceptible to the 

disease, was to help bolster his family life. 

 

The provision of preventative intervention for an individual and his family should be made 

available, 

 

the Commission said. Instead, our Commission proposes to recommend a policy which directly 

contradicts these supportive measures. In fact, the imposition of financial penalties through due process 

of law would only serve to break down family stability and effectively depress that young person’s sense 

of personal worth. After all, I have no illusions that the monetary burden will fall on the culpable 17- or 

16-year-old teenager. The real burden will be shouldered by the whole family. From a medical point of 

view, I can only see increased problems from a young person’s home life at a time in his or her 

development when stability at home is pretty important. 

 

Socially, increased fines are discriminatory and regressive. They are discriminatory because they affect, 

in particular, those ethnic groups in which alcoholism is most prevalent. It is well documents that the 

rate of alcohol consumption and crime resulting there from varies among different ethnic peoples, 

according to their customs and relative class. For instance, Professor Schmeiser from the University of 

Saskatchewan Law School shows in the Saskatchewan Law Review, Spring 1968, that while 

undertaking a first hand look at the administration of justice throughout the Northwest Territories 

sponsored by the Institute of Northern Studies he noticed the evident existence of a severe liquor 

problem particularly among the Indian and Eskimo population. He points out that in a survey of liquor 

convictions at Inuvik from January 1965 to August 1966 the native conviction rate was much higher 

than the white conviction rate. The total number of convictions was 849 and the 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1577 

non-white population accounted for 800 of these. Although the Indians and Eskimos composed only 

38.7 per cent of the population they were responsible for 74.6 per cent of the convictions during this 

period. The Metis figure was quite low and the white population was lower yet. Although Inuvik is not 

located in Saskatchewan I can think that we could find communities within this Province which are 

similar to this. Professor Schmeiser points out how equal applications of laws can accentuate injustices 

when applied to persons who are unequal in condition and in opportunity. In such cases he says, law can 

become the oppressor rather than the protector and the government action becomes unbearably 

bureaucratic. 

 

I would stress that increasing the financial penalty for underage drinking will be discriminatory. Indeed I 

think there are serious drawbacks in having drinking offences punishable by fines at all. It would be a 

regressive law simply due to the fact that it would fall hardest on those people who can least afford it or 

on those communities which are culturally depressed. In many communities there is nothing else to offer 

the local resident but a night in a hotel beverage room. It is a sad documentary on the social conditions 

which exist in parts of Saskatchewan, but I am afraid it is true. The challenge of justice in a free society 

should be met, I will agree, through a reordering of the social economic condition, but this should be 

accompanied hand in hand by a restructuring of our legal practices as well. I know the answer is not 

simple but surely we can seek out alternatives that would work. The present handling of the alcohol 

problem in our society especially with respect to the courts is to my mind most demoralizing for 

everyone concerned, a more alienating process could hardly be invented. It is incumbent upon us to start 

decriminalizing classes of behavior in which justice cannot be met nor the social problem solved. Rather 

than seeking ways to become even more punitive in our approach we must work to construct laws that 

would favor the weak and oppressed to bring them into the mainstream of Canadian life. Mr. Speaker, I 

will concur with the Liquor Report. 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief words on the Interim Report. I would point 

again, Mr. Speaker, as did the Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris) in introducing this report that it was 

indeed an Interim Report and also with the similar comments made by the Member for 

Saskatoon-Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) in the course of his remarks. Certainly I think we all appreciate, 

those of us on the Committee particularly that some of the recommendations would not perhaps be 

acceptable to individual Members here and to individual citizens in the province, Mr. Speaker. I can say 

this that while we did agree to the Report unanimously it wasn’t without a good deal of consideration on 

some of those recommendations. I think for example of the recommendation and the point raised by the 

Member for Assiniboia and also a similar point, I believe the same point really, that was brought into 

debate by the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald)< the question of increased penalties both 

for the licensee and the minors. I think there is justification here and we did give this a good deal of 

consideration, Mr. Speaker. The question here centred around the fact that we proposed to provide a 

means of more positive identification to anyone 18 and over. It was for this reason it was felt that some 

increase in the penalty would certainly be acceptable in this particular situation. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1578 

Most of the other recommendations received a very thorough going over, Mr. Speaker, and as I say 

some of us did have certain reservations about some of them. I think of point number 8, raised by the 

Member for Elrose (Mr. Owens) and I can see his thinking on the point here in leaving the regular 

government outlets open until I think we recommended 2:00 a.m., it could be any earlier time than that. 

The view here was to cut out the illicit trade and traffic as far as bootlegging was concerned. In this 

particular recommendation the Committee met, as I am sure Members are well aware with members of 

the city police in Regina, the RCMP in Saskatoon and so on. 

 

A good deal of consideration was given to all of these recommendations, Mr. Speaker. Again as was 

pointed out in the introduction of the Report, a much more comprehensive report will be coming when 

the final report is brought in. At that time a great deal more attention will be paid to the entire question 

of rehabilitation and treatment as far as alcoholism and the abuse of alcohol is concerned. At that time I 

am sure we can have a more comprehensive debate on a broader scale on this particular Report. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I just wish to add a very few words. First I should like 

to compliment the Committee for the work done. My reports of the work of the Committee indicated 

that the Committee operated exceptionally well and that is a credit to Members on both sides of the 

House who were able to tackle these problems in an orderly systematic way, in a way which laid aside 

any partisan consideration and which brought to bear the full capacity of all members of the Committee. 

 

I propose to support the motion before the House. I wanted to indicate that we as a Government have not 

had an opportunity of fully considering all of the implications of the Report and accordingly the support 

that I give, and very likely some of the Ministers would give, should not be construed as meaning that 

the Government will necessarily forthwith enact into legislation all of the portions of the Report. It may 

be that on mature consideration some of them would be thought to be unacceptable at this time. It may 

be that some of them will be thought to be more appropriately delayed until the final report is 

considered, it may be that some of them will be thought to be ones which ought to be immediately 

introduced. We will certainly be looking at it. And we certainly have looked at it – I don’t mean to 

suggest we have not given it some consideration up to now. We have, however, not yet reached 

conclusions, we have not yet completed all aspects of our consideration of it. I find it generally to be a 

good report, I suspect that a number and indeed perhaps most of the recommendations will find their 

way into law. I merely wish to add the caveat that I am not adding – that I will support the Report, but it 

may be that on mature consideration some, one or more than one of the recommendations will not find 

themselves introduced into law forthwith or at any time. 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make one or two 

brief comments with respect to the Interim Report. I realize it is an interim report, I am sincerely hopeful 

that the final report will place some emphasis on one of the things that I presented personally to the 

Committee. I hoped that advertising of liquor 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1579 

would not be permitted in the province. My argument here is basically that the liquor salesman is 

suspect because it is obvious that his approach is to increase the sale of liquor and liquor is a severe 

problem in our society. 

 

I should like too to compliment the Committee. I think they did a very credible job. I know in the 

presentation I made before that Committee I was well received and every courtesy was shown. One of 

the sections of the Interim Report indicates extended hours for the sale of liquor. I am opposed to those 

sections. I do not believe that prohibition was satisfactory in any respect and I also believe that making it 

more available over longer periods of time does not in any way solve the problem. I certainly have my 

reservations with regard to a number of other sections in the Interim Report, but I shall await the final 

report for further comments. 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — I have two comments with respect to this Committee 

Report. One relates to the education of people to the dangers of alcohol and the second one relates to the 

advertising of liquor and alcohol in Saskatchewan. 

 

I am in sympathy completely with the mood and the ideas of the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Nutana 

Centre, but I do not think that his comments are realistic having regard to what actually occurs with 

respect to the advertising of liquor. We find that newspapers coming into Saskatchewan from other 

places have all kinds of advertisements for alcohol, for beer and for all sorts of liquor. All the magazines 

that come from the United States into Saskatchewan carry liquor advertising. $10 million of Canadian 

money is spent in the United States every year to advertise Canadian liquor back into Canada. A large 

part of this money is spent in radio stations near the United States-Canadian border; and this is $10 

million flowing out of Canada into the United States without in any way reducing the hazard of liquor. 

 

Quite frankly, as I say, I am in favor of the sentiments expressed by the Hon. Member for Saskatoon 

Nutana Centre but I don’t think it makes sense to chase the money across the border. I should like to see 

that $10 million spent in Canada – repatriate these dollars and keep this advertising income in Canada. It 

would help not only people in the radio business, the newspaper business, it would help our economy 

and our balance of trade generally. But that does not in any way detract from the remarks made 

originally. 

 

My second comment is very simply this, that the education of people to the dangers of alcohol must 

continue. I am not convinced that our province actually makes a profit on its liquor revenues. The 

money earned from liquor revenues is a substantial amount, but the amount and the cost of the welfare 

dollars going out to people because of the damage done to homes, to families, and to jobs, because of 

alcohol, may well eat up our entire revenues and it may well be, Mr. Speaker, that we do not make a 

profit at all, and that the profit ‘so called’ may be totally illusory. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1580 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 15 – LOSSES DUE TO FAMILY FARM PROTECTION ACT 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. E.F. Gardner 

(Moosomin): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that a 

Board be established to determine the amount of financial losses suffered by various groups of 

individuals due to The Family Farm Protection Act, and to determine what compensation should 

be paid to these people by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. A.W. Engel (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — I rise on a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. The question I 

have is, is this motion before us in order due to the fact that the subject matter is contained in a Report 

tabled on March 2nd by the chairman for the Special Committee on Crop Insurance and The Family 

Farm Protection Act? A debate on this question would result in arguing the points that are going to be 

dealt with when we talk about this issue later. I should like your ruling on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to thank the Hon. Member for bringing this point to my attention. I have not 

studied the Report referred to in detail, but he has drawn certain sections of it to my attention. I should 

ask the House to be able to reserve my decision on the ruling on the Point of Order on this until a later 

time, and in the meantime leave the motion stand until I have had a chance to check it on the rules and 

regulations. 

 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, may I speak on the Point of Order? There is only 

one question about it, Sir. There is no question that there is a report before the House on The Family 

Farm Protection Act which is a general agricultural report. This refers to a specific problem relating to 

the people that are involved, the implement dealers, credit unions and so forth. I do point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that this relates to a specific problem and a specific area not necessarily in that report. 

 

Mr. Engel: — If the Hon. Member for Milestone would take the report on page 35, he could copy it 

word for word. In this motion here and I can’t deal with just one aspect of it without discussing the 

motion based on the resolution made by the Hon. Member for Moosomin. This motion is dealt with in 

this book and I can’t deal with half of it without dealing with the question. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, I presume we have an 

opportunity to speak to the Point of Order now because you will be making a ruling and we should have 

the opportunity to make our views before you make that ruling. 

 

I would suggest that the report covers a wide variety of subject and this is only one particular subject 

that is in the 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1581 

Report. Therefore, it would be very difficult for us to vote for some sections of the Report and vote 

against some sections of the Report. This is a specific resolution on a specific area and that is why we 

have put it on the Order Paper, as it deals with a specific aspect of that Report. Because when the Report 

is brought in to the Legislature and debated we will be either voting in the Assembly for the Report or 

against the Report, not on individual subject matters in the Report. This is one individual subject in the 

Report, that is why I submit that this is in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t wish to make a ruling at this time because I haven’t had a chance to study it. I 

am asking the House if they will agree that I can defer my ruling until a later time until I have had time 

to check the problem, because I haven’t had a chance to study all the implications of the point raised by 

the Hon. Member. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 12 – MANDATORY HEARINGS PROPOSED BEFORE LEGISLATIVE 

ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. T.M. Weatherald 

(Cannington): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the Government of Saskatchewan that legislation be proposed 

to ensure that provision is made for mandatory public hearings before any major environmental 

change is made in which the Government participates or for which Crown lands or Crown 

permits are required. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Hanson: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

deplores the action of the previous Government in permitting resource developments that had 

dire effects on the environment and ecology of the areas affected without providing an 

opportunity for interested parties to appear before public hearings held for the purpose of 

considering the effect of such developments, in particular, the construction of a pulp mill in 

northwestern Saskatchewan being an example of a possible or potential environmental hazard; 

and further that this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for the 

establishment of the Wetlands Project Advisory Committee through which water control projects 

that affect multiple resource use can be fully considered by all the interests involved, and 

furthermore, for the (proposed) establishment of the Department of Environment in order that the 

optimum use of our natural resources in the interests of the people of the province may be 

assured. 

 

Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — I rise to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, in support of this 

amendment, in this debate, because it touches on an area which I hold that needs priority attention by all 

governments, either Provincial, Federal or local, as well as by individuals and that is the protection of 

our environment and the ecology. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1582 

Mr. Speaker, in adjourning debate on this Resolution, the other day, I said I was doing so because I felt 

that we could not continue to ignore the effects on the environment and ecology by human activity that 

we usually refer to as progress, but may in some cases be better defined as self-destruction and very 

possibly self-annihilation. 

 

We have, for too long, been misleading ourselves with the outmoded conventional wisdom that 

proclaims bigger to be better. Now the bigger populations, more products and by-products of 

technology, greater use of resources and proliferation of wastes are lowering the quality of our lives and 

perhaps even threatening our survival, it is surely time to make intelligent choices which at best may 

preserve a reasonable quality of life and at worst will avoid disaster to all mankind. 

 

Now I have no objection, Mr. Speaker, to public hearings before any major environmental change is 

made. I believe that people have become very conscious of the problems being created; created by 

reckless irreparable changes to environment and to ecology in the name of progress and profit at any 

cost. More and more people are becoming aware that man is dependent on his environment and that 

nature is very finely balanced with each creature, each chemical, each microbe having a role to play in 

maintaining that balance. And when environmental change is made people with concern and knowledge 

should be permitted to be heard. 

 

Public hearings may also be of value in educating people about the problems of pollution that are 

ever-increasing at a rate faster than they are being resolved. This awareness may lead to the realization 

on the part of many that each one of us, every individual, has the responsibility towards protecting our 

environment. Pollution, Mr. Speaker, which we well know is an ever-increasing hazard to our 

environment and the ecology and man himself, is a result of human society, and therefore we must not 

look only at pollutants. We must look at man himself as well. 

 

People involved in the problems and people learning about them can get a better insight into themselves 

and how they may be contributing to pollution by their own carelessness, by their waste, by their 

sacrifice of conservation for the sake of a fast gain and even by their apathy. Such public hearings would 

provide a forum for the expressions of ideas, concerns and proposals on behalf of individuals, 

community organizations, conservation groups, native representatives and all levels of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record of the former Government in this regard is unfortunately a dismal one. It is 

worth considering the kind of obvious effects of the pulp mill at Prince Albert which the former 

government refused to consider. It is said that about 30 million gallons of dark brown foul-smelling 

waste with accompanying foam and fibre were discharged into the Saskatchewan River each day. Test 

fish placed in aquaria in which the wastes were deposited died soon after. 

 

Coliform bacteria levels increased five miles down the river from less than 1,000 bacteria per 100 

millilitres to 4.5 million bacteria per 100 millilitres. The Water Pollution Control Branch suggests that 

water containing over 20,000 bacteria per 100 millilitres is badly polluted. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1583 

Anyone, Mr. Speaker, looking at the Prince Albert pulp mill could easily visualize the effects of the 

Dore Lake mill on the environment. Along with the points which I have already mentioned, the Dore 

Lake Project would have threatened the breeding ground of perhaps 10 per cent of all the California and 

Ring-billed Gulls in Saskatchewan and the only place in the province where Caspian Terns are known to 

rest. 

 

Many people demanded public hearings, Mr. Speaker, abut the proposed Dore Lake mill. To my 

knowledge no such hearings were held. Someone seemed afraid of what the facts would reveal. This 

lack of action on the part of the former Government was, putting it mildly, deplorable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments and society as a whole must stop worshipping the sacred cow of the gross 

national product. We must deal with the reality of a society which is obsessed with the mania of growth, 

where an increase in the gross national product is a measure of all things good. We must understand that 

the reality of our society, based on the kind of ‘profit at any cost’ philosophy pushed by the Members 

opposite, is that it very often opts for short-term resource development. This short-term exploitation has 

led to waste, to pollution, to dire effects on the environment and ecology. 

 

The previous Government refused to consider these things, they knew not how to consider social and 

human values because they were too obsessed with the idea of profit at any cost and with big for the 

sake of bigness. They seemed unable, or unwilling to project into the future. They chose to ignore any 

potential environmental hazards that may cause suffering to generations of the future. Mr. Speaker, 

because of a neglect to consider the effects of a wide range of things from industry to wastes and the 

poisons of insecticides and pesticides, there have been serious consequences. 

 

Jacques Cousteau, after spending three years exploring the depths of the oceans, said in 1970 that the 

oceans are dying. He said, and I quote: 

 

People don’t realize that all pollution goes to the seas. 

 

He said that the earth is washed by the rain which carries everything into the oceans where life has 

diminished by 40 per cent in 20 years. Mr. Speaker, this should surely be a sobering thought to all of us 

in this House as well as to the individuals, the cities, and the industries who contribute to that pollution 

without giving it a second thought. 

 

I once read an article called “The Death of a Seagull” which tells of the life of a gull which, born hungry 

for fish, as all seagulls are, ate voraciously of that meat poisoned by DDT which was once used to kill 

insects and during World War II was used even to kill the body lice of the soldiers. The life span of the 

gull was four years, Mr. Speaker. On the fourth year when food became scarce the gull began to burn up 

its body fat where the poison is accumulated and stored. 

 

During times of stress and hunger, the poison was released in massive doses. It inhibited the central 

nervous system. The bird thrashed and struggled for several hours, when it collapsed there were many 

convulsions before death came. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1584 

Now why do I take the time to repeat this story, Mr. Speaker? Because I want to point out that it is a 

dead seagull today and it may be a dying child tomorrow. I use the example of DDT, Mr. Speaker, but 

one could list other pollutants such as mercury and effluent from pulp mills which are hazards to our 

environment and ecology as well as other things. 

 

Some zoologists claim that at least 150 bird species in North America are threatened with local 

extinction due to pollution. The cormorants off California are now laying eggs with no shells at all, just 

plastic bags of yolk. Trout in southern Ontario’s Lake Muskoka and Simcoe are no longer capable of 

reproduction. One would not have to research very long to make a list of great length. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the permitting of resource developments which have had dire effects on the environment 

and ecology of areas affected without sufficient study is totally inexcusable and very deplorable. 

Considering that the previous Government was prepared to allow effluent to be poured out of their 

proposed Meadow Lake pulp mill which in volume would have equalled the Beaver River volume of 

flow, one can’t help being amazed and shocked by their short-sightedness. 

 

I can recall not so many years ago when I could get up in the morning and step out the back door on my 

father’s farm, as a young boy, and hear many birds singing in the trees. Today, there are far fewer birds. 

I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that if we continue with our mad exploitation of our resources at any cost, that 

someday a few surviving people may be saying how there used to be crowded cities before people began 

to be added to that list of 150 bird species threatened with extinction. I say this in all seriousness, Mr. 

Speaker, and I am saying that we had better look very carefully at all developments, be they agricultural, 

industrial or whatever, that may have dangerous effects on the environment and ecology. If some birds 

are laying eggs today with no shells, how long will it take for babies to be born deformed, 

unrecognizable or dead? 

 

I have, Mr. Speaker, said a few words on the kinds of effects that have and may result if action is not 

taken to prevent the environment from being polluted and destroyed. I could go on and document item 

after item to strengthen this point. We could consider the Alaska oil slick which killed 10,000 birds in 

1970; or the fact that American water supplies are so contaminated that at least 700 companies with 

sales in 1970 of $75 million are selling bottled water; or the estimated $1 billion cost to clean up Lake 

Michigan and the examples could go on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Department of the Environment which is mentioned by the amendment of the 

resolution is an important move by this Government to look seriously at the developing of our natural 

resources in the interests of the people of this Province while protecting the environment and ecology. 

The role of this Department will be a major one in controlling pollution. I hope that legislation, with 

teeth in it, will be readily provided when it is needed to stop pollution of the environment and the 

destruction of the balance of nature. 

 

Such legislation may not always be popular but when it is a matter of life or death I am sure most people 

will choose life. Without pollution control the chances for life on earth are in 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1585 

jeopardy. Laws in this area must be tough laws that demand that pollution be topped. It is not enough to 

simply levy a small fine. It is often cheaper to pay the fine than to install the controls necessary. The 

same situation develops a with the bootlegger who distils the whiskey and sells it for as long as he can 

before he gets caught. By that time his fine is no seat off his back because he has already made his 

fortune. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goal of the Department of the Environment should be clean air, clean clear-running 

rivers, the presence of birds and wildlife in our lives, pickerel and trout in our streams; a future in this 

Province for our children and their children. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have to learn total respect for the total environment in 

which we live. We have to learn to manage and use our technology and we must more than in the past, 

put man at the centre of the whole thing. We can’t continue to let ‘things’ dominate our lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on this Resolution and 

amendment. 

 

I believe that the resolution is a good one worthy of the support of Members of both sides of the House. 

I can agree with some of the comments that were made by the Member who just took his seat. I think we 

are all concerned with the environment. We have noted in the last few years legislation that has received 

support of both sides of the House, that did considerable to improve the environment and provide the 

legislation required so that we can go even further in maintaining a clean and pure environment. 

 

It is deplorable to me, Mr. Speaker, that resolution after resolution, regardless of the content, has to be 

turned into a partisan political debate. It is unfortunate that a question that concerns every person in this 

Province that was put on the Order Paper by a Member of the Opposition in good faith, has to receive 

amendments and debate that is purely partisan in manner. 

 

I hope that when this amendment comes before the floor of the House that Members opposite will have 

some second thoughts, because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan I think are 

becoming somewhat disillusioned with the Government of the day, and the fact that they have forgotten 

that they are no longer in Opposition and that today the full range of responsibility lies in their heads, 

and on their shoulders. 

 

I think the continual deploring of the actions of the former Government is not of any interest to the 

people of Saskatchewan today. The people of Saskatchewan had their opportunity on June 23rd and they 

took it to deplore whatever actions they saw fit of the former Government. I think that passing 

resolutions, deploring the actions of the former Government shows completely the complete lack of 

responsibility of the present Government. I think we have seen letters to the editor in the last few weeks 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1586 

which have shown that the people of Saskatchewan are just a little sick and tired of this continual 

reference to what has happened in the past. They are far more concerned about what is going to happen 

in the future. 

 

This Resolution is merely for the purpose of showing whether the Government supports the principles of 

public hearings. Surely they campaigned on it. Why is it necessary to amend it out of existence today 

rather than vote in favor of it. Is it just because it is an Opposition motion that you are going to vote 

against our motion? Or is it because in reality you do not believe in holding public hearings before 

changes in water projects and other environmental projects are to be carried out? 

 

The question of the Athabasca pulp mill was raised in the amendment and, again, I suggest that public 

hearings in regard to the Athabasca pulp mill are completely irrelevant at this time because there is no 

longer any Athabasca pulp mill. 

 

Public hearings could have been held if the Members opposite had wanted them. There are, on the 

Statute Books of this Province, waiting to be proclaimed an Act known as The Clean Environment 

Authority Act which the young Member from Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski) although he wasn’t in the 

session last year, knows received the full support of Members in the Opposition as well as in the 

Government. Yet it is strange if the Government is as concerned about the environment as the Member 

from Humboldt lets on, that since July 1st they have not proclaimed this Clean Environment Authority 

Act. They say they are going to bring in a Clean Environment Department and we have no objection to 

that. We will support it. If they are not prepared to pass The Clean Environment Authority Act I am sure 

that if the clean environment authority is in the best interest of the people of this Province, it will have 

unanimous support. But The Clean Environment Authority Act was there. You were the Government on 

the 1st of July and before you cancelled the pulp mill deal you could have had public hearings if that 

was your desire in regard to the environment. There were no final decisions made on the environmental 

aspect of the Athabasca pulp mill. Studies were still being held. 

 

So, again, I say let’s get away from the past and look forward to the future in the protection of our 

environment tomorrow not today or yesterday. You are overlooking your responsibility deliberately, or 

because you can’t get out of the idea that you are still in the Opposition. 

 

I would suggest to the Member who just took his seat that he address his remarks to the people in the 

front benches if he is that concerned. 

 

As I said earlier the people today are not concerned about what the policy was one year ago or what it 

was six months ago, they are concerned what the present policy is and what the policy is going to be 

tomorrow in the remote possibility that you do get some resource development in Saskatchewan. Are 

you going to hold public hearings? 

 

The attitude that you are taking against this motion would lead us to believe and the public of 

Saskatchewan to believe, that you are not prepared to hold public hearings or you wouldn’t be so 

concerned about this motion. This motion is clear-cut and straightforward. It would not weaken your 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1587 

political position by supporting a motion of this type. I suggest sincerely to the Members on that side, 

that you are weakening your position by the fact that you are not prepared to take a resolution at face 

value from this side of the House and you prefer to amend it out of existence by going back to deplore 

actions of governments in the past. 

 

I think you can enhance your position considerably by coming out supporting the motion as it was 

presented by the Member for Cannington because there is nothing hidden. There is nothing untoward 

about it. Really what we are doing we’re asking you to go on record as supporting a policy which you 

supported in this House last year and you supported on the hustings. Some of your front benchers, at 

least, have supported it since the election and why you are not prepared to support it at this time is 

beyond our comprehension. 

 

I am sorry that in the amendment the words ‘proposed establishment of the Department of Environment’ 

were in brackets. Are we to take that the decision has not been made whether you are going to proceed 

with the Department of Environment? If you have not I hope that one of the Ministers, perhaps the 

Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) could give us assurance that if there is no Department of Environment 

that you will proceed with the proclaiming of The Clean Environment Act. It was a good Act. It received 

the support of all Members of the House last year and I think that if you had proceeded with it that it 

would have satisfied the immediate needs and for some time in the future. However, we are not 

condemning you for not going along with that Act as long as you provide a Department of the 

Environment as you have promised both in the past and in the present Session. 

 

I would remind the Member from Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski), when he refers to the various types of 

legislation, that over the past five or six years considerable legislation has been put on the books of this 

Province which will control every aspect of pollution. We have the best pollution control and 

environmental control regulations of any province in Canada if the Government is prepared to use it. As 

far as industry is concerned there were amendments brought into The Water Resources Commission Act 

last year. And again they were supported on both sides of the House which gave the Government of the 

day the absolute power of closing down an industry if it did not fulfil the regulations. 

 

I say to the Member from Humboldt that if the Prince Albert pulp mill is as bad as he claims it is today 

that it is his responsibility now to close that pulp mill down. The Act is there, you don’t need any 

legislation. It’s right there on the book. All you’ve got to have is the willpower to use it and it is your 

responsibility now. It’s no use saying we didn’t do it, or we should have done something. We in our 

wisdom, wise or otherwise, did as the Prince Albert pulp mill to take additional precautions. They put in 

additional equipment. We said at the time that if this was not successful further negotiations and further 

improvement would be necessary. Now it is your responsibility to see that it’s carried out. It’s no use 

blaming us for what has occurred in the past. It is clearly on your shoulders today whether you are 

prepared to use the legislation that we made available to you to control industry and control the natural 

resources and to control mineral resources. All those regulations are on the books but you have got to 

have 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1588 

the willpower to use them, but they are there for your use and they were all put there by the Liberal 

Government. Air Pollution Control regulations are on the books, The Air Pollution Control Act was 

passed by us. We provided grants to cities. You talk about the Prince Albert pulp mill, for 20 years you 

let Prince Albert and Saskatoon dump their raw sewage into the Saskatchewan River and you didn’t do 

anything to stop them. So don’t go condemning today something that occurred in the past, your record 

isn’t all that clean. But that’s not helping the environment today what happened yesterday, whether it’s 

by your Government or whether it’s by our Government. As I said earlier the responsibility is clearly on 

your shoulders today. The legislation is provided through The Clean Environment Authority Act, The 

Water Resource Commission Act, The Water Pollution Control Act, The Air Pollution Control Act, The 

Intensive Livestock Operation Act and The Litter Act. 

 

That’s another Act that I want to bring to the Hon. Member’s attention. The Litter Act was passed last 

session and we haven’t heard a word about it since. Are you going to proclaim it or aren’t you? The 

Attorney General, I am sorry that he is not in his seat, said in October that it would be ready by the first 

of the year. Four months of the new year have gone and we haven’t heard a word. Nothing mentioned 

this Session yet whether The Litter Control Act will be enforced or not. I hope that you will. I know that 

you are having some problems with it and again I may be a little impatient with the fact that you’ve 

taken this long. All I am saying is that the legislation has been provided for you, now it’s up to you to 

use it. British Columbia and Alberta both brought in litter control regulations. Surely to goodness it is 

not impossible for us to bring in something similar. The Act is there, now it is your responsibility to act. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say again that I am sorry that the Hon. Member opposite brought 

in his amendment. I hope he will reconsider because certainly from our side of the House the original 

resolution was not provided with any political bias, we merely wanted to have it on the records of the 

House expecting support from both sides as we had support last session on most of our environmental 

legislation. It is important that we should have unanimous consent and it would have been on the record 

for the benefit of every person in Saskatchewan knowing that both Government and Opposition were 

prepared in the future to hold public hearings for the control and protection of our environment. So I 

would ask you if you would reconsider your position in this regard so that we can get a clear statement 

that is not being muddied up by amendments which are not completely but for the most part purely 

political in content. The question today as I have said, Mr. Speaker, is what are they prepared to do? The 

legislation is there, we should like to have a clear indication of whether they will accept their 

responsibility in this regard. Therefore we will be able to support the motion but we certainly have some 

reservations  about parts of the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, we were aware even before coming into 

office of the increasing conflict, and in some cases, controversy, over projects requested by landowners 

through their 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1589 

conservation and development areas and those persons particularly concerned with wildlife, and 

environmental aspects in the province. It is noteworthy that in spite of the existence of the Conservation 

and Development Act for over 20 years, the programs that have been conducted under it during that 

time, no positive steps had been taken to have these properly resolved or to have objections to projects 

properly and publicly heard. Now we have this belated resolution taking about major environmental 

change, whatever that may mean. Last summer shortly after coming into office I met with my colleague, 

the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer), to suggest what might be done to resolve the conflicts 

in resource use which were being brought to our attention. We do fully recognize the major problems 

that some farmers are having due to flooding of their farm lands and I want to talk mostly about that. 

 

The continued effort of farmers to improve their land, the continued pressure on farm income, the heavy 

added costs involved in modern farm operations by irregular shaped fields, have forced many farmers to 

undertake land improvement that was not considered some years ago. They are filling in pot holes, 

establishing shallow water runs, clearing lands and waterways so that water from snow melt or from 

heavy summer rains will move off their lands. It is collecting more and more on the land of the farmer in 

the lower parts of the drainage basins in this Province. Small pot holes and lakes on these farms are in 

wet years reaching new high levels, taking more land out of production and taking longer to dry in the 

critical spring periods. Wildlife depredation continues to be a major source of crop losses for our 

farmers in certain areas of this Province contributing further to the reduction of farm incomes. Through 

their conservation and development areas farmers are taking the initiative to organize in order to correct 

some of these problems. They petition the Department of Agriculture for assistance. Assistance is 

provided through engineering services so that works are properly designed and integrated to ensure that 

water is carried off the land with minimum cost and minimum damage to an adequate outlet. Financial 

assistance is provided in recognition of the fact that those most severely affected are in fact victims of 

circumstances and suffer losses attributable to causes that are widespread and generally beyond their 

means of control. Wildlife interests and environmental interests are properly concerned that this process 

may be carried too far that in constructing these works natural pot holes and small lakes which are very 

valuable to our environment, especially to migratory water fowl, are drained to the point that they lose 

them and affect this wildlife. Thus as a result of the discussions with the Minister of Natural Resources, 

we established first a wet lands committee made up of the Deputy Ministers of Natural Resources and 

Agriculture and the executive director of Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission. This is an overall 

co-ordinating committee. They recommended and there has been established a Wetlands Project 

Committee. It is made up of nine people including Judge H.W. Pope, Chairman of The Saskatchewan 

Water Resources Commission, who is chairman of the Wetlands Project Committee and eight other 

members. Four of them are involved in wildlife or natural history organizations and four are related to 

farm organizations. It is anticipated that these committees will do more than identify areas of conflict. 

To be effective it will be necessary objectively to review all project proposals and study various 

development alternatives in an atmosphere of understanding and compromise to ensure that all interests 

are properly served. Such public hearings will 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1590 

provide an opportunity for all interested people to express their views and participate in the planning and 

co-ordinating of our surface water resources. 

 

It will further provide an opportunity for the various segments of our society to become more aware and 

knowledgeable of the concerns of other interested groups and thereby gain a better understanding of the 

overall implications of the various resource development alternatives. This committee has held its first 

meeting and it is now presently arranging for public hearings to discuss a number of projects requested 

by conservation and development areas that affect or may affect multiple resources. It should be 

acknowledged that hearings of this nature should not be restricted to farmer initiated proposals such as 

those sponsored by conservation and development areas. It would seem reasonable to expect that 

farmers will be equally concerned about projects promoted by wildlife or recreational or industrial 

development interests. Thus, Mr. Speaker, in about six months we have taken positive steps toward 

resolving the conflict in resource use that had been allowed to develop into major problems under the 

previous administration. 

 

Our objectives in this area go beyond the resolving of conflicts and we have committed ourselves to 

work toward an orderly development program to ensure the optimum use of our available resources. 

Further steps will be taken with the establishment of The Department of Environment so that the natural 

resources and qualities of the environment of this Province may not be wasted or imperilled by any 

project whatever its nature may be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) kept referring in his address a few 

moments ago to our need to come out with a straightforward policy and a clear statement in regard to 

where we were going in regard to developments that may affect the environment and the ecology of this 

Province. He attempted to suggest that we were trying to hide some of these things. I want to bring to his 

attention that in six months time we have established a Wetlands Project Committee that will and has 

already started hearings in regard to such projects in the province. He inferred that we were not going to 

hold public hearings in the Province of Saskatchewan and we have drawn to his attention that we have 

held one hearing and series of meetings are already posted throughout the Province of Saskatchewan 

advising interested parties to present briefs or recommendations in regard to projects that may affect the 

water or the natural wildlife in the Province of Saskatchewan. He criticized the bracketed word 

‘proposed’ in the amendment. I would bring to his attention that at the time that this amendment was 

made to the resolution of the Hon. Member from Cannington, that there was not legislation in regard to 

the Department of Environment. It has not been introduced at this point in time in the Legislature but it 

is anticipated that it will be coming in the near future. Consequently there is nothing wrong with saying 

that the department is still in the proposed stage and in fact will be coming in the near future. 

 

The reasons that we are proposing and will be establishing a Department of the Environment is so that 

we can take some of the Acts that the Hon. Member made reference to and consolidate them so that we 

can have an overall and concise policy in a Department that is structured and established so that it will 

be primarily involved with our environment in this Province. We 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1591 

think that is the way it should be. Because we have already shown good faith in establishing a Wetlands 

Project Committee, because we have committed ourselves to a formation of a Department of the 

Environment which will look after the problems that we see developing in regard to human activity 

relating to our natural resource developments, the amendment that has been proposed by the Member for 

Qu’Appelle-Wolseley is one that I think is needed and one that I think should be supported by all 

Members of this Legislature. I sincerely ask that the Members to your left, Mr. Speaker, reconsider their 

position and accept the amendment that the Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley has proposed because it 

is one that lays down a policy and a path that will provide assurance to the people of Saskatchewan that 

we will not have the problems with regard to environmental and ecological upset that we were 

confronted with by the former seven years of government by the Members to your left. 

 

Having said those few words, Mr. Speaker, I again make a plea to Members to your left to support the 

amendment as I am sure all Members on the Government side of the House will do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I find it regrettable that the Member for 

Qu’Appelle-Wolseley and the Government opposite chose to amend this Resolution because it is really a 

non-political resolution. I might add that I think I am on fairly safe ground when I say that the first time 

this Resolution ever surfaced in Saskatchewan I moved at our local Wildlife Association meeting and 

subsequently there for the next two years it was passed at the Provincial Convention. I know of no other 

place it occurred from and in that respect I think that that was where it began. It certainly was not 

political from that group because people of all political parties belong to that group and actually there 

are no political agendas. The one thing about conservation groups is that they usually take a pretty 

strong stand against any government if they don’t agree with them. I agree with them entirely in that 

respect regardless of what political stripe . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wonder if I can interrupt the Hon. Member. I think that maybe I am making a slight 

mistake here, but the amendment should be taken off first before you close the debate, rather than close 

the debate while the amendment is still on the table. If the Hon. Member will agree to that I will still 

reserve him his right to close the debate afterwards. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I do have the right, I think, to say a few words to the amendment 

then. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, you do have the right to speak to the amendment but having moved the original 

motion you would have to stay entirely to the amendment. And if you wish to close the debate you 

couldn’t do it at this time. 

 

If you wish to speak to the amendment you may do so now or close the debate afterwards. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1592 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to speak very briefly to the amendment and then I will 

close the debate afterwards. 

 

I just want to make very brief comments. I think it is very unfortunate that the amendment has been 

moved simply because it originally is a non-political resolution. The Government opposite would have 

done themselves a much greater service by voting for it because it would have indicated to most people 

interested in conservation matters that they are going to do this, rather than attempting to blame the 

previous Government for whatever they did or didn’t do. 

 

In respect to the previous Government and the amendment, it could be safely said, and it is recognized I 

think by everyone, with possible exception of the Members opposite, that Saskatchewan’s rivers and in 

respect to pollution, the Saskatchewan River at Saskatoon and at Prince Albert, that these were left in 

much better condition now than they were when inherited in 1964. I think that statistics as far as . . . 

 

Mr. Gross: — How much . . . 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well if the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) doesn’t know how much 

pollution equipment was installed in Saskatoon I invite him to ask some of his colleagues because he 

should try and find out. 

 

The Saskatchewan River as far as the city of Saskatoon is concerned and the city of Prince Albert were 

concerned before 1964 was in a pretty deplorable condition and had become that way under an NDP 

Government for about 20 years. But that is a long held argument and I encourage anyone opposite to ask 

the Members for Saskatoon about what the condition was of the Saskatchewan River before the Liberal 

Government assisted the city of Saskatoon with a lot of pollution equipment. 

 

I suggest that this Resolution will be a disappointment to most people in Saskatchewan interested in this 

matter, because by voting for this Resolution the Government could have said, we are willing to have 

the public hearings. We are willing to take the action necessary. But instead they have taken the back 

road or the political way out simply by going back to a few old political hackneyed phrases of indicating 

exactly what they themselves would do. Subsequently, Mr. Speaker, we will not be supporting the 

amendment. 

 

The amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 29 

Messieurs 
 

Blakeney Dyck Wood 

Romanow Messer Snyder 

Thibault Larson Baker 

Brockelbank MacMurchy Pepper 

Thorson Whelan Carlson 

Tchorzewski Owens Robbins 

Matsalla Cowley Faris 

Cody Gross Mostoway 

Rolfes Lange Hanson 

Oliver Kaeding  

 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1593 

NAYS — 14 

Messieurs 

 

Steuart Loken Guy 

Grant Boldt MacDonald 

McIsaac Gardner Weatherald 

MacLeod McPherson Lane 

Macdonald (Moose Jaw N.) Wiebe  

 

The debate continued on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated that what, I think, most people interested in conservation 

matters would really like is an indication from the Government that they support this position. 

 

While the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) outlined some recommendations or changes that he has 

made in this Department – and these are welcome – most of these were provided in Acts previously 

passed in the last year or two and he is now putting them into operation. In this regard he is following 

through what the previous Government had intended and was starting to actually bring about. I think 

what is required, however, is that more than . . . well he says that some public hearings are being held. I 

think that most people would really like assurances that public meetings are going to be held. He may 

speak of a Wetlands Committee and I think certainly we support that idea, the problem still exists that 

this Committee may or may not pass judgement for or against the project and still doesn’t require that 

the public have a say in whether the project be proceeded with or not, simply by ensuring that this 

guarantee is given. Many of the problems that we have had up until now could be overcome. 

 

I think that the Wetlands Committee is a desirable move. It is a move in the right direction, but I suggest 

to the Minister why not let’s go all the way and ensure that the hearings be held because the Wetlands 

Committee, while I know it will take an interest in these matters and give considerable assistance, there 

still is the real danger existing that projects will be given the okay or turned down without the people 

concerned really having the final opportunity of participation. 

 

So I would conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that it is unfortunate we feel that the Government chose 

this occasion to make it a political resolution when it was not a political resolution. We think it is 

unfortunate they did not see fit to give wholehearted support to the idea. We think if they had given 

wholehearted support to the idea, joined with the Opposition in supporting this, that it would have been 

a step forward in the Province of Saskatchewan. I mentioned in my original remarks that most of these 

matters are relatively new in this country and while it is easy to say that we should have done something 

ten or five years ago or so forth, that if we actually proceed in this course we still will be the first 

province in Canada to do so and I don’t think this would be a bad record in any sense of the word. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just conclude my remarks and will not be supporting the motion as amended. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1594 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 4 – PUBLIC WORK PROGRAMS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): 

 

That this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for action taken in bringing 

forward public work programs in the early fall of 1971 and in extending and supplementing 

Federal Government programs for the relief of winter unemployment; Expresses regret at the 

tardiness of the Government of Canada in announcing its 1971-72 winter employment programs 

and at the dilatory manner in which municipal applications under the Local Initiatives Program 

were processed by the Department of Manpower and Immigration; 

 

And further that this Assembly endorses the proposal for a joint examination of the existing 

programs, by federal, provincial and local governments, to evaluate the effectiveness of existing 

programs and to prepare criteria, guidelines and contingency plans for the winter of 1972-73 

under varying assumptions of unemployment levels. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line down to and including Department 

of Manpower and Immigration in the 8th line be deleted and substitute the following therefor: 

 

Expresses its regret that the Government of Saskatchewan did not develop a Public Works 

Program in the fall of 1971 sufficient to alleviate the severe unemployment problem that existed. 

 

Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a few comments on some of the debate that 

I have heard on this particular resolution which is another important one. 

 

I recall the Member opposite from Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) who spoke the other day 

speaking of an ostrich with its head in the sand. Let me say that his comments and contradictions and 

seemingly intentional neglect to state the facts as they really are made him appear as the complete 

personification of that ostrich that he spoke about with his head in the sand. 

 

He and his colleagues, Mr. Speaker, are the agents of one of two things, or maybe both of them. They 

are refusing to speak of all the facts, thus intentionally attempting to misinform the public, or, their 

research is so lacking that they speak only to take up time and know not really what they say. Somehow 

they have become so swallowed up by the fact that they are the Opposition that their only sense of 

direction seems to be one of criticism in providing no alternatives and suggesting no realistic 

improvements. Surely the role of Opposition in 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1595 

Government must be meant to be more than a negative one. 

 

I would have thought that the new Liberal Members opposite would have brought some fresh, new, 

realistic, positive ideas to the Liberal Party on the opposite side of the House. Instead they have 

unfortunately been completely engulfed and dominated by their seniors and continue the same kind of 

unconstructive activity in debate in this House which led to the defeat of the former Liberal 

Government. 

 

It is somewhat ironic that the Members opposite would have moved and supported an amendment such 

as the one sponsored by the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw North, because they neglect to consider or 

mention the $5.3 million worth of projects which were in the former Government’s last budget as 

window-dressing, projects which could not proceed at all in the last year. Yet they move an amendment 

such as this one. 

 

The former Government had frozen on the drawing boards a $2.3 million provincial office building in 

Regina and a phase of the $2 million Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Science building in 

Regina, and yet the Member for Moose Jaw North moves an amendment expressing regret that this 

Government did not develop a public works program. 

 

Under the former Liberal Government 16 projects in the Education Department had insufficient 

planning to start work during the year, a value set at $499,000. In the Department of Highways the same 

kind of thing with $974,000; $3 million in the Department of Public Works that could not proceed, and 

the list continues. And now those same Members who wanted to mislead the people of this Province or 

misinform them by including in their budget items valued at millions of dollars, which could never have 

been proceeded with in the past year. Those same Members try now to misinform the public by moving 

this amendment which is totally inaccurate. 

 

I suggest that Members opposite should stop and look at their political cupboard before they criticize the 

efforts of today. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal projects which couldn’t proceed were valued at $5.53 million. 

They pretended to have a program to stimulate winter employment but when the facts were revealed 

they had almost none. 

 

I think that when the Member from Moose Jaw North talks about people putting their heads in the sand 

he had better pull his out and look at the record of his colleagues who sit with him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to say a few words in this debate because I believe there could be some very serious 

inadequacies in the way public works programs are developed, the way a lot of money is distributed and 

the manner in which the programs are administered. 

 

The winter employment program of 1971-72 and the tardiness of the Government of Canada in 

announcing it in a dilatory manner in which municipal applications under the Local Initiatives Program 

were processed by the Department of Manpower and Immigration cannot but lead one to believe that the 

Federal Government never really intended to have the Saskatchewan municipalities to take advantage of 

the program. It seems another example of a move taken prior to an election only to 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1596 

try and garner a few votes and no real effort was made to fight unemployment in a meaningful way. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that it was only the actions taken by the Government of Saskatchewan which 

supplemented and expanded the Federal Government programs, that made it possible for many 

municipal governments to take part. I know of many projects that local governments were not going to 

work on until this Government provided the help that it did in the form of matching grants. 

 

Winter works programs are failing to provide an opportunity for rural municipalities, as the Member for 

Biggar (Mr. Cowley) outlined small towns and villages equal to larger cities. Any crash program such as 

the one of the past year announced in such a careless manner leaves out many of our towns, villages and 

rural municipalities. Our larger cities with their full time city planners, architects and engineers are able 

to develop a program quickly which can be worked on under winter works. They have a larger 

concentrated tax base, making it easier to raise funds from their budgets that are needed to make up the 

amounts needed to cover the costs, the costs not paid for by winter works grants or forgiveness loans. As 

a result, Mr. Speaker, the cities are able to take advantage of these programs with ease. They swallow up 

the major portion of the moneys provided and the rural municipalities and smaller communities benefit 

very little. 

 

In the setting up of public winter works programs there is a need for consultation between all three 

levels of government; Federal provincial and local or municipal. Some consideration might be given to 

the ability by different municipal governments to take advantage of programs. Their ability to mobilize 

resources and raise funds needs to be considered, and those considerations must be incorporated into 

winter works programs. 

 

Another idea that should be given special consideration is that of recreation. If a community could show 

that its program will increase the opportunity for recreation for its members or that it will substantially 

improve facilities and opportunities, special consideration should be given. The lack of recreational 

facilities and well planned programs can no longer go ignored. I’ve said many times before that leisure 

time is increasing rapidly and people are demanding expanded opportunities in the rural areas. The cities 

alone can no longer be the only providers of good recreation opportunities. And to these, Mr. Speaker, 

other priorities can be added. 

 

I am saying that winter works programs should provide for special incentives and help in areas of 

special needs. 

 

To further help rural municipalities and towns and villages to take advantage of winter works programs, 

these should be announced well before freeze-up. They must have time to prepare plans, they must have 

time to complete their project after it begins. Our climate is not like in southern Ontario, or in coastal 

British Columbia. If foundation or excavation is needed, this should be able to be done before there is 

three feet of frost in the ground. This should be able to be done before mid-February when temperatures 

can be 40o below zero. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to recommend strongly that in light of the fact that many projects will not be 

completed by the May 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1597 

31st deadline, in fact many of these projects have not yet even begun, the deadline of May 31 be 

extended at least to the end of June. We must all urge the Federal Government to make this extension 

and announce it in their program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on the way in which the money has been allocated under the 

Federal winter works programs. I believe that the facts in this area prove that the programs were poorly 

planned, haphazardly set up and ridiculously mismanaged. I submit that there is a distinct possibility that 

some political motives might have been involved in the distribution of funds. 

 

Under the LIP some $150 million was allotted for all of Canada. At no time did the Federal Government 

indicate just how much local initiatives program money had been allocated to Saskatchewan 

municipalities. With four to five per cent of the population of Canada living in Saskatchewan; with the 

economic situation in Saskatchewan being of a serious nature over the last few years, during which time 

the Federal Government refused to provide any cash injection, one should have been able to assume that 

Saskatchewan on the basis of population and unemployment rate, should have been eligible for at least 

$2 million. 

 

What did Saskatchewan receive, Mr. Speaker? Out of 127 local government applications amounting to 

$3,390,744 forwarded to the Federal Department of Manpower and Immigration only 62 applications 

amounting to $1,388,704 received Federal approval. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the Province of Quebec received 40 per cent of the Federal 

Government’s Local Initiatives Program funds, according to the Globe and Mail of March 3, 1972. 

Quebec groups received $60 million – two and a half times as much as Ontario and far, far more than 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the three prairie provinces together received only $21 million. And even if one 

chooses to consider the prairie provinces alone, it seems rather strange that out of $21 million provided 

to them by LIP, Saskatchewan received only $1.3 million. One must be led to ask what has happened to 

that self-acclaimed spokesman for Saskatchewan, the Hon. Otto Lang? It would appear that the three of 

Trudeau – Marchand – Pelletier, are getting more than their fair share at the expense of provinces like 

Saskatchewan. It might be of interest, Mr. Speaker, and of considerable value to have a public inquiry 

into the LIP program as has been suggested by some in Parliament. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I would hope that the Opposition Members of Parliament will continue to press 

for such an inquiry. 

 

It is also rather strange the manner in which applications appear to have been dealt with. A kind of 

fox-and-goose or hide-and-seek game has been carried on by the Department of Manpower and 

Immigration and the Federal Government. A good case in point is an application made by the Humboldt 

RCSSD for assistance under the LIP. Assistance in the construction of a gymnasium at St. Dominic 

School. The first word was, Mr. Speaker, that hospitals and schools were not eligible. Then, and only 

after pressure from this Government, schools and 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1598 

hospitals were included. 

 

Early in 1972, the school board received a letter from the Department of Manpower and Immigration 

stating that their application had been rejected. It has been rejected the letter said because it did not 

provide UIC, CPP and Workmen’s Compensation. I personally wrote to Winnipeg, Mr. Speaker, 

suggesting that the rejection was unacceptable and that the least that could be done was that the school 

board should be given an opportunity to correct its error, if an error was indeed made. To this day I have 

not received a reply to my letter. The school board did. They received a letter in mid-February and that 

letter said the following: 

 

Your recent project application submitted under the Local Initiatives Program has been given 

careful consideration. I greatly regret to inform you that it has not been possible to give you the 

financial assistance necessary to carry out your proposed project. The response to the Local 

Initiatives Program has generated many worthwhile proposals from which a selection must be 

made. Your proposal has been carefully considered in comparison with others submitted under 

the program and we regret that it is not possible to approve a contribution to the project you have 

proposed. 

 

And this time, Mr. Speaker, the rejection seemed final and without question. And it seemed like a good, 

worthwhile project was rejected. And then on a weekend following March 2, 1972, after arriving home 

from Regina, Mr. Speaker, I picked up the local weekly newspaper the Humboldt Journal and reading 

through it I cam across a headline and the headline said: “Grant Approved”. And reading further here is 

what it said, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The Federal Government has approved a $19,000 grant to the Humboldt Roman Catholic 

Separate School District. The grant, through the Department of Manpower and Immigration is to 

be used to hire 26 men to construct an auditorium-gymnasium for St. Dominic School. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this was not only the first time that I came across the new change of heart on behalf 

of someone in Ottawa. This was the first time, as the chairman of the school board informs me, that the 

school board was aware of the fact that after officially being rejected twice, their application had been 

accepted. 

 

The question that arises is who were the shadow people who made the decisions on the LIP 

applications? What criteria was used in determining eligibility? Why are there such discrepancies in the 

amounts of money okayed to different provinces? Why was Quebec alone given $40 million of the total 

money while Saskatchewan received only one per cent even though it has four to five per cent of the 

population of Canada? 

 

The amounts of money allocated were done unfairly and obviously with discrimination. The 

administration of the programs by the Federal Government was inefficient with unnecessary delays and 

strange workings that are open to suspicion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, of 127 local government applications totalling over $3 million 

submitted to the 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1599 

Regional Office of the Department of Manpower and Immigration, only 62 applications amounting to 

$1.3 million were approved, under the LIP program. On March 6, 1972, the Province of Saskatchewan 

alone had given approval to 48 projects with estimated grants of $885,146, almost as much as the total 

Federal effort. Since March 6th there have been other provincial approvals. 

 

Under the Employment Loans Program, the Federal Government had given approval to 13 provincial 

applications and 72 local government applications for a total loan of $6.9 million. This may cost the 

Federal Government in loan forgiveness a total of $3.8 million in Saskatchewan. The province may 

contribute $4.3 million in loan forgiveness in matching grants, an amount greater than that costing the 

Federal Government. 

 

I submit that the Government of Saskatchewan should be commended for its action taken in bringing 

forward public works programs in the early fall of 1971 and particularly . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — . . . in extending and supplementing Federal Government programs for the relief 

of winter unemployment. The Federal program and the way that it was announced and administered, 

leaves a great deal to be desired. Only because of efforts made by this Saskatchewan Government were 

many municipalities able to take part in winter works projects this year. 

 

In closing I want to stress once again that the deadline of May 31st must be extended to at least the end 

of June. Future programs must be announced early enough so that municipalities can plan their projects 

and have time to start them before freeze-up. Stress must be put in making it possible for rural 

municipalities, small towns and villages to take advantage of winter works programs on an equal 

opportunity with our large urban centres. Former programs have not been very effective. A total study 

by all three levels of government is needed as the Resolution presented by the Member for Canora 

suggests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support this Resolution, I will oppose the amendment. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Just a question. I just didn’t hear what the Hon. Member said was the population of 

Saskatchewan as compared to Canada, was it nine per cent you said? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I said it was approximately nine per cent. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I rather make is something like four per cent but . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — There has been . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Yes, the only reason I am starting to question these figures is that the Hon. Member 

from Redberry made a 50 per cent error. I thought we should understand how big a margin of error they 

will normally allow. 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1600 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words in this debate if I 

may, Sir. 

 

An Hon. Member: — In the ‘woods’ again. 

 

Mr. Wood: — That’s the name of the game so far as I am concerned. Mr. Speaker, I am quick to agree 

that there is real need for employment in the province at the present time. I think there is a need, I think 

that unemployment is one of our problems and this problem has been with us for some time. It was not 

new when we came to office. We had a serious unemployment problem last winter and at that time the 

government of the day said that they were bringing in a huge employment program, some $15,775,000 

of capital program in the Department of Public Works. They made a good deal of sound about this a 

year ago, Mr. Speaker, in the session but when we came to office in the summer of 1971, we found that 

this $15, close to $16 million was not indeed that much. But we found that some $8,695,000 of it had 

been completely frozen. It was not considered to be in the Budget at all so far as the Department of 

Public Works was concerned. They were told to not consider this. It was not to be considered in the 

work they were proposing. Those items that were included in that amount were to be forgotten until they 

heard further from them and there was nothing, nothing had been done in planning them, nothing had 

been done to be prepared to go forward with them. 

 

When I became Minister of Public Works, Mr. Speaker, my instructions from the Cabinet were to get 

everything going that I could in that Department in regard to construction. To move forward everything 

that was possible to move forward. We approved for acceleration some $5,657,000 worth of 

construction. We brought in some new projects of some $2,378,000. There was additional other winter 

works projects in other departments of some $314,000 which made a total of the projects which we were 

endeavoring to bring forward of some $8,349,000. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the problem was in getting this work underway. The Government was prepared to 

spend this money. The Government was anxious to spend this money. The Government was only too 

willing to make the money available and to get the work going for the people of this Province that they 

might have employment this winter and that they might be able to make the jobs for the people that 

needed them in the province. But the Department of Public Works was not geared up to do this. The 

Budget had been frozen. They had no shelf of work lined out that they could go on. There had been no 

previous planning done. There was no planning, there was no designing brought forward in regard to 

work that could be gone forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the amendment which we have before us I believe says this House expresses its 

regret that the Government of Saskatchewan did not develop a public works program in the fall of 1971 

sufficient to alleviate the severe unemployment problem that existed. Well, if we did not, Mr. Speaker, 

there is one very plain door at which we lay the blame and that was in the Government of last year that 

laid the foundation and laid the planning for the projects that were to be brought forward in the latter 

part of the year. There was no planning, there was no money available, there was just nothing there. I 

said to the men in our department, “How can we get these things 



 

April 7, 1972 

 

 

1601 

rolling, how can we generate this program? How can we get the planning and the designing done that is 

necessary to get these programs underway?” I said, “Can we hire more men?” They said, “No, that’s 

useless we have just so many people in this capacity in the Department at the present time, if we bring in 

more new people who are not acquainted with the work we have to take out time to train these people. 

We are hamstrung, if we try to increase our staff at this time instead of giving more impetus to the 

program it will be delayed and held back.” Mr. Speaker, the Department of Public Works was not geared 

up to bring in a kind of program that this Province needed. And it was not the fault of this Government it 

was the fault of the previous Government that had left the Department in that position. 

 

Now I want to give all credit to the Department of Public Works of which I was Minister at that time. I 

had the very best of co-operation from these people and I have nothing but commendation for them but I 

have no words of commendation for the previous Government that left the situation as it was and I have 

not much sympathy with the people who bring in such a Resolution. Not only did they not do anything 

when they were the Government, not only did it leave the Department of Public Works in such a 

position that they were not able to move forward but they bring in a resolution now saying that we 

express regret that the Government of Saskatchewan did not develop a public works program in the fall 

of 1971 sufficient to do these things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do wish to speak further in this debate. Could I ask leave to adjourn the debate? 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


