


































































Hansard: April 20, 1972


1827 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

40th Day 
 

Thursday, April 20, 1972 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

CONGRATULATIONS TO ROSETOWN REDWINGS 
 
MR. G.F. LOKEN (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to draw to 
the attention of the Assembly that the Rosetown Redwings won the Western Canada Intermediate A 
Hockey championship Tuesday night by defeating the Lloydminster team three games to two in a five-
game series. Rosetown now advances to the dominion championship against Campbellton, New 
Brunswick. This series will be played in Rosetown starting tomorrow night. I know the Assembly will 
join with me in extending best wishes in this dominion final. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

HOUSEKEEPING BILLS DEFERRED TO FALL SESSION 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Premier. Having in mind that we are still getting a large number of Bills which may be regarded as 
housekeeping in nature and having in mind that it appears from all reports that we are likely to get major 
Bills, and I refer to the Succession Duty and Gift Tax Bill and the Land Bank legislation, before the end 
of the Session, I wonder if the Premier could tell us whether he has now abandoned the idea of having a 
fall session because if a fall session is contemplated I assume that many of the housekeeping bills could 
well have been deferred to the fall session and the major bills brought on a lot earlier in this Session. 
 
MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Member’s assumption is wrong and 
accordingly his conclusion is wrong. We have not abandoned the idea of a fall session. We agree that 
some of the Bills brought in are bits of housekeeping legislation. Most of it involves reorganization of 
the Government which we want to get on with now and we did not wish to defer. We think that if there 
is a fall session there will still be an adequate load of legislation to be considered at that session even if 
we do all that we propose to do at this Session. I again remind Hon. Members that no date for the 
conclusion of the Session has been set. There is no way to say whether this is late in the Session or early 
in the Session. We for our part intend to stay at what we consider important public business until it is 
done and we would hope all Hon. Members would share our approach to public business. 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to tell the Hon. Premier 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1828 

that it is late in the Session, but I regret that I am unable to do so. We, of course, can give no assistance 
from our side of the House until we know when the end of the flood of Bills will come. 
 

INFORMATION ON ESTIMATES 
 
MR. E.G. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Government a question. 
In Crown Corporations and various times in Estimates we have asked the Minister for information 
which they have agreed to supply to us quite readily. Occasionally the Minister has it right there but to 
save time in Estimates we have agreed with his suggestion that he will send it over to us. In Crown 
Corporations some of this information was asked for as much as a month ago or more and in most cases 
we have not received this information. We feel that some of this, particularly from Estimates, should be 
presented to us within a day or two, we may need it for some other purpose. In many cases it could be 
just a matter of the Minister sending it over and we should like to ask the House Leader or the Premier if 
he could see that the work is speeded up by having his Ministers supply us with this information as 
quickly as possible. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the individual instances to which the Member refers 
but I will certainly ask my colleagues to go over their notes to see whether there are instances where it 
was said the material would be supplied and check them out and see if we can get the information to the 
Members. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

NEW DIRECTOR OF SASKATCHEWAN RESEARCH COUNCIL 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 
should like to announce the appointment of Dr. T.P. Pepper of Saskatoon as the new Director of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. Dr. Pepper will succeed Dr. Tom Warren who retires this year after 16 
years of service to the Council. 
 
Dr. Pepper was born in London, England, in 1918 and came to Canada with his family at the age of one. 
He was raised on his father’s farm in the Morse district. In 1939 he received his Bachelor’s degree in 
Physics and Mathematics. Two years later he received a Master’s degree from the University of British 
Columbia. During the war he worked on radar development with the National Research Council. When 
the war ended he went to McGill University in Montreal to complete work on a doctorate degree in 
Nuclear Physics. Dr. Pepper received his PhD degree in 1948 and went to work for Atomic Energy of 
Canada at Chalk River, Ontario. In 1952 he set up a private company, Isotope Products Ltd., to develop 
industrial uses for atomic energy. The company expanded into the United States and Dr. Pepper moved 
to New York as president of the American company. He sold out in 1958 and returned to Saskatchewan 
to head the Research Council’s Physics Division. In 1967 he became Assistant Director of the Council. 
 
In making this appointment the Government is very pleased to have a man of Dr. Pepper’s experience 
available. He has excellent credentials in research and academic pursuits, 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1829 

combined with successful business experience. His background and his abilities will be most valuable to 
the Council in its work of applying science to our provincial economy. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 80 – An Act for the 
Promotion and Protection of the Health and Safety of Persons Engaged in Certain Occupations. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the rationale for the Bill that is before us centres on the increasing anxiety of 
employees, employers and governments everywhere over the question of occupational health and its 
implications for economic and social development. These and related concerns will be reflected in the 
expansion of the activities of the Occupational Health Branch of the Department of Labour to be carried 
on under the authority of the proposed Occupational Health Act. There have been a number of 
significant achievements in the field of industrial health in recent years as a consequence of the health 
and safety programs which have been conducted. One can call to mind for example progress made in 
conquering illnesses like anthrax, phosphorous poisoning, anemic diseases among miners, lead 
poisoning of painters, silicosis and so on. We cannot afford to relax, however and attempts to curtail the 
debilitating conditions must be continued. At the same time it is imperative to realize that certain kinds 
of work-oriented maladies are, in effect, growing, Cases can be cited including the rising incidence of 
chronic bronchitis, the persistence of occupational dermatitis and associated allergies and the increase of 
mental disorders would seem to stem from the progressive complexity of our social system. 
 
In addition a whole new set of ailments are manifesting themselves including neuromuscular weakness 
caused by vibration, deafness produced by the noise of machines, beryllium poisoning, poisoning by 
new chemical products and so on. While the application of pneumatic tools and mechanized equipment 
may be cutting down injuries formerly caused by the use of hand tools, an increasing damage to bones, 
joints and muscles has been noted. Where physical fatigue is reduced by the takeover of productive 
processes by machines, mental fatigue and its concomitant problems are intensifying because of the 
faster rate and more complex nature of the work involved. For these reasons the Government of 
Saskatchewan has recognized an evolving need for the development of a dynamic well-integrated 
occupational health program to keep pace with the emerging health requirements of the worker in the 
later part of the 20th century. 
 
In introducing this legislation, Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that government has a duty to undertake 
measures which will help to maximize economic efficiency in terms of the greatest possible utilization 
of the labor force and the minimizing of working time losses attributable to occupational accidents and 
disease. More importantly, from a social point of view, Mr. Speaker, the Government, I believe, has a 
clearcut obligation to take steps designed to safeguard the welfare of employees on the job, to eliminate 
dangerous and unhealthy working conditions and to translate for the individual the benefits of scientific 
accomplishment in the form of a long, happy and healthy life. This is not to say that the Occupational 
Health 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1830 

Program in its restructured format will represent a total panacea when it comes to industrial hygiene. 
Obviously the Government can only provide a mechanism by which hazards can be better identified and 
by that process, potentially controlled. The effective application of such a program in a practical way is 
going to necessitate the wholehearted co-operation and the dedicated contribution of every employer, 
every employee, indeed every citizen of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It may be observed, Mr. Speaker, that the operative clauses of the Bill before this Assembly are 
consistent with and influenced by the aims and objectives of the International Labour Organization 
Recommendation 112 on Occupational Health Services adopted at the ILO convention in 1959. The 
recommendation deals in some detail with the definition, the organization and functions of an 
occupational health service and has a decisive impact on the laws and practices of a number of areas in 
this field over the past 12 years. Passage of The Occupational Health Act will establish in legislation in a 
new and expanded version the role now being fulfilled by the Occupational Health Branch of the 
Saskatchewan Department of Public Health. Associated with the introduction of the statute will be the 
transfer of responsibility for the branch to the Department of Labour along with that for Workmen’s 
Compensation Board safety. 
 
These activities along with those of the Department’s existing safety branches will be administratively 
and functionally linked in a manner intended to facilitate the operation of the comprehensive, co-
ordinated Occupational Health and Safety Program. 
 
Under the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the Occupational Health Branch of the Department of Labour would be 
assigned the general responsibility for occupational health in the province. The definition of this term 
based on that published by a committee of the World Health Organization concerned with occupational 
health incorporates by implication a broad range of physical, mental and social factors affecting the 
welfare of workers. In the promotion of the principles residing in this statute, occupational Health 
officers within the Branch would be given fairly wide powers to enter and inspect places of 
employment, to ascertain whether regulations are being followed and to make such tests and 
examinations as may be deemed advisable. 
 
The Bill also contains a section which will permit the setting up by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council 
of an Occupational Health Council, made up of between 9 and 12 persons representing management, 
labor and agriculture and possessing expertise in the field of health and safety. It would be the duty of 
the council, Mr. Speaker, to make recommendations dealing with occupational health as well as other 
matters referred to it by the Minister. 
 
The Minister would be given authority under the proposed legislation where there is a working 
environment which is dangerous to require reasonable arrangements to be made for medical supervision 
of the people who are working in that dangerous environment. As well, where the Minister is of the 
opinion that the place of employment is sufficiently unsafe he may order the person in charge to take 
such action for the protection of employees as seem reasonable, including the prohibition or limitation of 
the employment of all persons in connection with the business, the control or prohibition of the use of 
any material or equipment or the imposition of certain duties on employees or employers. 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1831 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, there is a provision in the legislation for doctors and hospitals to supply 
without charge to the Chief Occupational Medical Health Officer reports concerning persons who 
became ill or injured while engaged in an occupation. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, this kind of authority 
already rests with the Workmen’s Compensation Board so it is not a particularly new provision. It is 
specified that in any place of employment in which ten or more persons are employed there shall be an 
occupational health committee with responsibilities for the creation of safe and healthy working 
conditions within that establishment. 
 
The Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council is furnished under the legislation with the authority to make 
regulations relating to working conditions in the province. 
 
The Bill includes a penalty provision which sets out specific fines for breach of any of the regulations or 
orders made under the authority of The Occupational Health Act. 
 
Provision is made in this Bill also for the Branch to undertake research and educational projects intended 
to develop and publicize knowledge of employment hazards. The designated place or category of 
employment may be required to establish an occupational health service, according to certain 
specifications on the basis of the character and the degree of hazard of the particular activity. It is 
noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, that the only known precedent for this requirement, the statutory definition of 
which is taken from the ILO Recommendation 112, will be found in the laws of the Netherlands. 
 
In specific terms, Mr. Speaker, it may be useful for a moment to direct attention to the fact that the 
present Occupational Health Branch is actively engaged in making available such services as medical 
and technical advice to industry, medical supervision of workers in potentially hazardous occupations, 
protection of health of persons exposed to radiation, the assessment, control and prevention of 
environmental pollution, information and educational services and environment health laboratory 
analysis. These responsibilities will be continued expanded and augmented under the requirements of 
the new legislation. 
 
In moving second reading, Mr. Speaker, may I conclude then by pointing out that the Act and the branch 
of government which will administer its provisions is expected to make a positive and innovative 
contribution to the escalating search to safeguard the health of Saskatchewan’s working people. It is 
apparent that the very technological advances which are generating additional health risks at the same 
time produce effective weapons to overcome them. It is not the knowledge of solutions which we lack, 
Mr. Speaker, as much as the determination to apply them. What is primarily called for is an efficient 
vehicle for the harnessing of these remedial forces and for the marshalling and channelling of the kind of 
converted public effort which will combat the multiplying health hazards of our modern industrial 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that the present Bill will prove to be successful in meeting the challenge 
and accordingly I am pleased at this time to move that this Bill be now read a second time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1832 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the comments of the 
Minister of Labour in moving second reading. We have just had this Bill on our desks since yesterday 
afternoon. We have already indicated that in principle we agree that this occupational health and safety 
program should be taken under the administration of the Department of Labour. We indicated this 
during the Estimates. We have no quarrel with this. As far as I have been able to determine when 
quickly reading through the Bill, there is very little new in the Bill, that is, new compared to what we 
have, in fact, had under the Department of Health, however to give our people time to study it fully, I 
would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. K. THORSON (Minister of Industry and Commerce) moved second reading of Bill No. 106 – An 
Act to amend The Mineral Resources Act. 
 
He said: The proposed amendments to the Mineral Resources Act will make an addition to the powers of 
the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council provided for in the statute under Section 10. The addition will be to 
make it clear that the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council has the power to make regulations for the 
establishment and operation of marketing boards to purchase and sell or otherwise market, dispose of, 
utilize or conserve any mineral and product of any mineral in Saskatchewan. 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, that it is not the intention of the Government to establish immediately any 
marketing board dealing with any mineral product. But the Members will be aware that with the 
necessity of more direct government intervention in our potash industry in the form of a prorationing 
plan and price stabilization plan, it is becoming increasingly apparent that the strength of the 
Government is needed in order to preserve the health of the potash industry. So far, the Government 
intervention has only taken the form of setting production quotas and trying to stabilize the price. Those 
are features of the operation of a marketing board which we would expect to find. At this point, the 
direct dealing with consumers and purchasers of potash by a government agency has not been 
established. It may be necessary to do that in the future. This amendment to this statute is now brought 
forward so that members will have an opportunity to discuss the matter publicly and to make it clear that 
the Government has the power to proceed. And I may say, Mr. Speaker, that it is the intention of myself 
and the Government that we should prepare a plan which would be available for implementation 
whenever we deem it advisable in the interests of the potash industry and the economy of Saskatchewan 
to establish a marketing board for potash. 
 
Another amendment is proposed to The Mineral Resources Act which simply repeals Section 17. This 
section was originally enacted to deal with leases, licences, permits and reservations and renewals 
thereof entered into by the Dominion Government prior to the transfer of natural resources to the 
Province of Saskatchewan including mineral resources. Later, the section was amended to provide for 
the payment of royalties by agreement approved by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. The proposed 
amendment would repeal the section so that henceforth royalties 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1833 

would not be a matter of agreement between the Government and the producers of a mineral. 
 
Now, I just refer the Members to the powers already granted to the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council 
under Section 10 of The Mineral Resources Act and in particular, clause (1)(q) which makes it clear that 
the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council has the power to enact regulations prescribing the royalties, rents, 
fees, dues or charges to be paid for or under a disposition or for any other privilege granted under this 
Act or any regulations or orders made thereunder. 
 
Simply put, Mr. Speaker, it is the feeling of the Government that special rates of royalties should be a 
matter of regulation established by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council under the authority of the Act. 
Special rates for royalties should not be, in the future, a matter of contractual relationship between the 
Government and the producer. Or at least, Mr. Speaker, if they are to be the subject of an agreement, 
then there ought to be an opportunity for the Legislature to consider the wisdom of such an agreement 
and we would prefer not to have the power in the statute to allow the Cabinet to enter into an agreement 
without bringing the matter to the Legislature. So the purpose of this amendment is to make it clear that 
royalties henceforth will be the subject matter of regulation and will not be simply a matter of a contract 
signed between the Cabinet and some company that wishes to produce a mineral in Saskatchewan. 
 
With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a Bill to amend The Mineral Resources 
Act. 
 
MR. H.E. COUPLAND (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I am a little concerned about this Bill. It 
seems to me it’s sort of opening the way for far more control by the Government. And when you hear 
the way some of them speak on that side of the House, it scares me a little that this is kind of opening the 
door to socialization of the industry. The Minister says that subsection (a) is mainly for the potash 
industry. I’m wondering why he didn’t specifically put it in the Bill that they wanted marketing boards 
for potash. As I read it, it could mean uranium or oil or any mineral or mineral product. So I think I want 
to have a little more time to do a little studying on this Bill and I therefore beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
MR. THORSON (Minister of Industry and Commerce) moved second reading of Bill No. 107 – An Act 
to amend The Mineral Taxation Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Mineral Taxation Act are covered in four 
distinct areas. First of all it’s proposed to amend Section 3 to do the following: provide for the payment 
of a mineral acreage tax in a manner and at such times as will be prescribed by Order-in-Council; 
secondly, to increase the rate of the mineral acreage tax from 10 cents an acre to 20 cents an acre; and 
thirdly, to set the date for the identification of mineral acreages exempt from the tax at the 31st of March 
rather than the 30th of June each year. 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1834 

Now, I need hardly emphasize the significance of the second point. Every Member will understand that 
the rate of the mineral acreage tax is being doubled from 10 cents to 20 cents per acre. 
 
The first point, the manner in which the tax is paid, will now be set by Order-in-Council. It is the 
intention of the Government to provide that the mineral acreage tax is due and is payable on the 30th of 
June of each year rather than at the 31st of December of each year as presently provided in the 
legislation. The experience of the Department of Mineral Resources is that some of the taxpayers wait 
not only until the end of the year to pay the tax but sometimes into the following year before the tax is 
paid. We want to try to have these taxes paid promptly and that’s why we want the power to set the 
manner and the time at which the tax will be paid. And as I say, it is the intention of the Government 
that these mineral acreage taxes should be paid in the middle of each year. 
 
The third point I referred to in the amendments proposed for Section 3 of the Act has to do with the 
designation of mineral acreage which is exempt from tax. Presently, landowners who own 3,200 acres or 
less of minerals are exempt from payment of this mineral acreage tax and it is intended that that should 
continue but that the designation should be determined each year on the 31st of March rather than on the 
30th of June of each year. 
 
It is also proposed to amend Section 3A of the Act and that has to do again with the time for payment. 
We propose that the payment should be made on June 30th of each year instead of waiting until the end 
of the year. 
 
There are some proposed amendments to Section 25 and that will remove from the statute the limitation 
on the mill rate under the producing tract tax. Although, I may say, Mr. Speaker, while we have this 
amendment here and while we had at one time considered actually changing the mill rate, there will not, 
in fact, be any change in the mill rate under the producing tract tax during this coming year nor will 
there be any change in the method by which values of mineral lands under production are assessed for 
the purposes of this tax. Presently, the mill rate is limited by statute. We propose to remove the 
limitation. There is no real significance in this, Mr. Speaker, because there was no statutory limitation on 
the method by which the assessed value was determined. So that it was in the power of the Lieutenant-
Governor-in-Council at all times to raise the tax revenues in this area by simply raising the assessed 
values of the parcels of land that are subject to the producing tract tax. We propose to remove the 
statutory mill rate to be in line with the situation insofar as determining the assessment is concerned. 
 
The final amendment proposed, Mr. Speaker, is a new Section 27A which will enable the Lieutenant-
Governor-in-Council to establish penalties for late payment of tax under The Mineral Taxation Act. 
Again, this is in line with our determination to see that the tax is paid promptly and that the revenues 
come in to the Government on time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act. 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1835 

MR. COUPLAND: — Mr. Speaker, here again is another Bill that I think will be harassing the industry 
at a time when we should be encouraging them in the province and trying to create employment and 
development. 
 
The one thing that strikes me, Mr. Speaker, is Section 27A that is added (the penalty clause). I am 
wondering how much trouble the Government does have collecting their tax to put in a vicious section 
like this. Now, they have no minimum or no maximum, it is just entirely at the discretion of the 
Government. I’d like to see, if it’s possible, that the Minister in Committee of the Whole will maybe 
bring in an amendment to put a limitation on the penalties. The Minister said they are determined to 
collect the tax. I am just wondering how determined. 
 
There is quite a bit more I should like to say on this Bill, so I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 78 – An Act respecting 
Credit Reporting Agencies. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 78 which 
is a brand new Bill respecting credit reporting agencies in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Credit reporting agencies, as all Members will know, have assumed an important role in today’s 
consumer world by investigating and reporting information on the credit worthiness, credit standing, 
credit capacity, character and general reputation of consumers for credit purposes. This Bill imposes 
requirements on those credit reporting agencies that have now become a vital part of our consumer 
world. It imposes requirements on them to ensure fair treatment of individuals whose credit or character 
is being investigated by them. It is known that credit reports containing inaccurate or erroneous 
information have in a number of cases damaged the credit rating and the reputation of consumers. This 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, is designed to ensure fairness in credit reporting. It is designed to provide the 
consumer who is dealt with unfairly – and as a consequence adversely affected by a credit report – some 
means to protection for himself against such inaccurate or erroneous information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill recognizes two types of information. One type concerns the financial, business or 
credit rating of persons and is generally factual in character, being supported by financial and other 
reliable data. The other type of information concerns the consumer’s character, general reputation, 
personal habits or mode of living. This latter kind of information is often, in fact, almost exclusively 
based on expressions of opinion obtained from other persons to whom the consumer may have had some 
exposure known more or less and defined by the general term in the business as investigative 
information. Because of the nature of this second category of opinion evidence, if I may call it that way, 
special provisions concerning it are contained in this particular Bill. In detail, the Bill calls for the 
licensing and regulation of credit reporting agencies, and is modelled along the lines of 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1836 

other licencing Acts that this province has seen and other provinces have introduced. The Act will be 
administered by a registrar who will be so named for the purposes of the Act. This registrar will have the 
usual supervisory and investigative powers over credit reporting agencies and he will make certain 
decisions with respect to licencing of the agency and suspension of their licence, thereby suspension of 
the operation of the business and termination of that agency’s right to operate in Saskatchewan. In all 
cases, Mr. Speaker, the decision taken will be subject to review on appeal to a judge of the court of 
Queen’s Bench to ensure that the Registrar is not abusing his wide powers. 
 
This Bill is also designed to ensure that every credit reporting agency adopts proper procedure in 
meeting the needs of commerce for information about consumers and also in meeting the needs and 
expectations of consumers with respect to confidentiality, accuracy, relevancy and valid use of the 
information collected. Basically a credit report may be supplied only to those who need it for 
commercial purposes. Also the report must not include certain information such as, for example, 
information about bankruptcies which have occurred 14 or more years prior to the date of the making of 
the report, or information about writs of summons or judgments or debts that are now statute barred or 
other adverse information that is more than seven years old. As Members can see this protection will be 
to the benefit of the consumer and will not in my judgment create any undue hardship on the activities of 
the credit reporting agency. There is no reason why some writ of summons or judgement or a 
bankruptcy after that period of time has elapsed, should still be maintained as part of a credit report 
when we are dealing with a new transaction with respect to the consumer. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, certain records and files must be maintained by a credit reporting agency by the 
provisions of this Bill. The agency will be required on request by a consumer to disclose to that 
consumer the nature and substance of all information in its file respecting that particular consumer. The 
consumer may be accompanied by one witness in his request for that information. But that information 
only goes to the consumer about whom the report is written and not to a third party or a stranger in a 
consumer transaction. Provision is made in the Bill for the procedure to be followed where a consumer 
disputes the accuracy or the fullness of the information which is contained in his particular file by a 
credit reporting agency. This is the way it should be. If a consumer feels that some of the data either 
factual or opinion is inaccurate he of course should be entitled to the privilege of coming to the credit 
reporting agency and asking for a correction in that report. This Bill provides for that. 
 
Also under this Bill a consumer who has applied for credit may ask the merchant, dealer or credit 
grantor whether or not he has received a credit report on him. If so, the consumer is entitled to be 
provided with the name and address of the credit reporting agency. He may then if he chooses call on 
that credit reporting agency which then is required to disclose the nature and substance of the 
information as I have described earlier in the consumer’s file if requested by that consumer. If the 
consumer is still not satisfied he may report the matter to the registrar who will be administering the Act, 
who may then investigate the complaint in full with all parties, the credit reporting agency and the 
registrar who is empowered by this Bill 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1837 

to dispose of it according to the information as revealed by the investigation. That decision by the 
registrar is as I have indicated to the Members earlier subject to an appeal to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the major provisions of this Bill. I think the basic principle of this Bill is to 
ensure that in today’s consumer world the credit reporting agency will always prepare reports on credit 
with respect to a consumer with the utmost of confidentiality with as much accuracy as is humanly 
possible with purely relevant information necessary to the consumer needs and the credit desires of the 
individual concerned and a proper and valid use of that information. Surely that is a laudable objective 
for this Legislature to accept, surely that is a principle most credit reporting agencies now adhere to and 
will be very easily able to adjust and adapt to once this Bill is approved. 
 
In concluding may I point out that inaccurate credit reports are of no value to the users thereof and to 
some extent undermine public confidence in the credit reporting system as a whole. Yet as I already 
stated individuals have suffered as a result of inaccurate reporting, deliberate or otherwise, and have 
been unable to ascertain the source of the inaccurate information in the credit report. Therefore they 
have been unable to take the necessary steps to rectify the situation. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is designed to 
help consumers, and I am proud to say that it is another major piece of legislation in this Government’s 
determination to advance the human rights and the consumer rights of the people of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. It gives me great pleasure in moving second reading of a Bill respecting Credit Reporting 
Agencies, 1972. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to comment on this Bill I do 
agree with the Attorney General’s laudable objectives and I agree that inaccurate reports are of no value 
to anyone. They are of no value to the man who relies upon them in extending credit and they are of no 
value to the man who would receive credit based on the strength of these reports. 
 
One of the problems we face in dealing with the legislation presented by this Government is that it has 
tended to be rather hastily put together and not always fully thought out. We are therefore going to have 
to give considerable scrutiny to this Bill. We have observed a tendency on the part of the Government to 
kick the man they go to help. In assisting the drowning man they are more likely to push him under than 
to pull him out. I think we have seen an example of that in the prevention of the assignment of wages by 
men who want to use that as a way to finance laudable and worthwhile objectives. We know many cases 
where people would like to organize their affairs through an orderly, deliberate and considered fashion. 
One of the methods adopted to do this is by assignment of wages, and the Government has prevented a 
man from doing that. I suggest that what the Government does by much of its legislation is hurt rather 
than help the man they seek to assist. So that while their motives are laudable, while their objectives are 
worthwhile, they so frequently miss the mark in actually carrying out what they set out to do. 
Consequently we shall have to give considerable study to this. 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1838 

Occasionally the Government makes someone else pay for their assistance. We saw an example of that 
in The Family Farm Protection Act. While they had a laudable objective in assisting farmers who were 
in some temporary financial difficulty, any cost involved was not to be borne by the Government or by 
the people who were being assisted, but in fact by some third party. This is another example of ‘non-
assistance’. The Attorney General shoots an arrow into the air and if you don’t look out it will end up in 
the seat of your pants. He tends occasionally to miss the mark. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’ve got a big target over there! 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — No, but what happens is that occasionally – and if it were only occasionally I 
wouldn’t be so upset – his actual carrying out of his objective is not properly carried out by the Bills 
presented to the House. Consequently, we must give further study to this. We want to make sure that in 
helping people he does not hurt the people. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
MR. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 92 – An Act respecting The 
Pyramid Franchises. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this too is a brand new Bill, it is The Pyramid Franchises Act, 1972. 
 
In recent years the sale of pyramid franchises to small investors has become very big business and 
promises to become even bigger business, unless legislation is enacted to effectively regulate this form 
of marketing thereby placing a greater measure of responsibility on the promoters of such pyramid 
franchise plans. The purpose of this Bill is to put a curb on this type of a pyramid franchise operation, 
and to assist persons who in good faith invest in these marketing schemes in the hope of being able to 
supplement their income and thereby to provide themselves with a higher standard of living. The 
schemes as presented by the promoters sound extremely attractive and promise great financial rewards. 
The promoters point to some people who in fact have made a profit. 
 
Unfortunately the greater number of the people who enter the plans are big losers and not big winners. 
These plans have been referred to as pyramid, multi-level or chain letter type of operations. Whatever 
they are called, the system works against the late comer, whatever that particular word means, who 
nearly always suffers serious financial losses. Persons have been known to have borrowed as much as 
$5,000. They have gone down to the credit union or to the bank and have borrowed $5,000 to get into 
plans of this type and many now in our province are struggling to repay that type of a loan. In some 
cases, they have sold their investment or their inventory that they purchased at the time of the franchise 
for as little as 10 cents on the dollar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to one of the leading men in this type of activity, Glen Turner of Orlando, 
Florida, the founder and promoter of Koscot Interplanetary Corporation, his system allows the little man 
to go into business for himself and to 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1839 

earn in a month what he used to earn in a year. For $5,000, Koscot would sell the little man a 
distributorship, according to Mr. Turner. The little man in turn could then earn money in two ways: 
firstly he could hire a sales force to peddle Koscot cosmetics door to door, or secondly, he would sign up 
other persons at $5,000 a clip, retaining $2,600 commission for the sale. It is reported that there were no 
cosmetics in existence under Koscot until Koscot was eight months old, until enough money was raised 
for Mr. Turner by the sale of the pyramid so that they could invest the money to produce the product. 
The scheme was set up on this basis, it was true that the first small dealer that Mr. Turner enrolled, a 19-
year old cripple from Marion, Ohio, had a very easy choice. He started selling distributorships, Mr. 
Speaker, at once and in no time that boy earned $80,000. The 35 or so distributorships he had enrolled 
could in turn also earn $80,000 but only if they signed up 35 more distributorships each, who in turn 
could do likewise, but only if they signed up 35 distributorships or more each. The reports that we have 
received go on to say that assuming just one distributorship to a family after five rounds of this chain-
letter type of operation, every United States household would own a Koscot distributorship. The 
question that has to be asked is, where would the last 51,296,875 little guys who have invested, find 
another 35 each to enrol at $5,000 and thereby earn their $80,000? That was the enticement that these 
private enterprisers held out to induce others to invest in the plan. $80,000 on a small down payment of 
$5,000 was the private enterprise and free enterprise system of doing things. Perhaps that is why Mr. 
Turner called this system ‘Koscot Interplanetary’ because he needed extra support to make sure the 
plans would work. 
 
Mr. Turner has other schemes. One is called Dare to be Great, a self-motivation course for free 
enterprise minded people which has also been promoted in Saskatchewan. There are still others which 
operate on the same principle as Dare to be Great and Koscot, but which apparently Turner has not yet 
brought into this province. We know nothing about them. One is called Cash is Best Incorporated, which 
is a cash discount card plan on a franchise basis. In addition, there is a plan called FashCot, a scheme for 
wigs and VitaCot for vitamins for those motivated by the free enterprise system. Glen W. Turner 
Enterprises is not the only promoter of pyramid schemes as naturally his system has been copied by 
others. In fact even before he set up his plans similar plans had operated in this province. Members 
opposite will no doubt recall NutroBio Products, Holiday Magic and others that one could think of, 
which operates on obtaining distributorships through the pyramid system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members opposite have criticized in the newspaper the actions taken by this Government 
with respect to Koscot Interplanetary and Dare to be Great in the fall of 1971. In fact, Members opposite 
are very fond every time we introduce consumer legislation of accusing the Government of being well 
motivated, but not being able to carry out the intent of the motivation. I want to tell the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that in the fall of 1971, and in fact up to this time, the Government of Saskatchewan had no 
legislation whatsoever to protect the people of the province against this type of a scheme. Other 
provinces or other parts in the United States in particular were researching the problem trying to define 
it and to meet it. We had no other choice. We could either let the Koscot scheme operate on 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1840 

The pyramid system as I have outlined to the Members, with a very fast distributorship, thereby sticking 
the little person at the bottom of the pyramid. We could have chosen to allow them to operate or we 
could take action. That’s what we decided to do. We said that if Koscot was going to operate, it wasn’t 
going to operate through the blessings of any government operated agency such as the Saskatchewan 
Centre of the Arts. Therefore a decision was made that the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts would not 
lease space agreed to by contract to Koscot or to Dare to be Great. Liberal spokesmen opposite have 
criticised that decision. Somehow that was a violation of the sanctity of the principle of contract by the 
lease to Koscot of the Centre of the Arts. It may have been a violation of the contract, but, Mr. Speaker, 
knowing the operation of Koscot as I have outlined it, I make no apologies for this Government having 
acted in the interests of consumers when it did in the fall of 1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Members opposite can get up with respect to this legislation and say that it is 
well motivated, but the Government has somehow abused powers. That is their opinion and they are 
entitled to keep it. We’ll let the consumers of Saskatchewan evaluate the stand of the Opposition when it 
comes to supporting unregulated and uncontrolled pyramid franchises as opposed to the efforts of this 
Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in drafting this legislation one of our difficulties frankly has been to define legally within 
the framework of a statute the term ‘pyramid franchise’ so as not to sweep in all franchises. There are 
basically three tests to determine whether a franchise is a pyramid franchise within the meaning of this 
Act. I want to say that we had trouble in defining it because I also want to tell the Members of this 
House that there is no other legislation in Canada similar to the legislation that we seek to pioneer here 
in Saskatchewan this morning. If we make a mistake with respect to the drafting we have no other Act to 
compare it to. 
 
We will accept the comments made by the Members opposite who seek to improve that legislation in 
Committee of the Whole. But we make no apology again for not waiting until the Dominion of Canada 
or other provinces have sought to define the term ‘pyramid franchises’ because this is a matter that 
should be clearly set out for the Province of Saskatchewan. And I tell the pyramid franchise operators 
who seek to deny the provisions of this Bill who might be tempted to circumvent the law of the Province 
of Saskatchewan as it is written, that as far as I’m concerned as Attorney General and those in charge of 
consumer affairs that that type of operation will not be welcomed or condoned in the Province of 
Saskatchewan no matter whether it is a violation of free-enterprise or not. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Nevertheless, notwithstanding these difficulties of definition I think we have 
come up with a definition of pyramid franchise. 
 
Basically there are three tests according to the law to 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1841 

determine when a franchise becomes a pyramid franchise. The answers to these questions, Mr. Speaker, 
must be answered in the affirmative in order for a franchise to be a pyramid franchise. 
 

1. Does the franchise give the purchaser of the franchise the right to sell goods or 
services? 

 
If the answer is yes, we ask the next question. 
 

2. Does it give the purchaser the right to recruit other distributors who in turn will have 
essentially the same right to recruit other distributors? 

 
If the answer is yes, then we continue to the third question. 
 

3. Is the marketing plan or system, the marketing plan of the franchises and the product, 
is that plan organized, directed, prescribed or controlled in substantial part by a franchise 
or at the top of the pyramid? 

 
If the answer is yes to that question, as it would be to all three, we have a pyramid franchise. If we have 
a pyramid franchise we don’t outlaw it, Mr. Speaker, we regulate it. That’s the purpose of the Bill. If he 
falls under the definition the Bill then provides for the licencing and bonding of such a pyramid 
franchiser. It provides for cancellation or suspension of licence in certain circumstances. For example, 
where there has been a misrepresentation or dishonesty or where the franchiser had demonstrated a lack 
of competency, fitness or trustworthiness to carry on the business. 
 
The Registrar is given wide discretionary powers under this Bill with respect to cancellation or even 
granting the licence, but his decision may be reviewed on appeal to a judge of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. And we give this discretion to the registrar, Mr. Speaker, because someone in the government 
services should be in the position to take a look at the proposed cancellation of the licence of the 
franchiser. Does the contract have certain limitations as to the number of distributorships that the 
franchisee in turn may sell? Because if there is no limit to it then you’ve got an uncontrolled pyramid 
franchise. Is there a provision for buy-back of the product, be it a cosmetic, a wig, or whatever. Is there a 
buy-back provision so that in fact if the goods are not satisfactorily produced that there will be someone 
that the franchisee can return the goods to. Someone has to take a look at these types of situations to 
make sure that they exist in the contract in order to really control the operation. 
 
The Bill provides, Mr. Speaker, that the purchaser of a pyramid franchise may cancel the contract at any 
time within 60 days upon making the contract, and obtain the full refund of his money from the 
franchiser. It is expected that this provision will put an end to the chain-letter game introduced into these 
marketing plans. I remind Members that the chain-letter operations have been ruled illegal and against 
the law by the Parliament of Canada in the Criminal Code of Canada. 
 
Indeed, instead of pushing the sale of distributorships on a chain-letter basis, promoters will have to 
push the sale of goods to consumers. 
 
The Bill provides that unsold goods must be taken back by 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1842 

the franchiser at any time within one year at 90 per cent of their value. In addition, the purchaser of the 
franchise is entitled to a refund of a portion of the franchise fee where he cancelled the contract after 60 
days but within 180 days. The refund of the franchise fee ranges from 95 per cent down to 75 per cent, 
depending on how long the contract has been in force before it is cancelled. 
 
When I’m talking about refunds, Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about a refund of the franchise fee. That’s the 
fee paid to get the franchise, not any fee that is paid with respect to the purchase of the goods that may 
be attached to the franchise. 
 
The Bill also regulates the form of advertising, and the form of agreement to be used in respect of 
pyramid franchising. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, you already know of someone, perhaps other Members in this House know 
already of someone who has put up $5,000 of hard-earned money, perhaps borrowed it, encumbered a 
home, or part of a farm, who has put up the $5,000 to become involved in one of these chain-letter 
operations already in the hope of supplementing his income. Instead of his improving his position he 
may now be facing serious financial problems. 
 
I want to tell the House that many have demanded the refund of their money from the companies, certain 
companies, without any success at all and without any practical recourse against the company at all. The 
companies and their promoters are often located outside of Saskatchewan. Possibly even outside of this 
country and they are thriving on money taken from the little people of this province, those who work 
hard to earn that money. They are thriving off those people in this province and elsewhere in a scheme 
that was basically doomed to failure from the outset and they knew it and they sought to sell that to the 
franchisee. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, Members opposite may not agree with that. That, of course, is their 
right in this House to take that position. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that one of the provisions of the 
Consumer Protection Bill, the Department of Consumer Affairs, has a provision which allows the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, the man who will likely be administering this particular Bill that I 
introduce, the right to suspend an operation for a five-day period. Mr. Speaker, it is precisely for this 
type of an operation that that power is given to the Minister of Consumer Affairs. That is what we had in 
mind when we introduced that Department of Consumer Affairs legislation. Because very often these 
are whirlwind schemes. Anything short of a cease and desist order taken by a Minister of Consumer 
Affairs forthwith might thwart the purpose of trying to help a large number of consumers. That 
Department of Consumer Affairs Bill also has a section giving the Attorney General – because he is the 
law officer for the Government – giving him the right to bring an action on behalf of those people who 
have borrowed $5,000 or more to get into a scheme and now have no recourse against the company, 
because it’s gone, because it’s fled, or it’s fighting the matter in court, or because they are defunct. The 
Attorney General has the right to bring that form of an action to protect the little people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we must read these two Bills together, 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1843 

the Pyramid Franchise Bill and the Department of Consumer Affairs Bill. Those who would say, as 
according to the newspaper of yesterday, a man by the name of Mr. Purdy of the Employers’ 
Association, that this type of power is a hatchet over business, are deliberately misleading the Province 
of Saskatchewan and the people of the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Every legitimate businessman in Saskatchewan has nothing to fear and in fact 
does not fear any strong consumer affairs legislation or any legislation with respect to pyramid franchise 
sales, Mr. Speaker. None whatsoever. Those who seek to sell franchises have nothing to fear of this 
legislation because it doesn’t outlaw it. What those two Bills, the one that we introduced and the 
Consumer Affairs Department Bill have done is place the power for protection of consumers in the 
hands of the elected representatives of the consumer, the Government of the Province of Saskatchewan 
who must act in the best interests of the public. Newspapers, such as the Leader-Post and the Star-
Phoenix who misrepresent the position of consumers’ interests are living in an age that by-passed them 
at least 100 years before. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Editorials that talk in harried terms about the need of a delicate balance between 
the interests of consumers and the balance of the businessman and then end up by saying that the 
businessman should in effect be allowed to go unregulated, are editorials that belong back in the 1850s. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Speeches from Members opposite who maintain that position also belong back 
in the 1850s. I don’t know how anybody could say that legislation which seeks to equalize the 
opportunities of consumers has somehow created a hatchet over the head of legitimate businessmen in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. This Government wants legitimate businessmen to thrive and to grow. 
We hope in a four-year program they will thrive and grow. The success or failure of any business 
operation in Saskatchewan will not depend on whether or not the assignment of wages or a Department 
of Consumer Affairs is set up, or whether a Pyramid Franchise Bill is set up. In fact I say, Mr. Speaker, 
because of these Bills we will eliminate the shyster operator, the man who is not a legitimate 
businessman, the man who does not live in the community, the man who doesn’t give two hoots about 
his fellow citizens. We’ll eliminate him leaving his field to a better operation for the businessmen of all 
of Saskatchewan and anybody who says this is anti-businessman is not telling the truth. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the first Province in Canada, the first Province in 
Canada, to experiment with this type of legislation on pyramid franchises. 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1844 

I’m hoping that the Federal Government will get into a field of pyramid franchises as well because we 
are going to need their co-operation and if they come up with a better definition or better situation we’ll 
amend this Bill. We’ll change the Bill if we have to in order to comply with it because we want the 
Government of Canada to work together with our province and I can assure the Members of the House, 
the new Minister of Consumer Affairs that the Government will continue to work with the Federal 
Government in this area. But I do say that this is a first for our Government and for our people. It is 
another attempt to provide consumer protection laws to the benefit of consumers and businessmen 
unequalled by any other province in the Dominion of Canada. I invite all of the free-enterprisers and 
Liberals opposite to join us in this task to improve society as a whole. I move second reading of an Act 
respecting the Pyramid Franchises. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to assure the Attorney 
General that he is not likely to receive any great criticism from this side of the House in connection with 
this Bill or the presentation of it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — Pyramid franchising is something that has been with us for a little while but it has 
only recently become the kind of a problem that is represented by the operation of Koscot 
Interplanetary. 
 
The days, a few years ago, when a person could have some cosmetics or vitamins left over in his 
basement has been altered drastically in the last year or two, to the point where people can put up 
thousands and thousands of dollars and can lose their money because the value of the product is 
deteriorating in their basements. 
 
You can’t say Mr. Turner was thinking small. You can’t accuse him of thinking small. Anybody who 
names his organization Koscot Interplanetary obviously has some grandiose things in mind, and the 
result of these grandiose thoughts is the type of Bill that we are getting here today, and the type of Bill 
which is likely to occur all across the North American continent. Already some half dozen American 
states, have, largely as a result of the Koscot Interplanetary operations, brought in bills of this kind. 
Saskatchewan is the first Canadian province to do so, but it is a relatively new phenomenon and 
everybody is moving quickly, largely thanks to people like Koscot Interplanetary who have brought the 
pyramid franchise game to newer and grander heights. 
 
I appreciate the difficulty that the Hon. Attorney General has in defining ‘pyramid franchise’ and I 
assume that he will get a pretty easy time from us knowing that if it is not adequately defined that 
alterations can be made. 
 
Of course we are concerned. We are concerned that people like the sellers of the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica and other book sellers and similar types of operations are, hopefully, not unduly hampered by 
this type of an Act. I assume also that 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1845 

sensible application of the powers of the registrar will ease the burden of those other legitimate operators 
who are not in any way to be compared with Koscot Interplanetary. 
 
I totally and absolutely condemn the kind of operation of Koscot Interplanetary and I compliment the 
Government for carrying to the House this Bill which is obviously an extension of the Liberal Consumer 
Legislation begun and carried on so vigorously by the previous Hon. Attorney General, Mr. Darrel 
Heald. When it comes to the field of consumer legislation you are unlikely to get any serious opposition 
from us because undoubtedly it will be an extension of the kind of a program that was begun several 
years ago, as I say, under the previous Liberal Government. 
 
It may well be said that the Bill we have here today, which is rather a lengthy and powerful Bill, may 
operate a little bit in a heavy-handed fashion. There are those, I’m sure, who will accuse this House of 
using a sledgehammer to crack a walnut. That may well be so, and undoubtedly we shall have to look at 
this Bill and its operation in future sessions of this Legislature. 
 
In the meantime, I can assure the Government and the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) that 
while we shall scrutinize the clauses very carefully for draftsmanship on how it will operate in actual 
fact, the entire substance of the Bill, the intention of the Bill is one we shall support and, therefore, 
without further ado we will wish to look at it briefly and I assure the Government that it will be briefly, I 
ask leave that debate on this Bill be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek that Bill 
No. 99 – An Act to amend The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 99 is a very significant Bill 
in the Health Department. 
 
It allows for a significant experiment in new methods of payment for medical services. The Member for 
Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) the former Minister of Health, has said that global budgeting for community 
clinics is no experiment, but a significant new program. In a certain sense the Hon. Member may be 
correct. We are launching what we hope will become a significant new program. We hope not to the 
exclusion of other forms of medical practice that community clinics, community health centres will 
become very significant instruments for the delivery of health care in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To that extent we can agree. We agree that it is a new departure, an exciting departure, which the 
previous Government was not prepared to undertake for health delivery in Saskatchewan. However, I 
shall return to the statement – that it is a new program and not an experiment – because it is indeed an 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1846 

experiment. There are many aspects of this Bill which are exploratory and exciting. 
 
Before we go further in discussing the Bill, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say two simple things about 
community clinics in the Province of Saskatchewan. There are two reasons that we, as Members of the 
New Democratic Party, as the Government of Saskatchewan, believe that community clinics have a 
significant role to play in the delivery of health services. 
 
The first is that community clinics are willing to experiment. They have a notable reputation of 
willingness to experiment with new health delivery systems. They have experimented with new 
techniques of preventive medicine at the family practice level. They are willing to experiment with the 
use of para-medical health workers. They are willing to experiment with other than fee-for-service 
methods of physician payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second reason why community clinics are significant and must constitute an important 
aspect in any health delivery system which this Government establishes, is that community clinics allow 
for the involvement of ordinary people, of lay people, in the making of health decisions. This is not to 
put down the professional and deny the doctor an excruciatingly important role to play, but to say that 
ordinary people have a role to play. 
 
The Occupational Health Act, on which the Minister opened second reading today also illustrates this 
important principle, the involvement of lay people in the making of health decisions. In that Bill are 
provisions for occupational health communities at the place of work. They will hopefully allow workers 
to understand and become involved in the making of health and safety decisions affecting them. 
 
The Hon. Member opposite said that we ‘jumped the gun’ that we have ‘moved too quickly’, that we 
haven’t waited for John Hastings’ Federal study of community clinics to conclude and bring forth its 
recommendations. Mr. Speaker, if we had waited for that committee to report, I strongly suspect that the 
Members opposite would have accused us of dilly-dallying and being unprepared to act. When the 
Government has a specific new program on which it is prepared to act, to say, wait for somebody’s 
Royal Commission to report, is a feeble excuse. 
 
Royal Commissions are the Liberal way of governing. A Royal Commission on this and a Royal 
Commission on that, and no decisions or anything. There would have been no Federal commission on 
community clinics if ten years ago the CCF Government and Saskatchewan people had not been 
prepared to experiment with community clinics. Mr. Speaker, as with so many health care improvements 
it is in Saskatchewan that the experiments begin. 
 
Community clinics became a reality in Saskatchewan. People got themselves together; they took the 
risk; they made the experiment, and they launched community clinics a decade ago. Now the Federal 
Government finally realized that the people of Saskatchewan have a good thing going and it launches a 
study. 
 
We in the NDP, do not intend to wait for a Federal White Paper, a Federal study, a Federal report with 
recommendations, before acting. 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1847 

Now the question of costs. This is a significant question, and has been a cause of differences between 
the Liberals and the NDP for a number of years. We removed deterrent fees from Medicare and 
Members opposite said that the extra costs incurred would be the death of Medicare. The Members 
opposite are now saying that because we are experimenting via the community clinics in non-fee-for-
service methods of payment, that this will mean doom and destruction from mounting health costs. 
 
This is the typical conservative reaction that one can expect from Members opposite who are unwilling 
to experiment, unwilling to try new ideas. Surely there can be no solace taken from the present 
escalating health cost statistics and given the escalations we are experiencing, it is important to try to 
reduce costs by experimenting with alternative methods of financing health care. 
 
I can agree with the Hon. Member from Whitmore Park that if, via the community clinics, we introduce 
para-medical people — nurse practitioners, physician assistants, etc. – without reversing the upward 
trend in number of physicians in the Province there will merely be an expansion of demand to use the 
additional para-medical services and we will realize no savings in costs. 
 
However, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that in the course of the next decade there will be a certain substitution 
of para-medical health people performing some of the services which physicians are now providing. 
Physicians can then concentrate upon the medical services requiring the high degree of skill and 
competence possessed by them and not waste time on colds, sniffles, sore throats, and such routine 
medicine as could be better handled by para-medical people. 
 
But we will never know, Mr. Speaker, to what extent we can effect this substitution unless we try. 
Members opposite are Cassandras crying doom and destruction as soon as we begin important 
experiments. 
 
Members opposite also referred to two alternative methods of physician remuneration, fee-for-service 
relative to salary. 
 
It is their impression that fee-for-service keeps doctors honest. If we have a salaried service we will have 
lazy physicians who will not work they allege. Fee-for-service encourages overutilization and 
discourages preventive service. If a physician is operating solely on the basis of maximizing his personal 
income – and I am not suggesting that he is – it is foolish for him to inoculate the rest of the household 
when one gets the chicken pox, because of course, it is financially advantageous to let the whole family 
get chicken pox. He can then treat and charge the entire family. Although here is a simple and 
overexaggerated example, it illustrates the elementary truth that fee-for-service discourages preventive 
medicine. There are also specific idiocies in our fee schedule, different items which reward physicians 
for different services in a manner completely unrelated to the time and trouble necessary to perform the 
different services. 
 
Salary service avoids these idiocies. However, as Members opposite said, there are disadvantages to it. 
If one thereby creates a mentality or feeling among doctors that they are bureaucrats obligated to work 
just from 9 to 5 one risks the problem of a curtailed supply of physician services. 



 
April 20, 1972 
 

 
1848 

There remains a third alternative which, personally, I favor: per capita payment. It is not new. It implies 
that a physician has a list of patients whom he treats and he is paid according to the number of people on 
his list. 
 
Per capita remuneration encourages preventive service inasmuch as a doctor who keeps the patients on 
his list healthy by good preventive practices thereby minimizes the amount of curative services he has to 
perform. It is a system which allows there to be some variation in the income a physician earns, as a 
function of the size of his patient list. That allows him discretion as to whether he wants to work a great 
deal or a little. It would be an interesting experiment to introduce a per capita system in North America. 
 
One of the community clinics, the Prince Albert Community Clinic has expressed considerable interest 
in undertaking such an experiment, and if it is considered advantageous we in the Provincial 
Government are desirous to help. 
 
Debate on physician remuneration centres around three basic systems, fee-for-service, salary, and per 
capita. I have added nothing new to the debate, Mr. Speaker. Medical journals, professors, physicians, 
public health administrators have been discussing for 50 years the relative merits of these various 
systems. We don’t need more White Papers and studies. We need actual controlled experiments by 
groups of physicians and lay people prepared to undertake them. We have in community clinics people 
who are willing to experiment. It is the policy of our Government that we shall encourage them to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now conclude my remarks on this Bill permitting community clinic associations to enter 
into global budget agreements. I shall certainly support it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to the 
Members of this House a group of 77 students from Queen Elizabeth Elementary School from 
Saskatoon. They are accompanied by their teachers, John Grant and Sandy Belan. Queen Elizabeth 
School is one of the older schools in Saskatoon but certainly has made its reputation known over the 
years. I hope that their stay here this afternoon in the House will be one that will be rather informative 
and the memory of the things that happened here will remain with them for the rest of their lives. I ask 
the Members of the House to join with me in greeting them here and wishing them a safe return home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon City Park): — I should like to take this opportunity to welcome to this 
Assembly a group of 40 students from St. Paul’s North Elementary School in Saskatoon. I understand 
that they are accompanied here by their teacher Mr. Fogel. I hope that they 



 
April 20, 1972 

 

 
1849 

have an informative and educational and worthwhile afternoon and a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to the 
Members of the Legislature, in the east gallery and in the Speaker’s Gallery and in the west gallery, 175 
students from W.C. How School in Regina, one of the very fine schools in Albert Park constituency. 
They are accompanied today by Mrs. Huber, Mr. A. Olson, Mr. D. Wollenberg and Mrs. Hill. This 
school and these students, under the principalship of Mr. Bud McNeil have made this one of the finest 
schools in Saskatchewan and we have a fine bunch of people here to testify to that today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


