



















































Hansard: April 18, 1972


 

1789 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

38th Day 

 

Tuesday, April 18, 1972 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

PUBLIC HEALTH EDUCATION COMMITTEE 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 

like to ask a question of the Hon. Minister of Health. I believe he has a thrust group in his department 

and under that group a number of probe committees. I wonder if he would tell me if the probe committee 

dealing with public health education is chaired by a gentleman by the name of John F. Deverell. If so, 

what his qualifications are and what the terms of reference of the committee are? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of probe 

groups. I believe that the thrust committee sets up various probes. I should like to check on the chairman 

of that committee as well as the terms of reference on that and bring back the information to the Hon. 

Member. 

 

MR. GRANT: — A supplementary question. Does the Minister know if Mr. Deverell is chairman of 

this committee? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — I know that Mr. Deverell is a member of the committee. I am not sure whether he 

is chairman now. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 

 

RETURN NO. 78 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown) for 

Return No. 78 showing: 

 

Whether the Department of Agriculture received appropriation of funds for payments to 

farmers on account of unharvested crops in the year 1971. If so (a) the amount of money 

appropriated, (b) the formula for payment to the farmer, (c) whether this money is for 

distribution to any farmer in Saskatchewan or whether it is designed to a particular area 

of Saskatchewan, (d) when these funds will be distributed, (e) the person who determines 

amount payable. 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, as the Return now asks the 

information, it will not give them all that we should wish to convey to the 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1790 

Members of the Opposition, I therefore move an amendment, seconded by the Minister of Welfare (Mr. 

Snyder) that Return No. 78 be amended by deleting all the words after the word “showing” and 

substitute the following: 

 

(a) the formula used by the Department of Agriculture in making payments to farmers on 

account of crops unharvested in 1971, (b) the amount of money expended by the 

Department in making these payments, (c) whether the payments are available to any 

farmer in Saskatchewan or where designed for a particular area of Saskatchewan, (d) 

when payments were made, (e) the branch or branches of the Department that determined 

the amount payable to each farmer. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 85 – An Act to establish 

the Department of Culture and Youth. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move on behalf of the Government second 

reading of a Bill to establish the Department of Culture and Youth, 1972. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan has done much over the years to improve recreational 

facilities and encourage participation in athletic and social events. Particularly with respect to our youth, 

the Government has generally tried to upgrade their qualify of life. The new Department of Culture and 

Youth will seek to continue these programs and advances already obtained. It will also seek to 

co-ordinate the Provincial Government input with all members of our community with respect to culture 

whatever their age and status. This proposed new Department will seek also to play a much broader role 

than the individual agencies and boards which it will from time to time administer and which already 

exist under the existing programs. One might wonder what is the need for a Department of Culture and 

Youth when culture is thought of as a creation of society as opposed to a creation of a bureaucracy. 

Culture is basically spontaneous and unplanned as opposed to governmental programs and planning. 

These are valid questions and they have been among the Government’s thoughts when we discussed the 

establishment of this Department of Culture and Youth which is before the House for approval in second 

reading. 

 

At a broad conceptual level there appears to be, at least in the opinions of many, three major concerns 

which have not been adequately met by past governments in this area. This new Department of Culture 

and Youth must now address itself to these concerns. Firstly, the Department must act as a focal point 

for cultural conservation in Saskatchewan. Secondly, it must act as a source from which unique talents 

which might otherwise go unexpressed or which might go elsewhere to find true expression and support 

will receive encouragement here at home. Thirdly, the Department must be primarily a resource at the 

governmental level to heighten the aesthetic consciousness of our province and emphasize the 

importance of the quality of life in the Province of Saskatchewan. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1791 

May I briefly say a few words about each one of these three points. Firstly, the question of cultural 

conservation. With progress and technology increasing its influence on our life style more rapidly day 

by day, probably more rapidly than at any time in the history of man, there is a process of extinction or 

near extinction of some culture forms occurring which is a very worrisome thing. I ask, is 50 years of 

such technological progress more vital than the hundreds that it has taken to create the array of ethnic 

diversity which Saskatchewan is very lucky enough to possess? I think the answer is, No. Culture is very 

special. Those with very special artistic and linguistic patterns that this province of ours possess are in 

abundance, they are beautiful and they are rich and they deserve preservation. These same cultural 

patterns are today threatened more by a single technological culture devoted to increased productivity 

than by any racial bias or prejudice that is found in our community or in our province. Although we 

must accept developmental technology as necessary we need to accept it as rendering extinct that to 

which it is in the final analysis inferior. The defence of the multilingual-multicultural resources of the 

Province of Saskatchewan is the duty of all of us and the focal point of such defence will reside in this 

new Department of Culture and Youth and in this Government. I hope that the Department of Culture 

and Youth will be the focal point for the advancement and promotion of those great cultures. 

 

Secondly, it will provide support for unique talents. I have on occasion stopped to ponder how many 

very gifted people have gone unnoticed in our province because we have not allowed room for or 

recognition of their potential. It is this travesty of human potential that the Department will try to stop in 

a way that will encourage and support the potential not only of very talented athletes and artists but also 

to recognize the power of people as groups of classes and recognizing them as innovators of a cultural 

style. One need only look at the drain the country has suffered in the past and the province I believe is 

still suffering the loss of its fine young artists and fine talented people. How very important it is to 

secure at least a recognizable reflection in government of this important issue. It is, of course, premature 

to describe the kind and the extent of such support for our young talent but we may see programs 

ranging from giving technical advice and help and the supply of material to essentially self-help projects 

all the way through to an enhanced scholarship program administered by the Department or an 

institution in the province most suited for that purpose. These must all be carefully considered as a 

means of support. 

 

While Saskatchewan has in the last several years been experiencing a loss of population, a curious 

phenomenon does appear to have arisen which the new Department will examine more carefully. A 

number of people in their mid-twenties and early thirties who left Saskatchewan appear to be returning. 

Several have visited our offices in the last several months stating some of their reasons for the return to 

Saskatchewan. An interesting theme that recurs is the question of the difficulties that arise with 

industrial urban sprawls with respect to the more populated areas of North America. The Department of 

Culture and Youth will be giving this matter some very important consideration to see how it fits into 

the projected cultural growth of our province. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1792 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, is the question of quality of life and the influence of the quality of life. As I said, 

in my opinion it is as important as any of the other two reasons. It is imperative to have in government 

as should be the case elsewhere in society, a constant effort and reminder of the goal to make life 

increasingly more aesthetic. Beauty and leisure to appreciate it has always been the foundation of 

healthy societies and this must be a foundation regained and restored in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

The tendency to depreciate the quality of life in favor of so-called ill-conceived progress must be put in 

proper perspective and reversed. When all is said and done, it is the duty, the quality, the freedom of 

healthy expression that is the basic purpose of culture in this province. It is culture which makes man 

and his forms of life so special on this earth. 

 

The emphasis of my remarks have intentionally excluded an exhaustive identification of potential 

programs for the Department of Culture and Youth. This will be done when we come up to 

consideration of the Estimates for the Department of Culture and Youth. 

 

Programs of the Provincial Youth Agency will be administered by the new Department and continued. 

The Act establishing the Agency will be repealed as a consequence of the establishment by the 

Department of Culture and Youth. Provincial grants to the Saskatchewan Arts Board will also be 

administered by the Department of Culture and Youth. Also it appears that under Section 6 of the Act it 

will enable Cabinet to prescribe additional functions and these might in future, for example, include 

such programs as perhaps provincial archives or whatever in this area. For the rest, the Department will 

seek broad representation from both urban and rural groups from all groups of people associated there to 

become involved in a development of its policies. It is the present thinking of the Department that we 

should play an informative role where possible and seek the advice and the help of the leadership of our 

people at the community level in urban and rural life to developing the policies of this Department. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to express how gratifying it is to me and to the Government to introduce 

this Bill. There will be many people in this province who share my view at any rate that the significance 

and the success of a department with considerable emphasis on culture will not be measured in per 

capita grants and cubic yards of culture per dollar. The significance of this legislation is that from now 

on there will be in this Government an identifiable cultural presence for all ethnic groups who appreciate 

and all people who appreciate the development of culture in our province. It will be a place where 

people can focus their cultural interests and concerns to government with the hope that their varied 

cultural views and experiences will more adequately be reflected in the programs in all sectors of 

governmental life in all activities in our society. Programs in which people cannot see any of their 

cultural values reflected are programs from which these same people will be alienated from our 

Government and our society. Ours is a province of many cultures and many languages thankfully, Mr. 

Speaker. Because Saskatchewan is also in Confederation, two languages, English and French, are 

official languages of Canada. 

 

In addition to conducting the usual recreational programs and projects, this new Department will be 

charged with the heavy 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1793 

task of getting these varied groups, other groups and interests to work together to provide, in the final 

analysis, a sense of one community here in Saskatchewan without at the same time causing undue 

sacrifices and asking undue compromises of any individual group of any linguistic or cultural society in 

our province. Without the predominance of cultural goals, progress and money becomes society’s two 

greatest objectives. I say that this is really not the objective for which we strive in this province and in 

this new Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Department of Culture and Youth is going to be a step forward of great magnitude in 

the development of cultural opportunities for all peoples in this province. I urge all Members of this 

Legislature to support this Bill and it gives me great pleasure to move second reading of it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.H. LANGE (Assiniboia-Bengough): — Youth and culture are two of the most widely discussed 

topics in society today. In my speech I shall examine the phenomenon of youth as a group and then 

examine some of the cultural problems with which we are confronted in our society. I hope to 

underscore the value of youth and importance of culture and therefore the necessity for government to 

become involved and, in fact, develop a separate department to serve the needs of these significant 

aspects of our society. Frequently, when people speak of culture they do so only in terms of art, 

literature and music. Others equate it with minority groups. A more inclusive definition of culture would 

take into account all the activities of all the people in our society. If we agree that culture is learned and 

passed on from one generation to the next, it is necessary that we regard youth as the most important 

link in the development of culture. Yet this important element is misunderstood. The young have come 

to be regarded only in terms of over generalizations. How often do we hear the statements that the young 

people are brash, headstrong and selfish, easily led and usually misinformed. Just as often we hear that 

they are honest and idealistic, that they see clearly and cannot be hoodwinked. Such vague descriptions 

are impossible to prove or disprove, they only serve to reinforce the widespread feeling that today’s 

youth is very different from its counterpart of the past generations. This widens the gap between 

generations. 

 

This widening gap can be attributed to much more than vague remarks. It perhaps has its roots in the 

rapid changes in science and technology that accompanied the post-war boom and the prosperity of the 

1950s and 1960s. During this period the production of goods reached new levels of efficiency, 

institutions reached powerful heights and communications extended beyond global limitations. With this 

expansion came the negative aspects that are sensed so keenly by young people. A society has evolved 

that appears incapable of handling the most rudimentary human needs. We have watched the 

technological society turn crystal rivers into open sewers, we have watched it spew out what we don’t 

need. For example, the endless numbers of new gadgets, while denying us the essentials, habitable cities, 

breathable air and a right to stay on the land. In the trenchant words of Charles Reich, 

 

The essence of the corporate state is that it is essentially single-minded. It has one value, 

the value of 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1794 

technology – organization, efficiency, growth and progress. No other values are allowed 

to interfere, not amenity, not beauty, not community, not even the supreme value of life 

itself. 

 

This growing disillusionment with the good life is perhaps the most strongly manifested in the 

sub-culture of youth. 

 

Many youths view the political leadership as an unbelievable idiocy. In the past, political leaders 

ranging from mayors to prime ministers were treated with respect and reverence. Today they are viewed 

with contempt. This negativism extends to all institutions from police and justice courts to the system 

itself. Through the mass media the young are daily exposed to society’s innate hypocrisy, its 

contradictions and the apparent failure of almost every facet of our social and political life. Youth have 

seen an activistic participatory democracy turn into its antithesis, nihilistic bombing and murder. The 

surprising thing about this feeling of rootlessness that pervades the youth is that there is no class or 

status distinction as to where it is found. The rich and the poor boy are equally affected. Their human 

resources and potential remain undiscovered, or worse still, wasted. It could be argued that 

Saskatchewan youth do not experience these problems to the same degree. There are, however, 

problems which are unique to the youth of Saskatchewan. Many of our young have spent 16 or 17 years 

in the educational system. What real choices do they have upon completion of their formal training? Can 

Saskatchewan offer them jobs for which they were trained or jobs that are socially meaningful and not 

simple cogs in the corporate structure. If not, the young then have the alternative of leaving the province 

to seek employment elsewhere or to roam. It could be said that they also have the alternative of 

remaining at home on welfare. I am certain you agree that these alternatives are unsatisfactory for the 

individual and for a province which needs its human resources. 

 

In this analysis of Saskatchewan youth we cannot overlook the young of either urban or rural 

communities who, for economic reasons, are barred from universities and other post-secondary 

institutions. It must be considered that they have even fewer opportunities to gain access to that which is 

required for their individual growth. Even more readily than their educated counterpart they can become 

stifled and caught in a cycle of welfare. 

 

Today’s youth are desperately trying to make sense of their lives and out of the world. In many cases 

they have rejected their materialistic backgrounds – the goal of a well-paid job, suburban homes, 

automobiles, first-class travel, status and security – everything that meant success to their parents. But is 

this any justification for the assertion that they have no goal? Are they really very different from the 

pioneers who explored and settled the West? Was not this country’s settlement dependent upon the 

young at heart who, restless and dissatisfied, had the courage to leave their native countries, their 

families and homes and relinquish their claim to a firmly established life-style in search of a dream? The 

restlessness of today’s youth is nothing new. And is the position in which our youth finds itself very 

different from that of many other groups in our province, groups who have become alienated because of 

age, class, sex, education, even geographical barriers? 

 

As an example, what choices do our old people have when they are no longer productive members of 

our society? Are they 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1795 

ensured of an active share in community affairs or do they become institutionalized and led to feel that 

they are no more than a social burden? It has been said that young people’s search for freedom does not 

seem to have any road or destination, yet they are looking for what man has always looked for from the 

beginning of time – a way of life that has some meaning or sense, a greater share of culture, so to speak, 

and in the life of the community. Our goal should be to involve all divergent groups as much as possible 

in the culture of society in general. This would include not only the young or old but the multi-cultural 

groups which comprise our Saskatchewan society without distinction or discrimination of any kind. 

 

The complexity of the problems involved in cultural development demands co-ordination at the highest 

level, thereby, necessitating the involvement of government. Even now some people are questioning 

whether we have a culture at all. We appear to be suffering from a lack of cultural identity, in fact, from 

any real identity. 

 

Last week the President of the United States endorsed the sanctity and difference of our Canadian 

culture but does he really believe we have one or does he know it is something we should like to have. If 

we are short of this precious thing called culture what does the future hold? With the rapid changes 

accompanying technology and the onset of cybernetics we are already getting grave predictions of social 

changes in our social structures. Futurists are predicting that we may never solve the problem of 

unemployment and that if we are honest about it, we would see that the situation can only get worse. 

And if the situation does get worse what will happen when the average man no longer claims his 

economic position as a producer in society and instead becomes only a consumer? It’s hard to imagine, 

you say? Could it be possible? 

 

It is possible and a perfect example is our Indian population. Reservations where no one has to work and 

where large groups of people live on transfer payments, where culture has died and so have the people. 

Already we have heard the phrases ‘reservations for the young’, ‘segregation for the old’. Even more 

frightening are the predictions of the futurist, George Orwell, 1984, who describes a scene where the 

majority of the people, faceless and nameless, are herded like cattle and kept separate from the small 

group of powerful who run the world. Will our managers and administrators ever become that powerful? 

Will our people become a burden to be left behind? With the aid of technology it may be possible. Every 

day the number of people who have been bought off by the various transfer schemes grows. 

 

The Department of Youth and Culture must look ahead and ensure that as the economic importance of 

the single man disappears, he still has a place in society where culture remains and is shared by all. So, 

we see that the direction in which we are heading is frightening. But even more frightening is the speed 

in which we are reaching the nihilistic end. Some people call it ‘future shock’ as coined by Alvin 

Toffler. It simply means that today’s culture is changing rapidly with every generation. In the past, 

father and son and indeed generation after generation has been able to live within the common bounds of 

a single culture. Today, we find that our society is changing so quickly that it has made strangers out of 

friends, distance among kin and alienation among most. The upswing of the counter-cultures and 

sub-cultures, the frantic scrambling of groups of people, 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1796 

led to the fringes by a fanatic search for a meaningful life and a system of values that makes sense in an 

increasingly complicated and contradictory world, are the proof. 

 

In Saskatchewan we need not despair. Here the problems of change have not reached the same insane 

proportions. With careful management we may be able to stop the tide. One of our greatest assets in this 

regard is the large agrarian group that exists – barely – in our province today. The rural life and culture 

is the backbone of any society. Throughout the world we can see the consequences of the destruction of 

the rural society. Many of the social problems of the world today stem from the disruption of this 

element. 

 

This Government has already made its position in this matter very clear and the Department of Youth 

and Culture should uphold this general concern for the continuance and revitalization of the rural 

community. If the rural community can be preserved, it will form the base for other cultural groups 

within the society and it will help to provide the stability and meaningfulness that is required by all men. 

 

The rapid change of culture must be slowed and the development of a common culture must be pursued. 

Some common grounds must be found between the urban and rural groups of our society. That is the 

only way that our people can combine their strength for the ultimate goal of human happiness. We find 

today that both of our major groups have cultural advantages that must be shared and inadequacies that 

have to be eliminated. The beauty of nature that lives in the country, the closeness of nature that the 

farmer enjoys must be shared with the people of the city. The stress and toll of the cities has only 

recently been understood and there is a growing movement back to the land. This closeness of the land 

and the exercising of territorial rights is a common need and ways to share them must be devised. In the 

same respect, the cultural assets of the urban community must be shared by all people. The arts – 

literature, drama, music, art – must be made available to all people. Every segment of Saskatchewan life 

should have access to the benefits of the arts. 

 

The development of a common culture, however, must not be exercised at the expense of minority 

groups and sub-cultures. They will always exist and a place must be preserved for them. There are 

pressing matters that must receive immediate attention before certain groups are lost forever. 

 

The problem of youth is pressing. There must be a system of hostels created to allow your young people 

to explore this country and in the dignity they deserve. This will not necessarily require funds as much 

as creative talent to devise a system that will be satisfactory to almost everyone. For it is not youth who 

are responsible for the situation, it is rather a positive expansion of man’s consciousness and a desire to 

learn and explore that which some of us haven’t realized. The lack of summer employment for students 

has definitely contributed to the situation. 

 

The older people must also receive immediate attention. This situation has long been neglected and is 

even more severe than youth as we have not yet defined the needs of the old. Assistance and funds 

should be provided to bring the old together, to allow them to organize so that they may define their 

wants 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1797 

and needs. It is only when we offer a rewarding and happy life to our old people that we can eliminate a 

fear that lurks in us all. 

 

A Government Department of Youth and Culture shouldn’t view ‘cultural development’ as the 

continuous improvement of those technical, economic and social factors which can significantly help to 

improve the level of cultural life and the ‘level of cultural life’ should be taken to mean the individual’s 

access to and freedom to participate in the cultural life of the community. The Department will need to 

be much less structured than other government departments if it is to become the vital link between the 

Government and the people of Saskatchewan if it is to act adequately in terms of the needs of the 

community, whether urban or rural. This is not to say that such a department would have a number of 

pat answers. It cannot do the job alone. In fact, it must establish close liaison with all government 

departments and with all the people of Saskatchewan. In this respect, the Department of Youth and 

Culture will share the underlying philosophy of all government departments for it will be aimed at a 

better quality of life for all people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few remarks about this new 

Department and I do support the motion. There may be some misunderstanding about the combination 

of culture and youth. To me culture is not necessarily or totally directed to youth. I believe that youth, of 

course, has a great part to play in the culture of our land but I also think culture by its definition is rooted 

in a history of a nation. This is the part that concerns me most. To the extent that our history is 

obliterated, or is lost, or is forgotten, we are deprived of a considerable part of our culture. There is on 

the Piapot Indian Reserve an elderly gentleman claiming to be some 116 years of age who remembers, 

according to the tales and stories of his father, the great buffalo hunts, the era prior to the modern 

development and the cultivation of our land. The time is now rapidly going by when the stories, first 

hand, of these men may be recorded for posterity. We are in the last days when we can get these things 

down forever directly from the men who experienced and lived these times. 

 

I mentioned in the Throne Speech Debate that in Ireland there are those people from the universities and 

from departments of government going around the land recording the old songs, the songs of the seaport 

and the songs of the seas and the songs relating to the history and legends of Ireland before these 

legends and songs are lost forever. We, already, have lost much of our heritage. We have lost much of 

our history because we have not recorded it when the time was right and it could have been recorded. So 

much of what has occurred after the First World War has been recorded by modern technology – radio 

and records. These are now permanently part of our land, part of our heritage, part of our museums. 

Those things which occurred in the earliest days were also recorded. The travels of Palliser and Kelsey 

were well recorded and the diaries have been kept. Books have been written about them. But there is that 

in between stage, the time from 1850 to 1900, before radio and before 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1798 

television, before movies, when records were not adequately kept, before the proper newspapers had 

come to Saskatchewan, and it is only now that we have come to a full realization of what we have lost or 

are losing and I urge this Department to give immediate attention to the preservation of these last 

vestiges of the earliest days in Saskatchewan. I say vestiges because that’s about all that we shall be able 

to record now. What there is must be fathered in before it is too late. These forgotten years from 1850 to 

1900 are now on the verge of disappearing into history and to eternal anonymity. 

 

An appropriate choice of Minister, Mr. Speaker, could do a great deal in this Department. I hope that the 

Minister chosen for this task will set about with vigor and zeal to do that which must be done now if it is 

not going to be too late. I must say that this Department of Culture has a very broad definition and I 

think its very broadness, the breadth of its definition, it can do a great deal today and in the future. Of 

course, I am sure we will have much to say and much to recommend to this department in future 

sessions of this Legislature. I content myself at this moment with urging upon them the activity which I 

think must take top priority and that is – the preservation of our history. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, may I just add one or two comments in 

elaboration or in comment on the comments of the Member from Albert Park. I concur with him in the 

view which he expresses that we should be recording, by whatever devices are available to us, the 

history which resides in the minds of so many pioneers of our province. I should not want the House to 

think that this has not already been done and already been done very extensively. I can’t speak for what 

happened in the last seven or eight years but I can say that in the late ‘50s and early ‘60s Saskatchewan 

Archives did a great deal of this. For example, there are recordings of the known old folk songs of 

Saskatchewan. There are tapes by the Hon. Mr. Turgeon, by the Hon. Jimmy Gardiner and other 

pioneers before they passed away. These tapes gave us the benefit of their reminiscences. When the 

Principal of the Regina Campus, John Archer, was the Provincial Archivist, a very vigorous program 

along this line was carried out. So far as I know, it is being continued although I don’t know with what 

degree of vigor. I am not for one moment suggesting that it shouldn’t be continued or it should be 

expanded. This is not meant to suggest that the comments by the Member for Albert Park were not well 

taken. It is just to suggest to Members of the House that a good deal has been done and I am sure it was 

done in the last six or seven years. I know it was done in the earlier years. We look forward to 

attempting to preserve these reminiscences of early life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Incidentally, with respect to the homesteading records, the Saskatchewan Archives Board did quite the 

finest job in Canada on preserving the homestead records which were available from the Federal 

Department and which were gathered in by the Archives Board and systematized and placed in a form 

so that they may be of use. 

 

I think we really have a wealth of material. If a comment might be made on this, it is that up until now 

we haven’t made a great deal of use of that material. It hasn’t found its way 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1799 

into very much of the writing of Saskatchewan or very much of the school curriculum or popular 

entertainment, or other places where I look to see it enter into the life of the next few decades so that the 

younger people of our age and younger who live in Saskatchewan can enjoy and appreciate the stories 

which came out of the past. 

 

I thank the Hon. Member for his comments and I think the Department might, and hopefully will, 

perform quite a useful function. I will be supporting the Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to comment on the 

Premier’s statement in connection with the recording of memoirs of the type of person referred to by the 

Hon. Member for Albert Park. 

 

Having been on the Archives Board for a number of years, I was quite concerned about the lack of 

activity in this area and I don’t think it is through lack of funds. I think it is through the lack of the 

proper type of person to conduct the interview. For the last two years I have endeavored to have the 

memoirs of the Hon. Wm. Patterson recorded and I tell you it is quite a job. We finally have gotten to 

the point where we have the people. Mr. Patterson has worked on his memoirs for about three weeks and 

I don’t know just when it is going to reach the point where it is going to be put on tape. 

 

These are things that certainly can’t be left too long. I think I should have had better success with Mr. 

Patterson if we had been able to do it a couple of years ago because now he finds his memory is not as 

good as it used to be. I would strongly urge whoever is chairman of the Archives Board now to remain 

active in this area because these are golden opportunities to catch those things while they are still 

available. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 83 – An Act to amend 

The Labour Standards Act, 1969. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, The Labour Standards Act covers a full range of provisions 

affecting the conditions of employment of Saskatchewan’s wage earners. 

 

The intent of this statute is to establish acceptable minimum standards of wages, hours of work, holidays 

and working conditions. This legislation is designed to be of particular benefit to workers who are not in 

a position to depend on labor unions or personnel practices to set such standards. 

 

In ensuring a reasonable and equitable return for their efforts in the form of wage and fringe benefits, 

The Labour Standards Act implicitly recognizes the contribution of working people to the continued 

development of the province. 

 

In accordance with announced Government policies to modify the Act when necessary, to make it more 

effective and more consistent with the new trends, it is now proposed, Mr. Speaker, 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1800 

to amend it to extend additional protection to members of the labor force. 

 

One important clause of Bill No. 83 deals with equal pay. The Labour Standards Act stipulates that no 

employers shall discriminate between male and female employees by paying a female at less than the 

amount which a male is paid for work of a comparable nature performed in the same establishment. This 

principle has been a difficult one to apply and depends in large measure on the general will of the people 

to support the attainment of that particular objective. 

 

Society, I believe, pays lip service to the concept of equal pay but a good many occupational wage rate 

comparisons indicate that its acknowledgement in theory does not extend to the implementation in 

practice. Traditional attitudes continue to be held by many persons to the effect that women are not 

entitled to the same remuneration as men. The arguments advanced by many are different and they are 

varied arguments. ‘Women are usually not bread winners’. This is an argument advanced by some and 

the conclusion is drawn that they are not forced to assume family burdens. ‘They do not have as high a 

level of education and training as men’. And so go the arguments. ‘They need more personal facilities in 

the work place or their absenteeism is higher, or they must be granted more work breaks and so on’. 

 

An example of this viewpoint will be found in the report of the Royal Commission on the Status of 

Women which mentions a decision rendered by an Ontario judge of the High Court of 1968 dealing with 

the claim of a policewoman for equal pay to that of policemen. The judge stated and I quote, 

 

She is not being discriminated against by the fact that she receives a different wage, 

different from male constables for the fact of difference is in accord with every rule of 

economic civilization, family life and common sense. 

 

I don’t intend to comment further on this situation, Mr. Speaker, except to say that the present 

administration is firmly committed to the principle of equal pay. It is apparent that to facilitate the more 

effective enforcement of legal requirements in this connection new progresses and new mechanisms are 

needed. To this end it is proposed that The Labour Standards Act be amended to blend with the equal 

pay provisions with the operational procedures residing in The Human Rights Commission Act of 1972. 

The clause respecting equal pay for female employees remains in The Labour Standards Act and the 

Labour Standards Branch retains the obligation to enforce these provisions. This responsibility will be 

carried on in an informal manner as has been the case in the past and the parties found to be violating the 

provisions of the Act will be given an opportunity to implement the findings of the Branch without 

further proceedings. However if a Labour Standards Officer is unable to resolve the matter in dispute a 

second, more formal and more visible mechanism will become operative. The Director of Labour 

Standards can refer the case to the Human Rights Commission for formal investigation. This may 

culminate in a Commission order giving effect to a decision of the Commission with appropriate 

penalties for noncompliance. The amendment sets out procedures relating to the conduct of the 

Commission’s formal inquiry and provides for an appeal to the courts from a Commission order. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1801 

A second noteworthy new requirement contained in Bill 83 deals with the right of an employee to 

participate as a candidate in a municipal, provincial or federal election. We are all justly proud of our 

democratic traditions, Mr. Speaker, and of the freedom of every citizen to vote and to make his voice 

heard on issues on which he is concerned. Rather curiously, however, a significant legal deficiency has 

been allowed to remain untouched for a long time which has acted as an impediment to the employee’s 

access to political office. The inherent danger in this situation is that public service is potentially 

restricted to persons whose vocation is such that their livelihood is unaffected by their candidacy. The 

amendment, therefore, will attempt to remove occupational barriers for entry into politics by 

establishing in law an employee’s right to obtain a reasonable leave of absence to seek nomination as a 

candidate in an election. On the expiration of the leave the employee would be entitled to resume his 

employment without loss of any privilege connected with seniority. Similarly, a reasonable leave of 

absence is to be granted during the employee’s term of office should he be elected. 

 

At the present time, Mr. Speaker, The Labour Standards Act allows a Labour Standards Officer to 

require the production of records and information. If an employer fails to abide by such a request he may 

be prosecuted and he may be fined. However, the Act in its current form does not allow a magistrate in a 

prosecution of this kind to order the production of the documents and information so involved. To assist 

in the resolution of the problem which precipitated the Inspector’s directive, the amendment includes a 

clause specifying the magistrate may, in addition to any fine imposed, also order the employer to make 

the relevant records or information available. 

 

Another section of Bill 83 will expand the powers of the Lieutenant-Governor-in Council to introduce 

regulations under the Hours of Work portion of The Labour Standards Act in order to take into account 

special needs and conditions. This Bill also includes several changes of a housekeeping nature designed 

to make the legislation more consistent and more uniform. Provision of Bill 83, Mr. Speaker, will make 

The Labour Standards Act a more efficient instrument of labor standards policy. In practice, it will 

extend and improve the enforcement machinery needed to guarantee workers payments to which they 

are entitled by law. It will also confer on the working man and woman privileges enjoyed by other 

sectors of the community. At the same time, where indicated, the terms of The Labour Standards Act 

will contain a built-in flexibility which will permit the legislation to be readily adaptable to the 

legitimate demands of varying circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few comments it is with pleasure that I move that this Bill be now read a second 

time. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I received this Bill last night and after reading 

through it quickly, it appears to be a housekeeping Bill except for the new Section 4 and the new Section 

68A. I was a little disappointed that the Minister didn’t elaborate a little further on this section. I think 

there are some difficulties in it. Certainly, I would agree with the principle that the section outlines. I 

think the more impediments that we can remove from seeking office and making available for an 

employee to seek office is very good. He speaks about removing 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1802 

occupational barriers. Certainly, the new section does not ensure that such groups as farmers or 

managers of any kind or employees of family enterprises or professional people, it doesn’t remove any 

barriers for them. It is very difficult for me to interpret the Minister’s meaning of the word ‘reasonable’ 

in speaking of ‘reasonable leave of absence’. I don’t know whether this means if an employee is elected 

and place in the Cabinet and is in the Cabinet for ten years, whether this is reasonable. It doesn’t seem to 

me, for instance, an employer with one employee to give that employee a leave of absence for a month 

in the fall and three months in the spring, a day here and a day there, I don’t know whether this is 

considered reasonable. It certainly makes it very difficult for the one-employee employer to carry on in 

his business at all. I don’t know whether this Bill by the Minister’s definition will allow, for example, 

employees of the Provincial Government to seek office, given a leave of absence for a month here and a 

month there and then return to service within the Provincial Government. 

 

This is the only item in the Bill and I realize, Mr. Speaker, that this is better done under a clause by 

clause study on third reading but this is the only part of the Bill which is not housekeeping and to give 

our caucus a chance to discuss this, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Highways and Transportation) moved second reading of Bill No. 82 – 

An Act to amend The Telephone Department Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed to The Telephone Department Act, Bill 82, are not 

really earth-shaking. Under The Telephone Department Act the Department of Telephones makes grants 

available to rural telephone companies for poles and circuit cables. These are formula grants. They are 

now approved by Order-in-Council and they are approved by the Cabinet. The amendment simply 

proposes that the authority to approve these be given to the Minister instead of having each requisition 

approved by Order-in-Council. That’s the essential substance of the amendment and if there are any 

questions we can deal with them in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, this is strictly a housekeeping Bill and 

a very good one, in my opinion. I endeavored to move in this direction myself without success and it 

certainly will save cluttering up Cabinet meetings with unnecessary Orders-in-Council, in my opinion. 

We will certainly support the Bill. I would suggest that the Premier and the Attorney General might also 

look at Orders-in-Council for Commissioners for Oaths as I recall there was a pile of those and a real 

nuisance to Cabinet meetings. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1803 

RULING BY MR. SPEAKER ON BILL NO. 73 – AN ACT TO AMEND THE INCOME TAX 

ACT 

 

He said: Before we proceed with Bill No. 73, Hon. Members will recall that there was a certain Point of 

Order raised on this Bill the other day to which I had agreed to bring in a ruling at a later time. I should 

like to advise the House as follows, 

 

On Friday, April 14, when Bill No. 73 was called for second reading, the Hon. Member 

for Saskatoon Nutana Centre rose to move second reading of the said Bill. A Point of 

Order was raised that a motion for second reading of a money Bill standing in the name 

of a Cabinet Minister could not be moved by a private Member. The Assembly 

unanimously agreed to allow the Hon. Member to continue with Bill No. 73 pending a 

ruling by the Chair on the condition that it would not set a precedent of the Assembly. 

 

The Point of Order that was raised opens the matter of moving motions. In this case, the 

motion was that Bill No. 73 be now read a second time. Since Bill No. 73 falls under the 

definition of a ‘Money Bill’ it musts be initiated by a Cabinet Minister with the money 

recommendation. Both of these requirements were met on first reading. The question then 

arises as to if the motion for second reading has to be moved by a Cabinet Minister or by 

any Member of the Assembly. 

 

I refer all Hon. Members to Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, Seventeenth Edition, 

page 295, 

 

‘Public Bills’ are so called because they deal with matters of general public interest. In 

most cases they are introduced and piloted through the House by a Member of the 

Government and referred to as ‘Government Bills’; other Bills are known as ‘Unofficial 

Members’ Bills’ or, colloquially, as ‘Private Members’ Bills’ (an expression which 

should not be confused with ‘Private Bills’). In our Legislature we have seen many cases 

of ‘private Members’ Bills’ whereby a public Act was amended by a Bill which was 

moved and piloted through the Assembly by a private Member. 

 

The Bill in question was introduced by the Premier and received first reading under his 

name. The said Bill was also standing on the Order Paper for second reading under the 

name of the Premier. It has been a long standing custom and practice of this Assembly 

that one Minister can move a motion standing in the name of another Minister. This 

practice is based on the theory of collective responsibility of Cabinet. On the other hand, 

a private Member cannot move a motion which is standing in the name of another 

Member because of the lack of collective responsibility between private Members. In 

accordance with this well established practice, I would rule that the procedure used on 

Friday last in moving second reading of Bill No. 73 was irregular. Since the Assembly 

unanimously agreed to allow the Hon. Member to move the motion even if it was an 

irregular procedure, I would rule that the said Bill can be proceeded with in this case and 

will be deemed to be valid. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1804 

I would point out to the Assembly that I would not consider this practice to be a 

precedent of the Assembly and would advise all Hon. Members to avoid this particular 

problem in the future. 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, if I may say a word on the Point of Order. 

We appreciate your ruling and your comments and I think it is important in the future of the Assembly. 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just on the ruling, I too would like to congratulate you 

on the very thorough way that you have gone into the whole question. I do wonder, Mr. Speaker, and it 

is just a point relating to the general Point of Order, if somewhere along the line provision might not be 

made for a Legislative Secretary of a Cabinet Minister to introduce or give second reading to some of 

these Bills. It is a partly related issue to the current Point of Order. I would see no departure from the 

ruling and the principles you have outlined if that were to be the case. I think it is one more move and 

one more measure that would bring more people on the Government side, regardless of who is the 

Government, into the activities of the Legislature. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank you for your ruling. As the 

Member for Wilkie has intimated, the Member who moved it was the Legislative Secretary to the 

Premier and the Provincial Treasurer, I think there would be merit in pursuing his suggestion. I 

apologize to the House for proceeding in this case without adequate research and I appreciate your 

ruling. With the consent of all Members, we can proceed as if this were regular and I understand there is 

an agreement that it will not create a precedent. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 

Bill No. 97 – An Act to establish the Department of Consumer Affairs be now read a second time. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to speak on the debate in second 

reading to establish the Department of Consumer Affairs. In this very sanctimonious Session that the 

Government has had, it is nice to see Government repentance for their past actions. 

 

It is interesting to note that the Estimates of the budget of this particular Department will approximate 

$100,000. But I think we must take into account the Provincial Secretary’s Department which will 

probably give us the total budget in the field of consumer legislation at nearly $300,000. It is to be 

hoped that the new Department and the greatly expanded budget, Mr. Speaker, will enable the 

Government to be staffed with confident, unbiased personnel who will discharge their duties in a manner 

which will be proper and necessary in the field of consumer legislation. We shall now have a 

Department brought in by a Government whose record in the field concerned is abysmal to say the least. 

It is interesting to note that part of that record is the responsibility of some of the Members of 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1805 

the front benches of the Government opposite. I refer in particular to the Premier of the Government 

opposite who was Chairman of the Securities Commission prior to his election. He was Chairman of that 

Securities Commission when the matter of commercial cemeteries came before the public of 

Saskatchewan. He was Chairman of the Securities Commission and very involved in this field when the 

people of Saskatchewan took a bath through abusive practices in commercial cemeteries. 

 

MR. MESSER: — We heard that speech three years ago. 

 

MR. LANE: — You are going to hear it again, Mr. Minister of Agriculture. I hope you learn something 

this time. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would warn the Hon. Member not to stray from the Bill. We can’t have a general 

debate on this Bill. I must admit I am not too familiar with every clause but I should like the Members to 

stay to the Bill. 

 

MR. LANE: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think that the field of consumer practices is definitely within the 

ambit of consumer affairs. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It is, providing that the topic of discussion is not definitely under another 

department. There may be some legislation which definitely relates to another department and then it 

wouldn’t be to this one and I would ask the Members to act accordingly. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, the practice has been that certain Members of the Government opposite 

have allowed companies to carry on business, have allowed practices to occur in the field of consumer 

legislation which had to be stopped by the previous Liberal Government. Companies licenced by 

Members of the present Government opposite were allowed to carry on businesses which eventually 

went bankrupt in other parts of Canada to the detriment of the small investors and at a great cost to the 

small investors of Canada. Companies that were run out of Saskatchewan by the previous Liberal 

Government had been licenced by the NDP Government before 1964. We should like to see the Minister 

responsible for consumer affairs discuss his record in the field of legislation, the track record in the field 

of legislation of his predecessors. We know that won’t happen so I am going to take the liberty of 

discussing some of the advances of consumer legislation brought in by the previous Liberal 

Government, many which were necessary because of the abhorrent practices of some Members of the 

front benches of the Government opposite. I am going to take the time, for the edification of the new 

Members opposite, to list some of this legislation brought in by the previous Liberal Government. 

 

MR. GUY: — You are going to have to wake them up first. 

 

MR. LANE: — Oh, they are just feigning sleep, Allan. They have been feigning sleep through the 

whole Session, that’s what they’ve been doing. It’s Roy that we have to wake up. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1806 

The Direct Sellers’ Act, Mr. Speaker, controls the sale of goods door to door, house to house in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. A $30 million industry in the Province of Saskatchewan and this Act was 

designed to protect not only the consumer but also the legitimate free enterprise vendor. The Cemetery 

Act of 1965, shortly after 1964, when the Government changed I can remind the Minister of Agriculture, 

to clean up one of the most diabolical situations that developed due to inadequate legislation and a lack 

of administration of the major legislation that the previous Government had. It guaranteed that these 

people, especially senior citizens, who had paid in advance for post-mortem services would receive 

these same services in full. The Liberal Government had to take over the operation of four commercial 

cemeteries in the Province of Saskatchewan. It is interesting to note that each one of these commercial 

cemeteries was approved and licensed by the Securities Commission when the present Premier was in 

the Civil Service as Chairman of that same Securities Commission. 

 

An Act had to be amended because of previous licencing practices for The Investment Contracts Act. 

This Act was amended by the Liberal Government, again to protect the legitimate businesses and the 

public against the con artists. This amendment required that investment contract companies be required 

to have $1 capital for every $20 taken from the public investor. As a result of this legislation, three 

companies that had been licensed and allowed to operate by the previous NDP-CCF couldn’t comply 

with the terms as put in by the Liberal Government and were forced to leave the province. I think one of 

them being very well known throughout Canada for the losses that the small investors had to take 

because of fraudulent practices. One company that was allowed to carry on business in Saskatchewan 

when the present Premier was Chairman of the Securities Commission was the Commonwealth 

Company which raised all sorts of problems and eventually went bankrupt with criminal charges being 

laid in the Province of British Columbia. 

 

There was The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act which allowed persons entering into time payment 

contracts full disclosure of the costs of credit in terms of dollars and cents that could be easily 

understood. Typically, legislation that was brought in that has not been wiped out by the Government 

opposite. It’s been amended to improve it. This will have to be done, I suggest, in every piece of 

consumer legislation. The Litter Control Act of 1971, admittedly not a complete answer. It was not 

designed to be a complete answer but it was designed to isolate one of the problems of litter control. 

Unfortunately, the Government opposite has not yet implemented the said legislation that was promised 

by the present Attorney General to have it by January 1, 1972, I believe. We still have not seen that 

legislation. It is advanced legislation, necessary legislation and we can only urge the Government 

opposite to implement it as soon as possible. 

 

We have another piece of legislation by the so-called unconcerned Liberal Government as we have 

heard many times by the Members opposite in the various debates – Criminal Injuries Compensation 

Act, 1967. The first in North America and the third in the free world. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Costs more. 

 

MR. LANE: — Are you going to pull it out, 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1807 

Mr. Minister? Are you against this legislation? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Let’s debate the Bill. 

 

MR. LANE: — We also have The Motor Dealers’ Act of 1966 requested by legitimate dealers in the 

province in order to place and upgrade their industry and in order to protect the consumer. The 

Unconscionable Transactions Relief Act, again consumer protection legislation, which allowed persons 

who have entered into unreasonable or unconscionable transactions or had excessive rates charged to 

them to be relieved by the courts. Finally, we have The Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards Act of 1971 

which will prohibit a great deal of junk mail that is forwarded to the average consumer. Again, we had 

comments from the front benches, the Treasury benches opposite casting very disparaging remarks 

about that legislation. If he believes what he says, repeal that legislation and see how you stand with the 

consumers of the province. It is that attitude from the Member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) which 

is typical of the consumer attitude that the previous Members before 1964 had in this House. That was 

the concern for the consumer that they had and that’s the type of man who is still in the front benches 

and will still cast doubts on the efforts of the Attorney General or the administrator of Consumer Affairs 

to perhaps try and do something for the consumer. It is this type of attitude which will probably block 

progressive attempts in this field by the Government opposite. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Tell us about letting Shumiatcher off the hook. 

 

MR. LANE: — There is another attitude, the matter raised by the Member from The Battlefords, 

discussing matters before the courts. I don’t think it was the Government that let him off the hook, it was 

the matter of the courts enforcing justice in this province who gave the man a fair trial. It was your 

people that prosecuted. If you have any objection to the administration of justice in this province, take 

this matter up with the Attorney General. That’s who should be handling that. We can look at the 

administration of justice in his Estimates. 

 

Gentlemen, we welcome the legislation of the Government opposite to implement a Consumer Affairs 

Department. Your record is very, very sorry in this field and you have an awful lot to prove and we will 

be waiting anxiously to see whether you can, in fact, bring in a politically unbiased Department which 

will protect the average consumer in Saskatchewan. As I say, your record is very poor in this field and 

you have an awful lot to prove. You are going to have to prove that you can register companies in this 

province not for political reasons but because they deserve to practise and whether you can prohibit 

companies from carrying on business in this province because they are harming the local investor. 

You’ve got a lot to prove and this legislation does not give any idea that you intend to get rid of your 

previous practices as emphasized by the Member for The Battlefords. We hope that the Bill will go 

somewhere in allowing you to make up for past mistakes. The people will watch and we certainly will 

watch how you manage and administer this piece of legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1808 

MR. A. TAYLOR (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to hear that, at least I think 

what he said was that the Member for Lumsden would support this legislation. 

 

It is interesting to note that it is in fairly recent years that there has been a growing recognition for the 

need of consumer protection legislation. It was during these years that other provinces, some at least, as 

well as the Federal Government, introduced Consumer Affairs Departments but this was not done in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One can understand the reason for this when you remember that the Party opposite has been divided on 

this. The Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) mentioned when we last debated this Bill, his concern 

for the increasing protective legislation. He said he would probably be regarded as a reactionary and I 

suppose this is likely true. I would hate to disappoint him. This is probably the same sort of statement 

that Liberal Members would have made some years ago when Robert Peel first established a police force 

or when fire departments were first organized. Some said, ‘well, people ought to be able to care for 

themselves’. 

 

I believe that an establishment of the Department of Consumer Affairs is an important adjunct to the 

human rights and anti-discrimination legislation already before this House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — The primary purpose of such legislation is to protect the individual or group from 

exploitation by other members of society. An essential duty of any Department of Consumer Affairs 

must be to provide this kind of protection for consumers. 

 

I think the consumer is the new exploited class. Sidney Margolius puts it this way, 

 

The fact is, and this may seem a little strong to swallow at first taste, consumer 

exploitation has to a large extent replaced labor exploitation as the real problem of our 

time. We would not permit the things to be done to people as workers that we allow to be 

done to them as consumers. Our society has changed rapidly from one in which people 

lived simply, producing what they needed to consume, to one in which the local 

tradesman or craftsman produced the necessary goods, to finally a society in which the 

goods were prepared and provided by a distant and impersonal corporate giant. 

 

Now, of course, this has brought with it its benefits. Mass production has made available to many of us 

many items which most of us would not otherwise have been able to obtain. However, from the 

consumers’ point of view it has been also a mixed blessing. Our marketing and attitudes have been 

changed from those of filling our needs to those of satisfying desires and even at times to little more 

than a conditioned response. Where the consumer once went to the local merchant or craftsman, 

described his needs and obtained the necessary goods, he is now faced in the market place with a vast 

conglomeration of similar goods from which he must choose along with a complex advertising 

campaign to make certain that his choice is for product ‘A’. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1809 

In supermarkets alone where just a few years ago 2,000 or 3,000 articles were considered a very well 

stocked supermarket, now the supermarket carries from 6,000 to 10,000 items. In a large supermarket, 

for example, you might find 100 different sizes, types and brands of cake mixes, 250 kinds of brands 

and sizes of canned vegetables and 50 kinds of baby food. In many ways this has turned a pleasant 

shopping trip into a safari through a consumer jungle. 

 

The consumer today is often faced with a barrage of false and misleading advertising. Proliferation of 

goods, the problem of safety, guarantees which in some cases contain half truths or less. It is in the face 

of this complex situation in which he finds himself that the consumer needs assistance and guidance in 

reaching decisions and protection from unethical practices. I think that it is true that some responsibility 

has to be accepted by the consumer himself but no consumer can make an intelligent decision unless he 

is certain that the facts presented to him, on which to base his decision, are accurate. It is easy for us to 

look at a person who has made a purchase which turned out to be a mistake and say that he was foolish 

to buy it in the first place. This does not take into account, however, the conditioning nature of 

advertising itself and the way in which it can create in the person a felt need for the goods or services 

offered. Nor does this take into account the emotional needs of the individual. 

 

I can remember, for example, an elderly gentleman in hospital just a few years ago, about 1966, who had 

a severe hearing problem. The Member opposite who was concerned about consumer legislation should 

have thought of this. It was the kind of problem that any reputable doctor or hearing aid consultant 

would have told him couldn’t be helped by the use of a hearing aid. But this didn’t affect the motivation 

of the man to overcome his problem which was a severe handicap. He was attracted by ads in a national 

magazine that promised relief for the hard of hearing. He purchased a hearing aid for about $400 with a 

supposed guarantee of satisfaction and a money back clause. Unfortunately, his hearing aid provided no 

assistance and when the guarantee was more closely checked it was discovered that satisfaction was 

guaranteed to those with certain types of hearing problems and the money back was promised if the 

hearing aid should fail because of faulty parts or labor. This didn’t help the man in question. 

 

Then, of course, there are the diet breads which can be found today which sometimes consist of only 

regular bread sliced thinner. Quite naturally, thinner slices contain fewer calories per slice. 

 

One major concern of the Department of Consumer Affairs must, I think, be in the realm of safety. A 

good deal has been written in recent years about safety in children’s toys. There are often hidden 

hazards, not noticeable to the buyer when he purchases them. How many people think to check the eyes 

of a teddy bear to see if they are sewn in place or merely attached by a large pin which when withdrawn 

and swallowed by a child could cause serious damage. And even if one was to be cynical about this and 

say that the purchaser has a responsibility, what about the child who ends up playing with such a toy and 

who was not the purchase himself? Should they be endangered even by the purchaser’s carelessness if 

such is the case? 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1810 

It is interesting to note from an article in the April 10th Leader-Post that most children’s car seats now 

being sold in Canada will be banned from the market this month. The truth is that most of those seats 

being sold just don’t provide the margin of safety that was previously implied in the advertising. The 

consumer certainly has no way of testing these items and he has to depend on expert advice. We 

welcome this action which has been taken by the Federal Department of Consumer Affairs. It points out 

the kind of assistance and protection that such a department can provide to the consumer. 

 

Then we have the problem of guarantees. Do they really mean what they say? Are they written to 

provide the consumer with a minimum amount of protection? Far too many of them involve the use of 

small type, small print at the bottom of the page. I can think of one guarantee that I saw recently, in fact, 

I have a photocopy of it here. It has a most interesting guarantee at the top. It’s for a home appliance. At 

the top it says very clearly in large print, “A ten year warranty”. Now there is a small asterisk there and 

if you look at the bottom of the page, in very small type it says, “In the Province of Saskatchewan this 

warranty period will be two years only.” Now, maybe there is good reason for this, one doesn’t know. 

The consumer purchasing it certainly wouldn’t know. There might be some justification but I should like 

to know why the differential. Is it a matter of discrimination against the Province of Saskatchewan or is 

it even possible that in each province the guarantee contains an asterisk saying two years in that 

particular province and thus providing basically a two-year guarantee throughout Canada? I don’t know 

the answer but a Department of Consumer Affairs would certainly find it quickly. Now I suggest that 

many guarantees today are written not so much for the protection of the consumer but of the 

manufacturer. The guarantee sets out the conditions, the exemptions and the time limit and in this way 

restricts the manufacturer’s responsibility. When you buy an article guaranteed for two years what it is 

in fact stating is that the manufacturer will have no responsibility after two years. Sometimes the 

conditions to be met by the consumer in order to keep the guarantee in force are so detailed and 

technical that the guarantee automatically becomes void. 

 

Then we have the field of advertising itself. Now, advertisers today are usually very careful to avoid the 

outright use of lies or falsehood. The use of half truths in advertising merely adds confusion to an 

already chaotic situation. The technique of advertising by omission or unprovable impression, while it 

may indeed be legally factual, is also blatantly misleading. For example, I am told that much of the 

aspirin advertising that has been prominent on television is advertising by omission. The Bayer 

Company, for one example, advertised over and over again that the United States Government tests 

showed no other product to be more effective than Bayer. That sounds good. What the ad did not say 

was that the tests showed that Bayer was not significantly more effective than any of the others. Anacin 

also omits part of the true story when it states ‘ingredients your doctor recommend’. As one man has 

said, “If you assume from this wording that your doctor recommends Anacin, that’s your headache!” 

Your doctor may, in fact, recommend any of a number of similar pills containing aspirin and other 

analgesics and caffeine, some of which sell for a much lower price. 

 

When it comes to products such as soap powder and toothpaste, 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1811 

the decision-making on the part of the consumer becomes further complicated. After all, do you really 

need sex in a toothpaste? Howard Frazier put it this way, “The only sexy thing about teeth is having 

them and for that you need a good toothpaste, not a con game.” 

 

Now, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the legislation establishing a Department of Consumer Affairs is 

a step in the right direction. We have to recognize, of course, that there are some things that will fall 

purely within the Federal jurisdiction. There are standards that have to be national in order to be 

effective. Our Department, however, will be able to work with the Federal authority in an attempt to 

improve the national situation. I am happy to see that the Department to be established will have 

authority of investigation. It seems to me this is absolutely essential for the protection of the general 

public. The only recourse at present is individual court action and since this is expensive it is often 

avoided by the consumer thus leaving the problem unsolved for future consumers. 

 

I am also pleased to see that the Minister of the new Department will be able to issue a cease and desist 

order. Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I would sooner have seen this expire after ten days rather than five for 

a number of reasons. I can see, however, that the seller must also receive some protection. In calling for 

the expiry after five days ensures that the Minister will not issue such an order unless he is prepared to 

back it up before a judge. On the other hand, it does provide the Minister with the ability to take prompt 

action, particularly in matters regarding safety where speedy action is absolutely essential. I believe too 

that the knowledge that the Attorney General may bring action against those who have committed an 

offence under this Act will provide a further degree of protection. In the past it could be assumed by the 

seller that most consumers would not bring such action because of the cost and because of the time or 

the difficulty involved. 

 

It is also my hope, Sir, that this new Department will become involved in the educational process. The 

Member from Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) mentioned this and I share his concern. I think one of the 

major parts of any program of Consumer Affairs must be in terms of education and by this I don’t mean 

telling people what particular products or brands they should buy, but rather assist the consumers to 

develop a critical attitude, in the best sense of the word, to advertising in general to assist them in 

developing criteria on which to base their value judgements in purchasing decisions. This Department, if 

it is to be effective, must have the powers of investigation to examine consumer complaints, education to 

assist consumers in making purchase decisions and it must be free to initiate legal action against those 

who in any way attempt to abuse the consumer. Only by the use of all three of these can the Department 

provide the kind of protection that consumers need in today’s complex market place. At the same time, 

the Department of Consumer Affairs must be free to co-operate with similar departments in other 

provinces and with the Federal authority. It should be encouraged to examine existing legislation in 

other jurisdictions throughout the world. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I should like to emphasize that this is an important and integral part of the 

general human rights legislation presented in this Session. You will recognize, I am sure, that I 

wholeheartedly support this Bill. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1812 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will be very brief in wrapping up this 

second reading of the Consumer Affairs Department that is being instituted. I want to say, first of all, 

that the speech given by the Member from Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor) in my estimation was a 

very thoughtful and well researched speech. I think it displayed an understanding behind the 

establishment of the Department of Consumer Affairs. It is quite clear to all Hon. Members or it is to me 

at any rate, that the Member has taken time to think about the rationale behind this important public Bill, 

he has done some research and directs the attention of the Government to other areas that he thinks 

should be involved in consumer legislation. I do say, with respect, that I think this type of a speech 

reflects what exists at large in the community about consumer affairs. I think there is a very thoughtful 

approach now by consumer groups throughout Canada and people generally about consumer affairs. As 

the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley has pointed out, there is now a multiplicity of new gimmicks and 

new approaches which in effect has made the consumer the victimized person in today’s society or, as 

he described it, the new exploited class, which deserves and demands government attention and 

government protection. So I welcome his speech and I welcome his statement of support and I hope that 

all Members of the House will see fit to support this Bill as well. 

 

I was interested in the comments made by the Member for Regina Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) when the 

Bill was first introduced the other day. Personally, I detect that the Member for Regina Whitmore Park 

holds some very sincere and genuine belief that there is too much government interference in the market 

place. I don’t know how he will vote on this Bill in second reading but my guess is, in listening to his 

remarks, that if he had his preference, he would rather not see this Bill before the House incorporating 

this principle. I think that is a legitimate point of view to adopt, one that I do not agree with, of course, 

but I think one which the people in our province can certainly make a judgement on all of their own, the 

question of interference by government into the affairs of consumers is important. I certainly don’t see 

the establishment of a Department overweighing the interests of business. I think that the Department’s 

establishment will merely balance off, if it’s an aggressive Department, balance off the powers and the 

strengths of the companies with the consumers at the same time. 

 

I am somewhat concerned that some of the press reports in Saskatchewan are reflecting their bias in this 

area. I say this in its best sense. It’s the way I read them and I suppose we all look at it from a prejudiced 

point of view, but they tend to highlight this concern about interference by governments in the affairs of 

companies. There is almost a running theme throughout some of these matters that there is something 

very sanctimonious and important not to be tampered with when government gets itself involved in 

consumer affairs legislation. 

 

I say that this attitude is one that belongs back in the dark ages of political life in Saskatchewan and this 

Department will, I am sure, show that over the next months as it gets established. 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1813 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I am concerned and upset about the tone of the remarks of 

the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane). The Member for Lumsden, I suppose had a well researched 

speech as well but his speech did not get into the area of researching the rationale behind the Consumer 

Affairs Department. I am very sorry to see a young Member and a new Member to this House seek to 

drag out the perennial, old speech of the Liberal Party directed against the Premier and some Members 

of the CCF back now to the late ’50s, if not earlier, about schemes and projects which have no meaning 

in today’s consideration whatsoever. 

 

It is a tactic that is all too prevalent in the Liberal Party opposite – Yes, it is – a tactic all too prevalent 

which seeks in effect to scandalize issues rather than debate them on their points of merit. The Member 

for Lumsden, to my knowledge, gave no guidance or direction to the Government with respect to what 

kind of Consumer Affairs Department he foresaw. The only guidance you gave was that old, tired out 

speech that was also read in 1968, 1969, 1970. Every year the former Attorney General used to trot it out 

and use it against the Opposition of the day in the hopes that somehow the Opposition would lose the 

public’s confidence. If anything were necessary to dispel that illusion it should be the election of June 

23, 1971 for it showed the confidence that the people have in the Premier and the Members of the 

Government in that area. 

 

Yet, we have this old, young man looking back all the time and talking of negativisms, political 

partisanships and mouthing old speeches. I regret that very much. I do think that he has a contribution to 

make in this House. I would caution him not to fall into the wayward ways of those who sit immediately 

in front of him because if he thinks that he can emulate them and still maintain and grab the leadership 

of the Liberal Party he has another think coming. They will always beat him on his trick very easily. So 

a little bit of advice on that standpoint for his own political ambitions. He has to try something new and 

the new things is to talk positively about matters. 

 

MR. STEUART: — How to come second by Mr. Roy Romeo. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — It is better than coming in dead last, like the Liberal Party has come since June 

23rd and ever since. 

 

I conclude by saying, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an excellent Bill. Sanctimonious or otherwise it is a 

magna carta for consumer affairs. Members opposite don’t really believe that. 

 

The Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane), the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) don’t believe in 

consumer protection. I know that to be true because if they did they would have brought the Bill in 

several years ago when it should have been brought in. They wouldn’t have left the Province of 

Saskatchewan to the winds of the market place in the last three or four years while every other province 

in Canada advanced ahead of us. They wouldn’t have sat without a Department of Consumer Affairs 

while the Federal Government set up a Department of Consumer Affairs. They didn’t believe in a 

Department of Consumer Affairs and that is why no Department was set up. They don’t believe in the 

Department of Consumer Affairs now and that is why they backbite while saying all the time that they 

are going to support 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1814 

it. I am not sure about the Member from Regina Whitmore Park. They pander to the interests of those 

who say they ought not to be tampered with by the Government. They don’t understand the people of 

the Province of Saskatchewan or the interests of the average person and that is why they will always be 

doomed to sitting in Opposition in small numbers as long as they maintain that attitude. 

 

But hopefully, Mr. Speaker, that is not the majority view of this House or the majority view of the 

people of Saskatchewan. It has given me great pleasure to move second reading of this Bill and I urge all 

Members to vote for it. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Attorney General will permit a question at this time? What 

is your definition of a consumer? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think those questions can be asked in Committee. 

 

MR. LANE: — He said he would answer it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Yes, but I think that type of question can be asked in Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to the rest 

of the Members of the House, 30 high school students from the Eyebrow High School. They are sitting 

in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Agnes Wilson and Mr. Richard 

Bobonick. I hope I have pronounced that name correctly. I hope they have an enjoyable afternoon and 

that the hour or two that they spend in the House will give them a better feeling of how our Government 

is run and our processes in the Legislature. I should wish them well, an enjoyable stay and a safe journey 

home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 

students in the west gallery on behalf of Mr. Whelan, their MLA who is not here and to welcome them 

on behalf of this House. They are escorted by Mr. Orest Warnyca, Vice Principal. There are 40 in 

number and they are Grade Eight students. Again, a warm welcome to them on behalf of this House. I 

hope their stay here will be a pleasant one and be of great educational value. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, through you to the Members of the 

House I should like to introduce 30 students from the Birchwood School in Whitmore Park. They are a 

Grade Seven class under the direction of Mr. Kaner and Mr. Monkhouse. We sincerely 



 

April 18, 1972 

 

 

1815 

welcome this group to the Legislature and trust that their stay will be educational and informative and 

that they will take some good thoughts away from the Session this afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon City Park): — On behalf of the Member for Nutana Centre I should like 

to welcome to this Assembly, 37 students from Grosvenor Park Elementary School. I understand that 

they are accompanied by Mr. Bonner and Mr. Welsh. I welcome them here and I hope that they have an 

informative afternoon. 

 

I would also like to take the opportunity to welcome to this Assembly, 37 students from King Edward 

Elementary School. I believe they are sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery They are accompanied by their 

teachers Mr. Harvey Rutherford and Mr. Al Reichert. I hope they have an educational and informative 

afternoon and a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


