



















































Hansard: March 28, 1972


1224 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

24th Day 

Tuesday, March 28, 1972. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF AIR CADETS 
 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to introduce 

to you and to Members of the Assembly 34 members of the Foam Lake Air Cadet Squadron No. 542 

seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are accompanied here today by Constable D.K. Smith, their Drill 

Officer, Mr. Bill Klebeck, a member of the Civilian Committee and Mr. Harry Obtosoway, their bus 

driver. This particular air squadron placed first in Saskatchewan in 1971 obtaining some 96.5 points in 

that competition. In the last five years they have obtained an average of over 95 points. In addition they 

have won a number of individual awards for attendance and discipline. It was my good fortune, Mr. 

Speaker, to have a number of these young men as my students in the days when I was in the teaching 

profession. I hope that all Members of the Assembly will join with me in welcoming this air cadet 

squadron on their visit to the Legislature. We hope that their visit this afternoon will be enjoyable and 

educational and that their trip home will be pleasant and that we may welcome them again in this 

Legislature at some future time. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF SCOUTS 
 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, it is an extreme pleasure for me to introduce to you and 

through you to the Members of the Assembly a group of scouts, some seven in number, I believe, from 

Weyburn. They are a portion of the 5th Weyburn Scout Troop. They are accompanied by their Scout 

Master, Mr. Dale Hoff and their driver, Mr. Malcolm MacNeil. I am sure I express the wishes of us all, 

Mr. Speaker, when I say we hope their visit here will prove educational and that they might profit from 

it and that their entire tour today might be of the same and that their journey home might also be 

pleasant and safe. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF AIR CADETS 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to be able to introduce 

a fine group of air cadets seated in the gallery to your left numbering in 40, 26 from Birch Hills and 14 

from Melfort. They have been a very active group in Birch Hills for 10 years and in Melfort for over 30 

years. They have won several flying scholarships and other awards. They are led here by Captain Grant 

Getz from Birch Hills, Doug. Carswell from Melfort, Ron Assen, the bus driver from Melfort, Tom 

Hunter, Secretary of the Sponsoring Committee from Birch Hills. They have already visited the Moose 

Jaw Base and on their tour they have visited the Museum of Natural History and they are visiting the 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1225 

Legislature now. I hope that their stay here and their tour will be very educational. They are also on their 

way to visit Minot, North Dakota which is in the neighboring country and I am sure that their trip is 

going to be very educational. I hope the House will join with me in extending them a very profitable and 

educational tour and also a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

CONGRATULATIONS CHAMPION BULL 
 

Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to bring to the attention of the 

House the fact that the Grand Champion Hereford Bull of this year’s show and sale was owned and 

shown by Tag and Al Greaves of Fillmore. Fillmore is a torn in the Qu’Appelle-Wolseley constituency 

that I represent and is also my home town. I wish to extend the congratulations of this House to the 

family farm that captured the highest award at this show. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

ALLOCATION OF SCHOOL GRANTS 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a question to 

the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). Would the Minister reconsider and re-establish the 

principle of budget review in order that legitimate negotiations might go on between school boards and 

the Department of Education instead of the most vicious and dictatorial allocation of school grants ever 

seen in Saskatchewan? I have just heard from the Woodrow School Unit, Mr. Speaker, and their school 

grant is down $160,000 this year. They’ve just had a reassessment from $1.7 million to $2.3 million. 

Will the Minister reconsider and re-establish some legitimate negotiation with school units? 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Member from 

Milestone, if he recalls in my speech during the Budget debate when I outlined the grant formula, I 

indicated to the House at that time that budget reviews were still in effect. Our Department people are 

sitting down with the boards in their board office and suggesting to the boards what their budgets might 

be. If he in his question is referring to the fact that we are ready as a Department to sit down with the 

boards who have problems as a result of the grant formula which attempts to bring in equity in 

opportunity, equity in financing, we certainly are. And boards are coming in, we are sitting down with 

them, we’re looking at their problems and we will be prepared to review those problems once they are 

all before us. 

 

REDUCTION GRANT FOR REGINA SCHOOL UNIT 21 
 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, a question to the Hon. 

Minister of Education. What steps has the Minister 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1226 

of Education taken to reduce the plight of Regina School Unit No. 21 which will see a reduction in its 

grant of over $130,000 this year with a concomitant mill rate increase of 5.5 mills? 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — In answer to the Member from Lumsden, I have not as yet heard from the Regina 

Unit Board. That isn’t to say that they haven’t contacted my office wishing to meet with us. As I 

indicated to the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), we are certainly prepared to meet with them 

to discuss their problem. I don’t think that a mill rate rise to 35 or 36 mills in the Regina Unit is out of 

the way by comparison to mill rates across the province. The grant formula does bring equity in finance. 

We indicated that. We indicated that in our speech that the mill rates would rise in some areas. By the 

way, of 130 school systems there are only eight systems that received a significant reduction in grant 

from last year by application of the formula. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Supplementary question. When does the Minister of Education intend to table before the 

House the grants throughout the province for the various units? 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — The grants have been sent to the various school systems across the province. I 

think that since this is public business, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite and Members on this side 

can certainly call their Board offices and find out what the grants are. 

 

RENEGOTIATE ROSETOWN SCHOOL UNIT NO. 43 GRANT DECREASE 
 

Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown): —Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Education. I was wondering 

if he would consider renegotiating with the Rosetown School Unit No. 43 which has a decrease in grant 

review this year of $62,000 from the $694,000 they received in 1971 with a projected decrease of 

$45,000 for 1973. To balance the budget in 1972 would require an estimated increase from the 1971 rate 

of 41 mills to 43 mills. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I should certainly be willing to meet with the Rosetown people. If 

they will just contact my office, we can arrange such a meeting. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS 
 

HUMBOLDT BRONCOS WIN JUNIOR HOCKEY CHAMPIONSHIP 
 

Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I take extreme 

pleasure in bringing to the attention of this House and to yourself a very important event that occurred in 

Humboldt last night. I mentioned in my comments during the debate on the Speech from the Throne that 

Humboldt was one of those rare towns of its size that has a Junior A Hockey Team. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

last night that hockey team, the Humboldt Broncos won the Saskatchewan Provincial Junior Hockey 

Championship by defeating Melville in the fifth game in a best of seven series. 

 

I want to say to the Member for Melville that the Melville Millionaires were certainly worthy opponents 

and either of the 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1227 

two teams could have represented Saskatchewan equally well. I know that the Member from Milestone 

(Mr. MacDonald) and the Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacMurchy) both of whom have some 

playing in the Saskatchewan Amateur Junior Hockey League are particularly interested in this league 

and in the hockey which is hockey of an extremely high calibre. I know that the Members of this House 

will join me in congratulating the Broncos and wishing them well as they proceed to play Manitoba in 

inter-provincial playoffs. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

HUMBOLDT BRONCOS HOCKEY TEAM 
 

Mr. J.R. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I want to offer my most sincere congratulations to 

these Humboldt Broncos. They did a tremendous job. They are good sportsmen. And all I want to say, 

Mr. Speaker, Melville is known for its hockey, but all I want to say is the best team doesn’t always win. 

 

LUMSDEN WOMEN’S VOLLEY BALL TEAM 
 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I am sure the House would 

like to join with me in congratulating the Lumsden High School Women’s Volley Ball Team for coming 

second in the Canadian Women’s Volley Ball Championships. In the national final they lost two games 

out of three. They put on a very spirited display, I understand. They are certainly one of the very best 

volley ball teams in the province. I am sure the House would like to join with me in congratulating them 

for their efforts. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

POINT OF PERSONAL PRIVILEGE 
 

GRANT FORMULA FOR SCHOOL UNITS 
 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a personal or House privilege if you like, in 

response to the Minister of Education’s comments that he wasn’t going to supply us with figures of the 

grants to the school boards in the province. The Premier a few days ago assured me that they would be 

forthcoming. It has been customary in this House for many years. I would certainly ask the Minister and 

the Premier to reconsider this. If the grant formula and the grants are as good as the Minister is trying to 

tell us, he’s got nothing to hide, let’s have the news and answers to some of these questions. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I don’t have anything to hide. If it has been the practice of 

this House to table the grant figures, I’ll certainly be prepared to do this and I’ll make them available to 

the House as soon as we can make preparation for it in the Department. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1228 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 62 
 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 

No. 62 showing: 

 

(1) The number of final orders of foreclosure that were granted in the Province of Saskatchewan 
for the following periods of time (a) from July 1, 1971 to February 19, 1972, (b) from 

January 1, 1971 to June 30, 1972, (c) for each of the years from 1956 to 1970, inclusive. 

 

(2) For each such year the number of consents that were granted by the Provincial Mediation 
Board for the enforcements of Writs of Possession. 

 

(3) For each such year and number of the foregoing that were Farm Credit Corporation 
mortgages. 

 

(4) The number in each year that related to farm lands. 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — I would propose an amendment moved by my colleague 

the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) that we amend Return No. 62 as follows: 

 

That (a) the date “June 30, 1972” be deleted where it appears in subclause (b) of clause (1) and 

the date “June 30, 1971” be substituted therefor. 

 

(b) clause (2) be deleted and the words “For each such period the number of Writs of Possession 

of which the Provincial Mediation Board has had notice” be substituted therefor. 

 

(c) the word “year” be deleted in clause (3) and the word “period” be substituted therefor. 

 

(d) the word “year” be deleted in clause (4) and the word “period” be substituted therefor. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 63 
 

Mr. MacLeod moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 63 showing: 

 

(1) The number of final orders for cancellation of agreements for sale that were granted in the 
Province of Saskatchewan for the following periods of time (a) from July 1, 1971 to 

February 29, 1972, (b) from January 1, 1971 to June 30, 1972, (c) for each of the years from 

1956 to 1970, inclusive. 

 

(2) For each such year the number of consents that were 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1229 

granted by the Provincial Mediation Board for the enforcement of Writs of Possession. 

 

(3) The number in each year that related to farm lands. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I move, seconded by my colleague the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) that 

Motion for Return No. 63 be amended as follows: 

 

That (a) the date “June 30, 1972” be deleted where it appears in subclause (b) of clause (1) and 

the date “June 30, 1971” be substituted therefor. 

 

(b) clause (2) be deleted and the words “for each such period the numbers of Writs of Possession 

of which the Provincial Mediation Board has had notice” be substituted therefor. 

 

(c) that the word “year” where it appears in clause (3) be deleted and the word “period” be 

substituted therefor. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

PREAMBLE IN MOTIONS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Member proceeds with this Resolution I have a little statement I should like 

to read to the House which covers this motion (Resolution No. 2) and one other on the Order Paper: 

 

I wish to draw all Members’ attention to Resolution (No. 2) as it stands in the name of the Hon. 

Member for Melville. Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 17th Edition, page 296, defines a 

substantive motion as a “self-contained proposal submitted for the approval of the House and 

drafted in such a way as to be capable of expressing a decision of the House”. I would remind all 

Members that the practice of this Assembly has been to have the substantive motions succinct 

and clear without preambles in order that the motion would be capable of expressing decision. 

Arguments that are presented in preambles, can be used in the debate itself but should not be 

included in the Resolution. 

 

Resolution (No. 2), in my opinion, contains a preamble. In Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 

and Forms, Fourth Edition, 1958, Cit 199 (1), page 167, this situation is covered as follows: 

“When a member hands a motion to the Speaker after having spoken in support of it, the Speaker 

may, before putting the question to the House, make such corrections as are necessary or 

advisable in order that it should conform with the usages of the House”. 

 

I would draw attention to a Speaker’s ruling as recorded in the Journals of the Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, March 17, 1970, pages 96 and 97, where Mr. 

Speaker altered the wording of a private member’s resolution in order to make it conform with 

the 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1230 

accepted practice of this Assembly. 

 

The Chair will delete the words “recognizing that grain markets are limited and farmers are 

marketing grain at prices below the cost of production”, from the Resolution in order that the 

preamble will be removed. 

 

I also wish to draw all Hon. Members’ attention to Resolution (No. 6), standing in the name of 

the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre which also contains a preamble. For the same 

reasons as given above, the Chair will delete the words “being seriously disturbed by the 

intolerably high level of unemployment, particularly among young people, and recognizing that 

the lack of jobs is a direct consequence of gross mismanagement of the Canadian economy by 

the Federal Government . . . ” from the Resolution in order that the preamble will be removed. 

 

I think this will explain the reason I am ruling out the preamble on this motion and on motion (No. 6) 

and the Members will be able to speak accordingly. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 – INCOME STABILIZATION PROGRAM FOR PRAIRIE FARMERS 
 

Mr. J.R. Kowalchuk (Melville) moved, seconded by Mr. Larson (Pelly): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government to proceed immediately with legislation to 

establish an income stabilization program for prairie farmers, which program would include the 

following: 

 

(1) A guarantee that total grain receipts in the prairie region will not fall below $1.1 million 
during the 1971-72 crop year, and that this figure be adjusted in subsequent years to take 

into account costs of production; 

 

(2) The establishment of a Stabilization Fund for the purposes of this program, with 
contributions from producers; consumers through a two-price system for wheat; and the 

Federal Government, through an annual contribution from the Treasury; 

 

(3) A payout from the Stabilization Fund in any crop year that gross receipts fall below the 
guaranteed minimum, with distribution on the basis of the numbers of bushels of grain 

delivered, such payment to be included in the final payment made by the Canadian Wheat 

Board. 

 

He said: 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, we shall abide by your ruling. That portion of the motion will be 

deleted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day when I rose in this Assembly to give notice of motion that I would move a 

well-defined motion, in fact, according to your ruling, Sir, it was too well defined, urging the Federal 

Government to proceed immediately with legislation to establish an income stabilization program for 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1231 

prairie farmers, there were loud cries of derision and mockery from the Opposition benches, none louder 

than that of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) himself, Mr. Speaker. Mockery and derision and 

scorn because our Party dares once more to bring to the attention of this Assembly and to the attention 

of all the farmers in the West, that we, in the New Democratic Party, be it Provincial or Federal, believe 

most strongly, most dynamically, in a good, sound, basic stabilization program for western farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Not only do we dare, Mr. Speaker, once more to raise our voices louder than ever 

in the hope that the real farm price stabilization will eventually become a reality, but we will continue 

without stop right here in this Legislature and in the city and in the country on any political and 

non-political platforms and all through the West to place again and again our support for a farm income 

stabilization program. Because, Mr. Speaker, only if such a stabilization program becomes a reality can 

there ever be a hope for the survival of our family farms, our small and large rural communities, our 

Saskatchewan as we know it today. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we dare to bring this motion into this House and we dare the Opposition to vote for it, 

Mr. Speaker. We want a strong, loud, unanimous Yes from this Legislature for a strong, viable, effective 

stabilization program for the western farmer. I know, Mr. Speaker, that the Members to your left will as 

they did the other day, laugh and say derisively, “Why, your New Democrats in Ottawa had a chance to 

support a stabilization program, why didn’t they support it?” That’s right, that’s the question they are 

going to ask. May I say to you, Sir, how thankful I am and how thankful we all are that our New 

Democratic Members have not weakened like our Conservative Members in Ottawa . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — . . . that our New Democratic Members in Ottawa have not weakened like our 

Conservative fence-sitters and the Liberal Members in Ottawa. They had the courage to fight right down 

to the wire. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there was no doubt that the $100 million carrot was tempting but the solemn 

realization that with the carrot came years of a program that would stabilize nothing, that in reality a 

vote for Bill C-244 was a vote for the Federal Task Force Report and the extermination of two-thirds of 

our farmers off the land and that made our Federal Members fight and vote the way they did. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, that program offered by Otto Lang to which was tied ahead of it a big dangling million dollar 

carrot was baited with a pretty deadly poison. Political expediency would have been easy, Mr. Speaker, 

but if you look at the long term outlook of that stabilization program, the prospect virtually condemned 

the western farmer to almost total annihilation. It would have meant a few dollars for the farmer in that 

million dollar bait but salvation of the agricultural industry would not have been achieved, Mr. Speaker. 

The agricultural industry would not have been stabilized. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1232 

If the Stabilization Bill in such a form was what was needed, why did all the other farm organizations 

oppose it? The Farmers’ Union, The Wheat Pool, The Federation of Agriculture. If the stabilizing effects 

were that acceptable, why wasn’t the Bill broken into the two parts as suggested by our Federal New 

Democrat counterparts, to break the $100 million benefit from the rest of the Bill? I don’t think I need to 

repeat to anyone in this House why this wasn’t done. Because you had to accept the arsenic with the 

food, Mr. Speaker, that is why. That is where Otto Lang and his Ottawa Liberals and I must say the 

Conservatives as well, have totally discredited themselves. They have shown what political expediency 

they were prepared to go to. To hold out such a poisoned stabilization Bill was mocking, Mr. Speaker, 

and baiting the farmers, insulting them in fact, saying, ‘crawl, you former, crawl if you want some of 

these goodies’. That’s what it said. 

 

But thank God, Mr. Speaker, our western people, our western New Democrats, did not crawl. No, Mr. 

Lang practised the role of a bully gunfighter, Mr. Speaker, by pointing a gun at the farmers’ heads, 

knowing in what a vulnerable and weak position the farmers were in, sure that the farmers would 

weaken and come a-crawling but they didn’t. Mr. Lang got his answer in Assiniboia correctly, and, Mr. 

Speaker, he’ll get it again come election day whenever that will be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Why was this Stabilization Bill so unacceptable to the western farmers and the 

western farm organizations? Why did our New Democrats fight it and oppose many of its features so 

bitterly? There are many reasons, Sir, and let me enunciate some of these reasons to you. The farmers 

have never forgotten the iniquitous PFAA program foisted on the farmers for years, costing millions of 

dollars to farmers, many who never benefited at all, having no stabilization effect in times of dire 

financial distress. Yes, we had calculated and recalculated this harshly imposed Lang Stabilization Bill 

and found that it wasn’t even up to par with the PFAA. When you consider the increased costs of 

production sky-rocketing then what good is this type of stabilization when the farmers’ income is not 

protected at all? 

 

The first basic defect in this Stabilization Bill C-244 was that it had the total effect of stabilizing 

poverty. I know that is a rather harsh way of expressing it but there is no way that describes its attributes 

as does the word ‘poverty’. 

 

The other day the mover to the Throne Speech, the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor) made 

reference to the Senate Committee Report on Poverty in Canada wherein it was stated that 29 per cent of 

the people of Canada are on or below the poverty level. The plan that Mr. Lang and the Liberals at 

Ottawa had for the farmer would have, in fact, done just that for the great majority of the farmers in 

Canada – frozen stabilization at a poverty level. A plan such as this designed to stabilize cash receipts at 

current levels assumes that the income level of the past five years is an adequate base. This is absolute 

nonsense, Mr. Speaker. As I have said before, this would be even worse than the PFAA, as we all know, 

quite useless. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the plan did not take into account the cost of production. A stabilization plan to 

stabilize cash 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1233 

receipts is of no value in the face of almost daily rising costs of production. Another factor to consider, 

Mr. Speaker, in any Bill of this kind will be the many inequities resulting from the application of this 

formula to individual farm situations. For many reasons, including a wide variety of crop conditions 

across the prairies that vary from year to year as we all know, would make the plan quite inapplicable 

and unworkable as it was proposed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government’s portion of contribution designed to be limited and finally phased out is 

and in the opinion of many farmers in Western Canada as well, totally unacceptable. We want a 

stabilization plan that will guarantee that the total grain receipts in the prairie region will not fall below 

the $1.1 billion during the 1971-72 crop year and that a stabilization fund for this purpose be guaranteed 

through an annual contribution from Treasury. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, I make no apologies to any government for asking and demanding this kind of 

support. You know, Sir, that it was but a few weeks ago that the editorials of the Saskatchewan daily 

newspapers were crying crocodile tears for dear old free enterprise and what was happening to this 

sanctified free enterprise system when the announcement was made that finally the Meadow Lake pulp 

mill deal was written ‘finis’, the paper dared print such an obituary right on the editorial page – dear free 

enterprise had received another death blow. 

 

Nothing angers me more, Mr. Speaker, than such deliberate distortions that somehow a system that 

sucked millions and billions of dollars out of our national and provincial treasuries for years was and 

still is considered to be free enterprise. When you look around you, Mr. Speaker, there is hardly an 

industry in Canada today that isn’t subsidized through tariffs, tax write-offs and many hundreds of other 

ways as so well expressed by the Member for Assiniboia-Bengough (Mr. Lange). And yet the people are 

led to believe the myth that it is all free enterprise. Probably the only industrialist in Canada today who 

is a free enterpriser is the farmer. Mr. Speaker, it is time that we, the farmers of Canada and 

Saskatchewan, got part of that action. It is time that the Federal Government put its money where its 

mouth is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am proud that the New Democrats fought this iniquitous Bill, carrot-dangling Bill, to the very end. Yes 

and many of us lost money. I lost money as many other farmers did because we got that fine letter from 

Ottawa saying that we were entitled to $540 or $620 and then we didn’t get it of course. We lost money, 

many of us lost money. We lost the battle but we didn’t lose the war, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — The Conservatives in Ottawa too showed their true colors when it came to political 

expediency (so they thought), Mr. Speaker. So they thought! They sold out but our New Democrats said, 

“We’ll not be swayed, we will abide by our principles.” And I am very proud of them for it. Our proof 

of action was decided, Mr. Speaker, at the ‘Battle of Assiniboia’. It was there on the battlefield of 

Assiniboia that certain polarization of the thinking of western farmers took place. It was at Assiniboia 

that the people of Saskatchewan told Otto Lang, “Go dangle your carrot elsewhere.” It was at Assiniboia 

that 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1234 

the farmers told Otto Lang, “You tried to buy us with our own $100 million but we are not buying.” It 

was there at Assiniboia that Mr. Lang and Ottawa were told and they knew that there was no more 

dilly-dallying in regard to the two-price wheat system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the ballots that were 

deposited in the election at Assiniboia and the ballots deposited in the next Federal election will 

determine what kind of a Stabilization Bill we will eventually have for the prairie farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the strength of our western economy depends to the greatest degree 

upon our agricultural industry. The strength of our Canadian economy, Mr. Speaker, as exemplified by 

its rough shape in the last few years bears out the fact that the strength of our national economy is to the 

greatest degree determined by the strength of our agricultural buoyancy and agricultural economy in the 

West. 

 

In no way can our country, can our Canada forget about the western people. No Government of Canada 

if it really believes in a nation from sea to sea can ever again take chances of ignoring any one sector of 

this country including the West, Mr. Speaker. 

 

No Government, no political party in Western Canada can afford to sit still, including the Liberals to 

your left, Mr. Speaker, and not place themselves along the side of the agricultural industry of Western 

Canada. And that means, Mr. Speaker, an all out support of a Stabilization Bill with real teeth in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Members of this House, the most successful crop insurance program, the most 

comprehensive family farm protection legislation, the greatest diversification program ever imaginable, 

efficiency, mechanization and a thousand other remedies to the agricultural industry will indeed be futile 

if we do not get a stabilization program wherein the cost of production of agricultural products will be 

tied to the income received from the sale of these farm products, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I am hoping that the motion that I bring forth today, Mr. Speaker, will be endorsed 

and approved by this House. It has given me great pleasure to read this motion to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see that we are going to have a debate in 

this Assembly in regard to the Stabilization Bill because, once again, we are following what has 

happened in the country. There has already been a debate in the country and as the previous speaker 

indicated, that took place in Assiniboia. 

 

Before that by-election took place every politician of every Party in this province and in this country 

said that the issue in Assiniboia is going to be the Grains Income Stabilization Bill. That is what the 

issue was before the election but 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1235 

after the overwhelming defeat of the Liberal candidate he didn’t come first or second, but came third, 

that was no longer the issue. In fact, what had happened was that somehow the city slickers, in the city 

of Weyburn had defeated the Liberal candidate. Now, it is true that he did lose by some 1,000 votes in 

the city of Weyburn but if you were to take those votes out of the votes cast in the Assiniboia 

by-election, you would find that he also lost by some 2,000 in the areas outside of Weyburn. 

 

There is no question about it that the principles of the Grains Stabilization Bill as enunciated by Otto 

Lang were tested, they were tried by the people of Saskatchewan in that by-election and they were found 

wanting. And the basic principle which was found wanting was that there was no consideration for the 

increased cost of production to the farmer. This is a point that had been raised by all the major farm 

organizations in Canada – the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Manitoba Wheat Pool, the Alberta Wheat 

Pool, the National Farmers’ Union, the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture – all of these farm 

organizations for the first time in the history of Canada had united in opposition to a stabilization plan 

which, as had been indicated, would have bound the farmers of Saskatchewan to poverty. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak in regard to this motion. I have more comments that 

I should like to make in regard to this motion and so I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 5 – PROPERTY TAX REDUCTION FOR EDUCATION 
 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin) moved, seconded by Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan give consideration to take the necessary steps to reduce 

the property tax for education to 25 mills. 

 

He said 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that everyone in Saskatchewan is aware of the promise made by the NDP to 

reduce the mill rate for education to 25 mills. I am sure that every Member over there, every candidate, 

used this in the campaign. The promise was repeated over and over and everyone in the province is 

certainly aware of it. 

 

The impression was left with the people of the province that this would be done immediately, not two, 

five or ten years from now. Either or ten months have gone by and nothing has been done to carry out 

this major promise. The average mill rate for education in 1970 was 45 mills in this province. The total 

taxable assessment was about $2 billion, that is including both urban and rural. 

 

If the mill rate was reduced to 25 mills as promised, the property tax for education would be reduced by 

about $40 million. Now, every year that the NDP put off their very clear cut promise they are cheating 

the property owners out of this $40 million. They said they would reduce it to 25 mills. This would save 

the 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1236 

property owner $40 million and they are not doing it. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, the urgency of this 

particular promise. It leaves the burden of this extra $40 million on the property owner. 

 

This year would have been an ideal time to do it. The Liberal Government in Ottawa gave this province 

an extra $59 million. This money could have been easily used to reduce the property taxes instead of 

hiring a horde of planners and civil servants. The Liberal Government introduced the Homeowner Grant. 

They raised it, as you know, gradually to $70. Plans were made to increase it to $100. 

 

The homeowner, the large homeowner, will get $8 more. Only $8! Not up to $100 that he would have 

gotten under the Liberals, he will get $8. The average and small homeowner will get nothing, he will get 

no increase. 

 

The Property Improvement Grants proposed are only a minor change in the Liberal Homeowner Grant. 

The Property Improvement Grants are very similar to the Homeowner Grant. The PIG is the same as the 

HOG. The only thing is that the PIG that we have now is smaller than the HOG that we had before. 

 

The Property Improvement Grant makes no attempt to keep the mill rate down. No attempt at all! It 

reduces the mill rate by some 13 mills for some and only some property owners and it does away 

completely with the Homeowner Grant. 

 

The Premier said in the Budget Speech that under the new Property Improvement Grant that no 

homeowner would be worse off. I am sure that everyone is aware by now, everyone that reads the paper, 

that every homeowner in both Regina and Moose Jaw will be worse off than they were before. Regina 

and Moose Jaw are talking of mill rate increase of five or six mills. They have to do this because the 

NDP Government is not supplying enough money to keep the services down, the essential services that 

they require. So they will get an extra $8, the larger homeowner, the richer person. Everyone else will 

get no more and his taxes will go up by five or six mills. 

 

School units are now receiving notices from the NDP Government which indicate that grants will not 

meet increased costs. They have been told in effect that if they want their education services to be 

maintained at a decent level and certainly most people want this, that they will have to raise the money 

themselves or they will have to increase the property taxes. 

 

We have seen many instances of this. Moosomin School Unit, for example, has reduced their mill rate 

the last three years in a row under the Liberal Government. I am wondering if the Premier or the 

Minister of Education will now guarantee that sufficient grants will be paid to Moosomin to allow them 

to continue this practice of reducing their mill rates. I doubt if we shall get such a guarantee. With the 

increased mill rates, in two or three years property owners will be paying as much taxes as before and 

their Homeowner Grant will be completely gone. 

 

The property taxes for education should be drastically reduced. It is only the last few days, Mr. Speaker, 

that it has come to our attention that the Government is failing dismally 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1237 

in this regard. Arcola School Unit in which I live finds that they are going to have a one mill increase 

this year under the NDP. Last year under a Liberal Government they had a two mill decrease. Now I am 

sure that the Premier is not going to tell me that the Arcola School Unit area is one of the more 

prosperous in the province. This is an area of mixed farming, small farmers and certainly this is an area 

where the mill rate has gone up one mill this year, two mills down last year. 

 

Moosomin School Unit as I have mentioned is the same. Let’s look at the record over the last three 

years. I have here the front page of the Moosomin World Spectator and I should like to take a look first 

at April 8, 1970, this is two years ago. The headline says “Moosomin Unit Board Cuts Mill Rates”. It 

goes on to say: 

 

Moosomin School Unit Board has cut the mill rate for the second year in a row, Board Chairman 

Douglas Fyke told the World Spectator last week. This year’s reduction is one and one-half mills 

for unit ratepayers, the same drop as last year. 

 

So in 1969 and in 1970 the Moosomin School Unit dropped the mill rate by one and one-half mills. 

 

I have here the front page of the same paper, May 12, 1971, one year ago. It says in the headline “School 

Taxes Slashed”. I quote from this paper, 

 

A reduction of up to five and a half mills in the school rate is in store for most taxpayers in the 

Moosomin School Unit. The 1971 rates were announced from the unit office last week. This is a 

reduction from last year of five and one-half mills for Moosomin, four and one-half mills for all 

towns and villages and three and one-half mills for rural taxpayers. 

 

This is the record that we have in 1969, 1970 and 1971 in the Moosomin School Unit. 

 

I should again like to ask the Minister and the Premier if they will assure the people of the Moosomin 

School Unit that this type of reduction will be possible. This program was started by the Liberal 

Government, continued for the last three years and I am wondering if they will guarantee that the people 

in the Moosomin School Unit will be able to benefit by such reductions in the future. In fact, I think they 

are rather disillusioned by some of the recent events from this Government. They would probably be 

satisfied with a promise that they would get enough money to even maintain the mill rate without any 

reduction. 

 

I am sure most of you also, Mr. Speaker, noticed in the Leader-Post of March 23, 1972 – “Rural Taxes 

to Rise”. 

 

Trustees of the Regina School Unit are expecting their farmers and businessmen to raise cain 

when they learn the board will have to increase their mill rate. 

 

I don’t blame them too much. I think they are perfectly justified in raising cain. It goes on to say, 

 

The board has suffered a reduction of $130,000 grant under the new Provincial school grant 

system and expects 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1238 

a four mill increase will be necessary. 

 

I think the big problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier doesn’t seem to know which way you have to 

go if you have a 37 mill rate and want to get it down to 25. This seems to be perhaps the basic problem. 

We should like to point out to him that it is necessary to start moving in a lower direction. You don’t go 

back to 25 by putting a 37 mill rate up to 38 or 40 as is being done in many instances. 

 

Education, we all know, is certainly a people’s service and should be paid for by a people’s tax such as 

sales tax or income tax. Property taxes should only be used for services to provide services to property 

such as roads and police services. Forty or fifty years ago in rural areas the local school was supported 

by a tax on each quarter section. The towns and villages had a tax on houses or businesses. This system 

was certainly adequate 40 or 50 years ago. Education costs were low and there were very few 

professional or service people who were not paying a fair share of the tax. But in spite of the great 

changes in our society this archaic tax system has been maintained over the years. School taxes on 

property should not be drastically reduced or eliminated. 

 

The NDP promised this in their election campaign. We know individual candidates certainly made this 

promise to reduce the tax, the education mill rate to 25 mills. I give them credit. Perhaps the 

frontbenchers that are here now honestly thought that there was some chance that this promise would be 

kept. I am sure that they are badly disillusioned now and I am sure that this is one of the big reasons for 

the problems that they have had, I understand, in the caucus where some of the backbenchers are 

insisting that the Premier and the Cabinet do something about this particular promise. They were naïve 

enough to believe this during the campaign and they are a bit disappointed to find that the Premier has 

done nothing up to now and has given them no indication that he will ever do anything. 

 

The present Government has certainly taken no steps to implement this promise and no indication that it 

will ever carry it out. 

 

In the meantime, I should like to repeat, Mr. Speaker, that the property owners of Saskatchewan are 

paying at least $40 million a year more than they should be for education costs. If the mill rate was 

reduced to 25 mills even as they had promised, this would take a $40 million burden off the property 

owner. 

 

So I call on all Members of this Assembly to urge the NDP Government to take immediate steps to 

correct this very unjust situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1239 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, this is one of the NDP promises that was made in the 

course of the campaign. Of all of the promises that were made some of them were a little grandiose, 

some of them were a little vaguely worded but here was one that was very simple and very 

straightforward and one that they sold across the promise and promised from every platform – ‘we’re 

going to reduce the property tax mill rate to 25 mills’. Here is one, Mr. Speaker, now they are talking 

about averages, now they are talking about four years and three years. Well, I can tell them, Mr. 

Speaker, they are not going to have four years to implement this program unless they get busy right now 

and get it done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — This was a promise, Mr. Speaker, there was no date line, there was no timetable, it 

was a straight, simple, straight-out promise to reduce that mill rate to 25 mills. I think the Member from 

Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) has done an excellent job outlining the progress the former Government had 

made in reducing mill rates across the province. We have had some rather conflicting and disturbing 

reports, if you like, of late with respect to progress the present Government is making in this regard, Mr. 

Speaker. Because the Minister hasn’t put the grant estimates before us yet, because we really haven’t 

seen any new legislation dealing with grants, and because I should like to discuss this a good deal more 

comprehensively when we get that information, I beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 11 – INCREASE IN INSURANCE RATES 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park) moved, second by Mr. Guy (Athabasca) 

 

That this Assembly cannot condone that the Minister-in-Charge of SGIO, the Hon. R. Romanow, 

in announcing the licence insurance rates for Saskatchewan drivers for the year ending March 

31, 1973, failed to inform the public that there will be an increase in the rates for 1972 model 

passenger cars of $10 and also an increase in the rates of 1972 Class F trucks and Class R trucks 

of $5. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t propose speaking to it at great length because there was considerable debate in the 

House at the time this subject was before us. But the point that I wish to make, which some could argue 

was probably adequately made at the time, but I question this, was that the general public looks to the 

Ministers particularly for credibility and the fact that it took the Hon. Member several days to admit that 

the earlier statement had been misleading, I think left some question in the minds of the public as to the 

credibility of the Hon. Attorney General. I think this is regrettable because politicians quite often are 

accused of not being completely sincere and honest in some of their statements but a Cabinet Minister 

particularly when reporting a matter of this sort to the House certainly should be factual and if perchance 

he has been misled by his 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1240 

department people or has made a mistake then he shouldn’t take several days to correct it. He should 

stand up and admit his mistake because I think that we all recognize that once a person admits his 

mistake his stature increases. I stated that when the Hon. Attorney General did so a day before this 

resolution was submitted. Mr. Speaker, I would strongly solicit the support of the House on this 

resolution. I won’t be terribly surprised if I am not heeded in that appeal but I think it would do much to 

indicate to the public that we expect the Ministers particularly to set a pretty high standard. 

 

Mr. D.W. Cody (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, it is with considerable disappointment that I rise today and 

it is certainly with considerable disappointment with the Opposition and particularly with the Hon. 

Member from Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) that I rise to debate this motion. 

 

In spite of their pronounced limitations on that side of the House, one would have thought they would 

have had sufficient sense to stop beating a dead horse. Mr. Speaker, it is a grave situation in my mind 

when the Hon. Member from Whitmore Park seeks what I term cheap political advantage through this 

kind of a motion. The only thing I can see, Mr. Speaker, is that he hopes to catch the eye of the Press 

and probably gain for himself a little it of personal publicity. I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that he 

and his colleagues at this stage of the game certainly would have had enough Press after June 23rd. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, there is very little substance to this resolution, in fact, I am say no substance 

whatsoever. And I will therefore me moving an amendment at the conclusion of my remarks. Mr. 

Speaker, the Hon. Minister-in-Charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office has on several 

occasions explained his position and explained the position of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

Office with regard to rates. He has explained in this Assembly and he has explained in Crown 

Corporations that a new category was added for the rate schedule 1972-73. If you will look at the rate 

schedule which I am sure you all received with your registration, you will note there is no increase 

anywhere for vehicles dating back from 1940 to 1971. This rate, Mr. Speaker, is identical to that of last 

schedule, I should correct myself and say to that of last year. This rate, Mr. Speaker, is identical and will 

again say is identical to that of last year. There is, however, a new category added to the rate schedule 

for vehicles year 1972-73. Now, Mr. Speaker, if this is an increase and it makes the Hon. Member from 

Whitmore Park feel good by calling it that, then I certainly hope he feels better for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House firmly believe that the no fault concept of automobile 

insurance in the province has been a great step forward in giving the motoring public relief from the 

misfortune of tragic accidents. We feel that the increased benefits brought in under Bill 35 the other day 

will once again update The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. Is this related to the context of the 

resolution? 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1241 

Mr. Speaker: — I hope that the Member won’t start to discuss Bill 35, we have to stay with the 

resolution, Bill 35 is a debate by itself. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I was just merely stating that the benefits brought in under Bill 35, I am not 

going to debate those benefits. I will say again that the increased benefits brought in through Bill 35 the 

other day, as I have said before and I make no apologies for it, it was a terrific Bill, once again we will 

update The Automobile Accident Insurance Act to make it the best and well-received insurance plan on 

the North American continent. Mr. Speaker, I draw to your attention and to that of the Opposition and 

people of Saskatchewan that we are fortunate that there was a change of Government last June as it is 

my firm belief that if the Liberals had been returned the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office 

would have been down the road. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the Member is straying away from the motion. This motion deals with 

the rate announcements not with Bill 35 of the general insurance. This is dealing with the announcement 

of rates for cars and I think we have got to keep a little closer to the topic before us. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will try and keep within the rules as you have stated, however, I 

would suggest to the Hon. Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) that if he wants to do any reading 

he should go out into the lobby where he can do it with a lot of ease. Mr. Speaker, I said before and I 

feel that it is worth mentioning again, that it is unquestionable that had the Member from Whitmore Park 

had his want about it . . . 

 

Mr. Grant: — On a Point of Order – the Hon. Member is not speaking to the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think the Member is staying close enough to the motion. I believe that anything 

the Member from Whitmore Park may or may not have done is not embodied in this motion. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, someone said informally that the Member from 

Whitmore Park didn’t do anything, with that I agree. I’m sorry it’s not a Point of Order, I’m sorry, I 

don’t want to prolong or to challenge your rulings, Mr. Speaker, but I would submit to you that a 

Member is entitled to speculate on the motivations for the introduction of any resolution by any other 

Member and the Member is saying that the Member from Whitmore Park who made the motion 

respecting SGIO and car rates has certain motivations and he points to the actions of the Member when 

he was a member of the Treasury Board to show those motivations. I ask you to consider that in this 

matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the Hon. Member is wishing to tie his remarks into this motion, I think that he 

should give the House information to show how he is tying it in because I am at a lose to try to follow 

how he is tying it in. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1242 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. If he is going to bring in Government Insurance, you 

know I am going to have a long speech on this and I want the same kind of treatment from the Chair as 

the Attorney General wants you to make. You have made a ruling and I want to congratulate you on that 

ruling. He has no business discussing it if he can’t read and he is an insurance man, I hope he is 

educated, he doesn’t show it. I hope he will read the resolution and it states very simply what the 

Member from Whitmore Park wanted. If he wants to move an amendment then we will talk on the 

amendment but surely he is not going to roam all over telling this House that if we were re-elected we 

would sell SGIO. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I may say for the guidance of all Members that the Member for Watrous said he was 

going to introduce an amendment, the Chair has no knowledge what it is. Sometimes remarks being 

made by a Member may be tying into their amendment but if that is the case then they must advise the 

House of what they are going to move first, otherwise, the Chair can only rule on what is before it. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, he did say, maybe you haven’t heard or didn’t hear him, but he did say he 

was going to amend this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He said he was going to amend it but the Chair has no knowledge. His context may tie 

in with his amendment. If he would make the House acquainted with what his amendment is going to be 

before he moves it then the House would know it’s in order. At the present time I think he is straying too 

far from it. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, if you wish I can read a portion of this amendment and possibly then 

you can allow me to carry on if you wish. The amendment in substance says that we support the 

principle of compulsory no fault government operated automobile insurance. It also says that because of 

the provided wide benefits to our people involved in car accidents, extremely low rates of insurance as 

evidenced by the announcement of the Minister the other day and this in essence is what the amendment 

will be all about. And that is the reason partly why I was delving into these areas and I think to make my 

point I had to. I had to state the comments with regard to the Member from Whitmore Park. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I wonder if I might have a copy of that since he is 

going to speak to it. I wonder if we could just have a copy of his motion at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think he hasn’t yet moved it and I realize that Members cannot get copies of it 

because the Chair doesn’t have a copy of it. For the benefit of the House, I should just ask him if he 

would indicate what line the amendment may be along because I have no knowledge as to whether the 

amendment will or will not be in order until it is submitted to the Chair. All he has tried to outline for 

the benefit of Members is what his motion will embody. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1243 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to add one more Point of Order. I fail to see 

what compulsory no fault insurance has to do with the Member for Whitmore Park. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have an additional Point of Order arising out of my original 

comments. He says that he intends to move an amendment and he gives the general purport of the 

amendment but he then proposes to speak to the purported amendment without presenting it to us and 

surely he is not entitled to speak to something that isn’t before the House just because he says that at 

some future time he will bring it to the House. I think that until he presents a copy of the amendment, he 

is not authorized or entitled to speak to what is a mythical amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This does leave a fine line all right. On numerous occasions in the past it has been that 

Members will signify the intent to move an amendment so that it will show that they intend to go farther 

afield. Once any Member moves an amendment as submitted to the Chair, then he has finished speaking 

and he has lost his right to speak because he has moved his amendment once the amendment comes up. I 

realize it is difficult to read the amendment but what the Member could do for courtesy’s sake if he 

wished would be to send a copy of the proposed amendment across to other Members who are 

interested. The rules do not demand it and he must move his amendment before he sits down. But as a 

courtesy to give Members extra information, that could be done if he so wished. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order. I would offer a suggestion that the Member 

opposite from Watrous read the amendment he has on the presumption that when he concludes his 

remarks he moves the amendment. That way he won’t lose his place to speak, we’ll know what the 

amendment is, he can send us a copy. If he will tell us what the amendment is during the course of his 

remark and move it when he concludes his speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is what I suggested he could do and he has made known the general tenor of his 

amendment. I said he could out of courtesy send a cop to the other Members but he wouldn’t then be 

officially moving his amendment to bar him from speaking. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, if I could interject for the edification of some of us new Members. The 

impression that I got from the proposed amendment, it seems to be a totally different subject matter. I 

am just raising the question, Mr. Speaker, what the rules are on that. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, if I may say a word or two to the Point of Order. It would appear to me that 

the Opposition are very much afraid of what I might be saying here that is going to tap them on their 

little eyeballs or something. Is that what you are afraid of? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, Point of Order. Now that’s the kind of nonsense we shouldn’t have 

around here. What he is suggesting 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1244 

to us is that he is not going to tell us what he is going to speak about but he is telling us that what he is 

speaking about (although not to the resolution) is to something that he will tell us about later. Now, that 

has got to be nonsense. Obviously he is not going to extend to us the courtesy that you suggested. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think we are getting away from the debate. The Hon. Member hasn’t had time yet to 

say whether he is going to follow my suggestion or not since I said that that could be done. Maybe the 

Hon. Member has got an additional copy he can send to the leader of your group. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I have an additional copy here and if they would like to have it they care 

certainly welcome to it. However, I am going to continue speaking and there is no question in my mind 

about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, leaving off where I was so rudely interrupted by the Opposition. As I was saying, I should 

like to draw to your attention and in particular to the Opposition and the people of Saskatchewan, as I 

said before, that we are certainly fortunate that we did win the last election because there is little 

question in my mind that the Government Insurance Office would have been sold. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was a study done. We know that the Members on the other side of the House were 

not in favor of compulsory insurance, barring one or two. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I straightened that out yesterday with the Hon. 

Member. He is making an accusation in this House that is not correct. I stood up in this House yesterday 

and expressed by views on compulsory automobile insurance. It’s on the record, you just read it. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the Hon. Member yesterday as well and I know what he said but I 

also know what he said in Crown Corporations two or three days ago. When the very question was 

asked from the Hon. Member from Whitmore Park . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! What takes place in Crown Corporations cannot be discussed by either side 

until the committee reports to this Legislature. What goes on there is not available for the discussions 

here. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I am still convinced as I was before that there is little question in my mind 

that had the Hon. Member from Whitmore Park been the Minister in Chair of this corporation, it 

certainly would have gone down the road. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — I think that really there is more than one motive for this kind of a resolution. As I said at 

the outset, unfounded resolution, unfounded motion. I think it was just a matter of the Hon. Member 

wanting to discredit the Minister-in-Charge of the Saskatchewan Government Office and 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1245 

possibly, if you want to say, even worse than that, discredit The Automobile Insurance Act so that the 

people of Saskatchewan would lose confidence in this Act. They have tried to discredit this plan for the 

last seven years by having no increased benefits, by every kind of motivation that you can think of. Mr. 

Speaker, the plan has not been updated by one degree in the last seven years. I feel that for that reason 

and for that reason alone we can say that The Automobile Insurance Act was pretty well down the road. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your Point of Order? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Point of Order is this. I have read the motion as presented to me by the Hon. 

Member, his motion amending Resolution No. 11. Quite frankly, the motion as he proposes it is entirely 

different from what the original motion was. The point I propose . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I should like to advise all Hon. Members that the advance copy was sent across 

for guidance of other Members if they wished to see one. We cannot debate the amendment before it is 

moved. The Chair may or may not rule it out of order, I don’t know, because I haven’t seen it because it 

is not yet moved in the House. I hope Members will bear with me until I get the amendment and 

Members will be permitted then to speak against it if they wish. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, if you profess not to know what the amendment is going to be then keep 

him on this motion. You have heard him stray all over Government Insurance. You let him go by and 

yet you profess you are innocent. You are not innocent, you are letting him speak on something that is 

not before the House. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, if I may. I extended a courtesy to the Hon. Member for 

Albert Park by giving him a copy of my amendment. That’s exactly what the Opposition asked for. I 

extended that courtesy to them and after he read it he comes up with a Point of Order saying this 

amendment will not be in order. What more do those people want? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! An amendment may be offered to a motion which draws an opposite 

conclusion from the original motion, then the two are debatable at the same time. Then the House has 

the right to decide which way it wants to make a decision. On the other hand if amendment is made to a 

motion which is just changing a few words but not the substance of the motion then the debate must 

continue strictly on the amendment because it is either just adding to or deleting. But if an amendment is 

made which as I mentioned makes an alternative decision of the House both are debatable at the same 

time. I think for the benefit of the House I ask him to give us a little bit of the outline of his amendment 

but I didn’t ask him for the wording because once he submits the wording to the Chair then he has lost 

his right to speak. I hope that we can proceed without due difficulty 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1246 

and the Members will have a full chance to answer. 

 

Mr. Cody: — If I may just carry on I am going to only be another moment because it seems that I have 

hit on some pretty tender feet here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — It seems that when people get into the Opposition and get a little older, I guess you might 

term it or whatever you want to say, and letter a little on the reactionary side, they get sort of sensitive, 

quite sensitive to this kind of thing. As a result there is not much point in prolonging the debate any 

longer because obviously they are not going to give one an opportunity to carry on. 

 

Let me say again then, Mr. Speaker, that I feel the former Liberal Government has in my mind 

discredited The Automobile Accident Insurance Act over the past seven years. I can assure them that we 

on this side of the House will instill confidence in the people of Saskatchewan regarding this plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, with those few words, badly interrupted, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 

in moving the following amendment, seconded by my colleague from Arm River (Mr. Faris), 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

Supports the principle of compulsory, no-fault, government-operated, automobile insurance, 

administered in Saskatchewan by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, because it has 

provided wide benefits to our people involved in car accidents at extremely low rates of 

insurance as evidenced by the recent announcement by the Minister in Charge of SGIO, the Hon. 

Roy Romanow, respecting the rates for the licence year 1972-73. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before I put this motion to the House, I should like to read to the House from page 170 

of Beauchesne and 202(13). It says, 

 

An amendment to alter the main question by substituting a proposition with the opposite 

conclusion is not an expanded negative and may be moved. 

 

I should like to say that this amendment that has been moved by the Member for Watrous, seconded by 

the Member for Arm River, being somewhat of an alternate conclusion, I find the amendment in order 

and the debate continues concurrently on both. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, if I may on a Point of Privilege. I’ll have to ask your answer on this 

because I am not sure whether there is a Point of Privilege or not. The Hon. Member made a statement 

about myself and I took exception to it. I suggest 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1247 

that if he read the Hansard yesterday he would see that his statement was not correct. My point of 

enquiry is, may I have the privilege at this time of correcting the Hon. Member in this regard? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If a member feels that he has been misquoted during a speech of another Member then 

the proper time is at the conclusion of that Member’s speech, to rise at that time and make the correction 

without making it prerogative to state what they believe the facts. The House should accept any 

Member’s statement as being the true statement of the Member. You would have the right to correct his 

statement without expanding on the statement. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, I find that the Hon. Member was absent from the House yesterday and this 

may be some justification for his misunderstanding, but I’ll refresh his memory and the memory of 

others on what I actually said. I am quoting from the debate in connection with The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act. I am quoting myself, 

 

I don’t think he can find anything in the records of this House in the past seven years where I 

have criticized The Automobile Accident Insurance Act with the possible exception of one 

clause in it. 

 

Then I went on to explain the compulsory collision part of it, 

 

I don’t think there is anybody in Saskatchewan including the insurance agents working for the 

private sector who criticize the compulsory feature as far as third party liability is concerned. I 

don’t think there is any insurance agent who will even try to defend the position that private 

operators could do equally well or better because, first of all, it is done under the Act, there is no 

acquisition costs, there is no policy to be issued. I don’t think it would be practical under the 

private sector. It seems to me because of my basic argument, that government is justified in 

getting into business where there is a lack of competition or failure on the part of the public or 

private sector to perform, that they were justified in getting into this area of third party liability. 

 

Then I went on to express my opposition to the question of collision coverage. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I did not quote from any document. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We can’t enter debate on it. You made certain comments which you believe to be true 

and the Member for Whitmore Park is trying to put on the record his stand on it and I think that ends the 

debate on that part of it. 

 

What is before us now is the original motion and the amendment. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1248 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief remarks on this particular motion. 

Certainly I am sure it is a matter of regret to me and I know regret to other Members on this side and 

both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, that such a motion had to be made in the first instance. I am sure 

this was pointed out by the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) who moved the motion. The motion 

reads, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly cannot condone the Minister-in-Charge of the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office, the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) in announcing the licence 

rates for Saskatchewan drivers for the year ending March 31st and failed to inform the public that there 

would be an increase in rates for 1972 model passenger cars of $10 and an increase in rates of Class F 

and R trucks of $5. As I say, it is a matter of extreme regret that such a motion had to be put on the 

Order Paper, Mr. Speaker, Certainly the credibility of Government and the credibility of the various 

Cabinet Ministers is a very vital issue to this House and to this Chamber and the Government of the 

Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now, when you listen to the Member for Watrous (Mr. Cody) in his very good fashion 

really get up making some stormy comments and try and becloud the issue completely by bringing in a 

motion that completely emasculates the original motion of the Member for Whitmore Park and trying to 

obliterate the issue. I regret that he had done so and that this motion couldn’t have been disposed of in 

the normal manner. Mr. Speaker, as I say, I regret very much that this motion has had to be brought in. I 

trust as the Session develops that the Attorney General develops the kind of maturity that is required to 

be a Minister and remembers that he is, in fact, in Government, his statements must be factual 

statements and not given to the fantasy that he was so used to in Opposition and of course, if my good 

friend the Attorney General would come around to this attitude this kind of motion wouldn’t have been 

necessary in the first place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words regarding this motion and 

the amendment. I find that the amendment is in keeping with what I believe in and I will support the 

amendment. But as the Member for Wilkie has indicated, the reason for this motion appearing on the 

Order Paper was because of a misinformer coming into this House and informing us that there was no 

increase in rates for the 1972-73 year. On three occasions he tried to tell us that there was no change in 

rates and then finally he told us there was in fact an increase. The Attorney General who believes in 

honesty and human rights, why would he want to misinform the public? We certainly need an 

Ombudsman for the Attorney General, to keep track of him so that he doesn’t go around misinforming 

the public. 

 

The Member for Watrous (Mr. Cody) and the Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) spoke exhibiting 

the bitter attitude they were taking. They have won an election and when we criticize them or when we 

bring in a motion they talk about ‘we’ve been in battle, we’re going to battle’. Yes, the NDP they go to 

battle. The Liberals, they fight an election but the NDP by the kind of campaign they’re conducting, they 

are armed with 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1249 

the ammunition, with all the lies that they can garner up to misinform the public. Here again, the 

Attorney General tried to misinform, deliberately tried to misinform the public. And this is why the 

resolution has appeared on the Order Paper. As I said, I will support the amendment. The Opposition is 

not opposed to the principle of compulsory Government insurance in the automobile field. 

 

Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, as the Member for Rosthern usually 

starts his debate, I didn’t intend to get into this debate but I feel I must. 

 

Some of them are still smarting I think from previous things that occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a new Member of this House I feel somewhat disillusioned with what happens in this 

House. I think this is another example of what I was referring to previously. Certainly 60 Members in 

this House can find better things to discuss than simply a tactic or a method that was used in explaining 

Government insurance. If I remember correctly, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the House in the past when 

I was not a Member, the Members opposite used exactly the same procedures that were used in 

introducing a rate for car insurance and licence rates. I don’t think that the Attorney General would go 

before this House on such a small issue and deceive this House. I don’t think he would do that. He 

wouldn’t do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Members opposite are grabbing at straws to try and discredit this 

Government. They are trying to do anything to make a comeback from the defeat that they received last 

June 23rd. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Maybe it is true, Mr. Speaker, as the Member from Watrous has indicated that had they 

formed the Government SGIO would have been sold. I’m not sure whether the allegations are true or not 

but he alleges they are. But certainly we know their stand, we know that they thought of SGIO, we know 

what they think of certain other Crown corporations that have been established. 

 

That’s all I want to say, Mr. Speaker. Surely to goodness we’ve got more important issues to discuss 

than to spend our time for an hour or an hour and a half on a very small, little thing. Let’s get on with the 

business of governing, rather than trying to see if we can’t make some political hay on a small, little 

issue. And I would hope that that would be the end of this particular issue. 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to speak to this one 

either but it does seem that the debate has taken rather an interesting turn. 

 

We started out by condemning the Hon. Attorney General for what was a bit of misinformation which he 

presented to us on three different occasions. It now seems that the debate has turned to decide whether 

this is a big enough lie to be worthy of the Attorney General. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1250 

Mr. Romanow: — I wonder if the Hon. Member is saying that I lied? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — No, I’m not saying that at all. I merely am examining the . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I think the imputation was in the speaker’s 

comments and I think he should withdraw those remarks from the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I certainly am not saying that the Hon. Attorney General lied to the House but we are 

saying that he failed to inform the public that there would be an increase in the rates for 1972 model 

passenger cars of $10 and also an increase in the rates of 1972 Class F trucks and Class R trucks of $5. 

We are saying by the resolution that he failed to do these things. 

 

As I understand the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) he is measuring the size 

of misinformation and he seems to indicate to us that this is too small a thing for the Attorney General to 

lie about, that it would be a matter far larger that would cause him to lie and that that’s the kind of thing 

we should look out for. And I say that this is just as big and important . . . 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Personal privilege, please. If the Member is indicating I said that if the Attorney General 

would lie on a bigger issue, I would take exception to that statement. I did not infer that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, that is the point of issue because to us misinformation does not come in 

sizes. We are very disturbed over the import of the remarks of the Hon. Member for Nutana South and 

we are equally disturbed at the failure of the Attorney General as indicated in the original motion, 

Resolution No. 11. 

 

Mr. E.L. Cowley (Biggar): — I’m the third one in a row that didn’t intend to enter this debate. The 

debate really centres around a question of semantics as to what the interpretation is of what was an 

increase and what wasn’t an increase, and what is a new rate, and is that an increase or not. And that 

basically is the argument that took place back and forth across the floor a couple of weeks ago when this 

matter was raised. All I can do is question ‘why’ the Members opposite have seen fit to put this into a 

resolution. It’s for one of two reasons, Mr. Speaker. It appears to me it’s got to be either because they 

think they can make some political hay out of it or some reason that I can’t figure out. I can only assume 

that it’s the first one because it doesn’t appear to me to be anything else. It’s a question of semantics and 

the big lie thing is another question of semantics, as to how one interprets someone’s statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the Members can deal with this matter expeditiously and quickly and get 

it off the Order Paper. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1251 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — I have to take exception to a statement by my colleague 

and I am sure I may be the only one on this side of the House who feels that he can’t support the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Is the Member speaking just to the amendment or our you attempting to 

close the debate now? 

 

Mr. Grant: — No, I’m speaking to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member has the right to speak to the amendment but you would not be closing the 

debate at this time. That’s what I want to make sure. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Oh, I wouldn’t think of doing that. Please stop me if I wander, but I’m going to try to 

stick to the amendment. 

 

I think it’s regrettable really that I can’t support the amendment and in light of what I said yesterday I 

don’t see how the Hon. Member from Watrous (Mr. Cody) could expect me to support this amendment 

because it’s asking no to endorse the compulsory no-fault Government operated insurance scheme 

which, as I indicated when I read my remarks of yesterday, I have a reservation. After listening to the 

Hon. Member from Biggar (Mr. Cowley) yesterday I have a still larger reservation because the point I 

made yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was that while I could justify compulsory third party liability insurance 

for the protection of others and the protection of their property, by no stretch of the imagination was I 

able to justify the Government compelling me and the other citizens of Saskatchewan to buy collision 

insurance which in no way whatsoever had any bearing on the safety or welfare of third party people 

either in the area of bodily injury or property damage. 

 

The Hon. Member from Biggar is commenting about my point left no doubt in my mind that because of 

his thinking and because of philosophical grounds and the saving that might be made, that this is 

justified. He’s entitled to that opinion. I would suggest that he suddenly joined the ranks of the Hon. 

Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) because I would say that this fits in very well with 

the philosophy of the Wafflers and they are quite entitled to this philosophy too. Just because I disagree 

with it, I’m not going to harangue that point today, but he compared by point to that of Medicare, that if 

you carry it to that ridiculous point, I wouldn’t be in favor of Medicare. I don’t think this is a fair 

comparison whatsoever. There’s no similarity at all and I still maintain that my comparison was far 

better. If you are going to compel a person to buy collision insurance on their vehicles then the next 

logical step is to compel them to buy fire insurance on their houses. I think this is a far better 

comparison that comparing it to Medicare because you can at least see the limitation of your exposure as 

far as collision and your household insurance is concerned. You certainly can’t see any limitation on 

your exposure as far as medical expenses are concerned. So I don’t think that comparison is correct. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1252 

What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that while it has been indicated that the Opposition will support the 

amendment, in view of my basic philosophy or whatever you want to call it, or belief that the 

Government shouldn’t compel me to insure my property for my own protection, I find it necessary to 

abstain from voting because I support part of the motion but I can’t honestly in clear conscience support 

it holus-bolus. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

YEAS – 56 
Messieurs 

Blakeney Dyck Meakes 

Wood Smishek Romanow 

Messer Snyder Kramer 

Thibault Larson Kowalchuk 

Baker Brockelbank MacMurchy 

Pepper Michayluk Byers 

Thorson Kwasnica Carlson 

Engel Tchorzewski Richards 

Owens Robbins Matsalla 

Cowley Taylor Faris 

Cody Gross Feduniak 

Mostoway Comer Rolfes 

Lange Hanson Oliver 

Feschuk Kaeding Flasch 

Steuart Coupland Loken 

Guy Boldt MacDonald (Milestone) 

McIsaac Gardner Weatherald 

MacLeod McPherson Lane 

MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) Wiebe  

NAYS – 0 
Messieurs 

Nil 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 12 – MANDATORY HEARINGS PROPOSED BEFORE LEGISLATIVE 

ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE 
 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington) moved, seconded by Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the Government of Saskatchewan that legislation be proposed to 

ensure that provision is made for mandatory public hearings before any major environmental change 

is made in which the Government participates or for which Crown lands or Crown permits are 

required. 

 

He said: On rising to move this motion which I will be moving at the conclusion of my remarks, I 

should like to refresh the Assembly’s memory in regard to the resolution which is on the Order Paper. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many people in our society in all stations of life and of all ages who are 

showing a great deal of concern over what I would put into these categories, (1) the preservation of 

renewable natural resources, (2) pollution, and (3) the 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1253 

environment. The people who exhibit concern over these particular aspects of our society want to have a 

method by which they may participate in decisions that are being made by both industry and 

government. There are many new citizen groups that have sprung up around our country in the last two 

or three years and throughout our province and in very recent times they have become both active and 

very knowledgeable in these subjects. These interested conservationists and individual people find that 

too often the damage is done to the environment before they have an opportunity for discussion. 

Governmental agencies and companies frequently are well under way with both plans and work before 

the general public or individuals know of these plans and intentions. There are many projects involving 

mining, clearing of trees and drainage which would fit this description. What I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is 

not a system which would remove decision making from governments or unduly delay worthwhile 

projects, I simply suggest that public hearings should be advertised and held so that individuals and 

conservation groups have an opportunity to put forth their views. 

 

Recently there have been a number of exact examples of how this actually would take place. The 

Alaskan pipeline is the most noteworthy example. Except for a law which existed in Alaska which 

allowed conservation groups to present their case the Alaskan pipeline now would in all likelihood be 

actually built. The result of such law, however, has permitted conservation groups to hold up the 

building of the pipeline and the resulting further investigation has presented much more information as 

far as the value and the preservation of the environment is concerned. Of course, in this particular 

instance the latest information exhibits the McKenzie Valley pipeline would be the safest method of 

transporting oil from that part of the world to the markets and that actually it will present a more 

favorable way in regard to preserving the environment in doing so, Mr. Speaker. This is a typical 

example of how, I think, a law such as this would be of benefit to the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I realize that in all likelihood a number of speakers on the opposite side will spring to their feet and 

suggest that why didn’t we on this side actually put such a law into operation. Well, I would suggest to 

those who are likely to do so, Mr. Speaker, that I know of no province in Canada which has a similar 

type of law in existence, although I could be wrong on this count. But there are none which comes to my 

mind. I think if Saskatchewan leads the way in this regard this it could be of substantial benefit and 

would be the first such move in Canada. I think it is very necessary when I take a look at many parts of 

Saskatchewan where disfigurement of the countryside has taken place and could have been avoided if 

the public and various interested groups had had an opportunity to sit down and discuss and make their 

views known to the various Government agencies or the Government itself. 

 

I realize that there is a substantial number of people within the confines of Government who would say 

that this would reduce the decision-making process. I look at it from a much different point of view, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that what it would do is require governmental agencies and people who work for such 

organizations as PFRA, Conservation and Development Authority and others, that it would require that 

they be much more careful in their plans and in their decision-making process. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1254 

These conservation groups are anxious to participate before projects are undertaken. They are anxious to 

put forward their case, they are anxious to have an opportunity to discuss with the agency and the 

Government what is actually going to take place. 

 

I should like to express my point of view that it should not in any way influence a person’s own private 

property. I would not anticipate such a public hearing to involve a person who is a farmer and is making 

some changes in his landscape on his own particular farm. I don’t think that there should be interference 

in this regard as to what a farmer may do with his own particular land. But I do think that when mining 

projects are started, community pastures are started, when coal mining operations are an example, a pulp 

mill is an example. I do think that in most cases where permits are required from the Government and 

for an industry, or are required for the Government itself through one of its agencies to undertake a 

massive change, that there is a very drastic need for public advertisement of such intention to take place. 

This public advertisement will be statutory law which would require that the project would be well 

advertised, a public hearing be held and that the people who are interested to gain information can serve 

not only as a method by which the individual can gain information, it can serve as a way in which the 

individual can make his input into the final decision which would be arrived at by the Government itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that although this, to my knowledge, has not yet been tried in this country, that it 

is urgent and desirable and I believe it would rate high amongst public priorities which are required to be 

served in our province. It will require, of course, the co-operation of the public itself, the Government 

and industry. I think that rather than being a hindrance it can provide the necessary information for more 

and better answers before most projects are undertaken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned when I began my remarks I did suggest that there would be and likely will 

be the cry from Members opposite that this law should have been passed. Pollution and the environment 

is a relatively new subject in Canada. It has never really received any great amount of public debate 

probably until the last two or three years so I think rather than looking at the point of view that we are 

behind in this regard, I think we have an opportunity to be ahead in this regard, although I realize the 

law would have been to advantage in the past, previous to now. I do suggest for serious consideration 

that such a law would have wide merit and would have substantial public support. 

 

I therefore move this resolution, seconded by the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I thin it is well known that I have a great interest in 

the wildlife of the province and that I made a major speech here sometime ago on it. Certainly the 

environment is very closely related to the preservation of wildlife in the province. The hearings that 

were suggested in this resolution would be essential if we are to preserve the wildlife which is our 

natural heritage. I have some more remarks to make on this subject and I should like to beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1255 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 – BASIC HEARING AID TO BE INCLUDED IN MEDICAL 

INSURANCE PLAN 
 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park) moved, seconded by Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government that action be taken 

immediately to broaden the coverage of the Saskatchewan Medical Insurance Plan to include a 

basic hearing aid, without cost, for the hard of hearing. 

 

He said: 

 

This resolution relates to the provision of free hearing aids for the hard of hearing in Saskatchewan. I 

think this is a very meaningful way in which the Government can demonstrate its good faith in terms of 

health services for Saskatchewan people. I think this is one way in which the Government could give an 

indication that it in reality believes in providing a wide range of health services for Saskatchewan 

people. It is a program which in present day terms, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, would not be 

regarded as an exceptionally expensive program but one that I know would be valuable to many of the 

senior citizens whom I am in contact with on a day to day basis. 

 

People with hearing defects are shut off, Mr. Speaker, from the world. In the young people it leads to 

many other problems, speech defects, education problems, personality and social problems and job 

problems. In the elderly people with advancing age they are increasingly shut off from the world, a 

separate and distinct problem of their own. We must not delay. With them the pity is that in the eventide 

of life they need the services not tomorrow but today. 

 

It therefore, Mr. Speaker, gives me great pleasure to move the resolution which I believe will be 

supported by all Members of the House particularly those who recognize the words that I have used 

because I believe if they were to check Hansard they would find that I have used identical words of 

Members opposite in previous debates. I am, therefore, pleased to move this resolution. 

 

Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful that the Hon. Member 

has brought to the attention of the House the question of the problems of the hard of hearing. As the 

Member said in his opening remarks, the actual wording of his motion was almost identical with the 

wording that we, on this side of the House, used in a motion in 1970. That we, the NDP, moved the 

motion and then debate continuing it was moved by the Hon. Mr. Grant, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

Heald in an amendment thereto: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

This Assembly requests the Government of Saskatchewan when considering extension of 

services under The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act and having regard to other 

priorities, to consider also the inclusion of hearing aids as an insured service. However, this 

Assembly recommends that prior to such consideration 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1256 

being given the Government give careful study to the report of the Department of Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs Sub-committee on hearing aids. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sanctimonious twaddle. What the Members opposite proceed to do was to amend any 

urgency out of the resolution and to imply this was not a priority matter. And, of course, the Members 

opposite proceeded to do nothing in the remaining months of their office. In fact, there are relatively 

minor expenditures that I understand were requested by members of the Health Department to test a 

couple of hearing aids to which they had got access. This was considered of such negligible importance 

that the requisite $150 to conduct the tests was not allocated. And thus we arrive in March of 1972 and 

that we have quoted back to us in a very elegant game the precise words that we in the New Democratic 

Party used two years ago on this very issue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate that we consider what in fact has the Government 

done to date on the issue. We have before us the complete blank of what the opposite Members have 

done. What we have done – we have already begun to estimate the need and I agree with the Hon. 

Member that there is an acute need. We have estimates of up to 33.8 per 1,000 having some degree of 

hearing loss. That would amount to in the order of 25,000 to 30,000 people in the province. There are 

approximately 2,000 hearing aids sold annually in the province but a great many more would be sold 

were the cost lower. We have begun negotiations with interested parties towards the achievement of the 

program and now we are preparing and we hope to introduce within this year a program to implement 

the promise that we made last June to the electors of Saskatchewan to provide hearing aids at greatly 

reduced costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Richards: — We have already received 12 hearing aids which have been tested, three of which 

were found to be inferior, none of which are of acceptable quality. The average cost per hearing aid, Mr. 

Speaker, on our receipt for bulk tendering is $35 which compares to prices well over $300 which people 

are very often paying at the retail level for hearing aids. These hearing aids are good quality hearing aids 

according to reports from the National Research Council. I quote, 

 

We have tested around 200 models of hearing aids. The models that you 

 

That is the Saskatchewan Government, 

 

sent for testing compare quite favorably with the average aid. 

 

They include pocket or on the body, over and behind the ear, in the ear and eye glass hearing aids, so 

there will be no criticism from the Members opposite to the effect that we are having nothing but big 

boxes to shove in your shirt and that we are not prepared to consider the cosmetic aspect. We have done 

our homework, Mr. Speaker. We have got those quotations and are prepared ultimately even if the 

consumer had to pay all administration costs and all service costs we could sell hearing aids with the 

province, according to the feasibility 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1257 

study we have done, for less than $100. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I think that this is one more area where we as Members of the New 

Democratic Party in power are prepared to use the Government as a public entrepreneur on behalf of the 

problems of the ordinary people of Saskatchewan. That we are prepared not to use the power of the 

Government to subsidize huge corporate investments, not to wield the heavy axe over people, but we are 

prepared to use the power of the Government on behalf of the people, to challenge powers which set 

ridiculous prices that allow for exorbitant profits on hearing appliances. 

 

I think it does well become the Members opposite now that they are in Opposition to assume this 

sanctimonious position with respect to hearing aids, that to assume this position on a basis when they 

had seven years in office in which to do something to reduce the cost of hearing aids and now it gets 

thrown back in a nice little question of having dug up our former words. We have made our 

commitments, we will live up to our commitments and to that effect I should like to move the following 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(a) regrets that the previous Government did not develop a program or initiate any action which 
would reduce the price of hearing aids to the consumer even though they were aware that a 

large number of hard of hearing citizens were being denied the right to achieve improved 

hearing because they were unable to pay the exorbitant price for a hearing aid while others 

were purchasing hearing aids at great personal sacrifice and 

 

(b) commends the Government of Saskatchewan for establishing a special committee to inquire 
into this situation and recommends to the Government a program which will allow hard of 

hearing citizens to obtain quality hearing aid appliances at greatly reduced cost. 

 

I move this seconded by the Hon. Mr. Gross, the Member for Gravelbourg. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): It gives me a great deal of pleasure to get up and say a few 

words in support of the amendment and in support of the action taken by the Government to date. This is 

supplementary to the comments made by my colleague from Saskatoon University, Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) whom I know is doing an excellent job in that 

capacity of assisting the Minister. 

 

I also want to say to the Members of the House that I recall when I was a Member of the Opposition that 

this is a resolution that on at least several occasions was introduced by my colleague, the now Minister 

of Welfare (Mr. Snyder) when he was in Opposition and at times, as well, by my colleague the Minister 

of Health. Year after year the motion that we presented, that one that is the subject of the main motion 

now by the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod), was debated by the Members of the New 

Democratic Party who were in Opposition. There may have been one or two words spoken by 

Government Members at the time. I stand 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1258 

to be corrected by the Debates and Proceedings but if there were any in my recollection, Mr. Speaker, 

they were precious few. Apart from the lack of words spoken in support of the resolution, what is of 

more concern to me was that for seven years the former Government saw fit to do absolutely nothing 

about the subject matter which is now before you on the main motion. 

 

What rather the former Government sought to do was to make amendments. May I just draw your 

attention, Mr. Speaker, to the amendment which was introduced in the last Debates and Proceedings of 

1970 requesting the Government of Saskatchewan to take into consideration what the Department of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs had to say about hearing aids. The debate continued, the amendment 

was passed, the main motion was negatived and that’s where it sat in 1970. So what the Liberal Party 

has done, being devoid of ideas itself in 1971 and 1972, is to go back to the Journals. I think they have 

done this primarily with most of the questions they have asked as well, Mr. Speaker, and most of the 

other motions that are before this House. They have gone back to the old Journals to see what the NDP 

Opposition did. They ferret out the wording of the motion at that time and put it back before the House. 

They honestly expect Members of this Assembly and the public to ask of a new Government eight 

months after assuming office that it implement the substance of the resolution. I think very often today 

we hear about credibility and honesty in politicians, very often we hear statements about how important 

it is for politicians to act and to speak with consistency and not to misrepresent. Very often we hear 

Members lecturing other Members on what conduct and what statements should be made. Unfortunately 

every time that I have been in the House the lecture comes from the Members of the Liberal Party. They 

lecture and talk in one way but as this resolution shows, they act in a totally different way when it comes 

to the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say the motion from the Members for Albert Park is sheer and pure hypocrisy of 

the lowest kind. It is hypocritical, it is unfair because it plays games, political games, with those who 

have, in fact, been victimized on what the substance matter of the motion seeks to resolve. The Member 

from Albert Park, in my estimation, is very prone, and I think that is regrettable as a new Member, very 

prone to get up and introduce simply by way of reversal, motions of this nature or speeches to ask by 

way of reversal motions, the new Government of the day within eight months of implement measures. I 

think this is regrettable because as a new Member he has a positive contribution to make. I am going to 

lecture for a few minutes, if I may. He has a positive contribution to make on issues, on the policies of 

the Liberal Party. Not merely on turning the tables so that one cheap, political trick can be taken or a 

cheap political headline can be grabbed. And I commend to the Hon. Member from Albert Park and to 

the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) who was on Treasury Bench at that time, and to every Member 

on the opposite side, the thought that the people of Saskatchewan will only have confidence in you when 

you begin to realize and to show to them that you have a thought-out position and that you are going to 

carry through on what you say you are going to do. Not until such time, Mr. Speaker, will they do it. I 

want to say that I am very, very happy indeed that the Member from Saskatoon 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1259 

University (Mr. Richards) has explained to this House, to the Members of this House exactly what the 

facts are by introducing this amendment, that he explained to the people of Saskatchewan that it was the 

former Government that apparently did nothing or little with regard to examining the situation. I want to 

say that the Government and the Minister of Health should be indeed commended for getting this project 

on the way so quickly because I am sure that, in fact, very soon we will remedy the iniquity that all of us 

on this side of the House now profess we oppose. I am certainly going to support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I rise too to participate in this debate. 

When one looks at the resolution one cannot really oppose the resolution as such. But also when one 

listens to the Member from University (Mr. Richards) and finds that a similar motion was passed almost 

two years ago, one regrets the fact that action was not taken at that time. Again, I think it is evident that 

this Government intends to carry out the promises it made in June of 1971. We have been in office for 

only eight or nine months and already we have done much, much more than the Liberals did in seven 

years. Mr. Speaker, I have many more things that I would like to say about this particular topic and I beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 – MATERNITY LEAVE IN LABOUR STANDARDS ACT 
 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park) moved, second by Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): 

 

That this Assembly congratulates the Federal Government for including provision in the Canada 

Labour (Standards) Code for maternity leave for employed women and their reinstatement at the 

expiration of such leave, and requests that the Government of Saskatchewan bring similar 

legislation to this Assembly at the earliest opportunity. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this resolution calls for an amendment to Saskatchewan’s Labour Standards Act to provide 

for maternity leave along the lines provided by Federal legislation. I might remind the Members across 

the way that it is a Liberal Government in Ottawa that has provided this type of legislation and I make 

no apologies for the fact that if an idea is good I am quite prepared to recommend it to this House. 

 

The Canada Labour Standards Act provides for maternity leave up to eleven weeks or a period of six 

weeks following confinement and reinstatement in the position occupied at the time such leave 

commenced or in a comparable position with not less than the same wages and benefits. Women would 

qualify for this type of leave after they have been employed with a particular employer for one year or 

more. They would be obliged to submit a medical certificate when they make application to leave. 

 

Now I’m not asking for identical legislation. What I am asking for is similar legislation and I will be 

quite prepared 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1260 

to support any reasonable variation. I am sure that women in Saskatchewan’s labor force will be 

delighted to receive this kind of relief and assurance and safety protecting them for a return to their 

employment when they become pregnant during the time they are employed. I hope prompt action will 

be taken on this resolution and I do call on all Members regardless of party affiliation to support the 

resolution. In addition I plan to bring this before the fall convention of our Party and I have no doubt 

that our Party will consider this and other labor matters to establish a Liberal labor code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move this resolution. 

 

Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to participate in this debate on 

Resolution No. 8, I should like to say first of all what a very pleasant surprise it is to find that the Hon. 

Member from Regina Albert Park has seen fit to join the Government in voicing concern for our female 

members of the labor force. I think one is inclined to feel some sympathy for the Member over his 

apparent inability to convince some of his colleagues while they were in office to take some kind of 

concrete action to promote the best interest of working women through the introduction of legislation 

which he is now proposing in this House. It seems legitimate, Mr. Speaker, to ask why statutory 

provisions for maternity leave were not enacted during the period 1964 to 1971. I can assure the mover 

of the resolution, Mr. Speaker, that he is not likely to find an argument on this side of the House against 

the need for maternity leave protection. 

 

In all fairness, it would be pointed out, however, that we were handed the reins of Government only 

eight months ago as was mentioned in the previous debate and it is physically impossible to achieve 

more than so much in such a short span of time, particularly in view of the multiplicity of urgent matters 

which have been competing for attention over that eight months. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it is 

rather refreshing to receive the kind of suggestions contained in this resolution in as much as speaker 

after speaker across the way has been complaining for days that in terms of the labor policy of this 

Government that the Government has indeed been moving ahead quickly. Moreover, when it comes to 

programs dealing with the working women, the Government has no intention of adopting a hastily 

conceived, stop-gap measure which will come to grips with only part of a much broader issue. It will be 

widely recognized, Mr. Speaker, that the basis of this resolution is a valid one. However, the growing 

contribution of female wage earners to the advancement of the economy is of such significance that the 

Government believes that any legislative action should be proceeded by comprehensive investigation 

directed towards the obtaining of an overview of the difficulties confronting the employed women. 

 

As I mentioned in this Assembly a short while ago the New Democratic Government took steps to 

establish a Women’s Bureau in the Department of Labour in early 1964. The activities of the Bureau 

were directed towards the evaluation of legislation and working conditions of special importance to 

women in the labor force. Not only was the Bureau not given the resources to properly carry out this 

function by a previous Liberal Government but it was not permitted to become involved in any 

consideration of new policy relative to the particular interests 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1261 

of employed women. As indicated previously, Mr. Speaker, this situation is changing. The Women’s 

Bureau will play an important part in the study referred to. An assessment of the needs of female 

employees with family responsibilities will be made by the Bureau with specific reference to the 

question of maternity leave. 

 

Some attention should be focused at this point, I believe, Mr. Speaker, on the question of priorities. The 

Government felt that the most immediate action should be taken to prohibit, in law, discrimination on 

the basis of sex. Accordingly, a Bill is currently before the Legislature to protect the rights of women to 

obtain employment and to be subject to fair employment practices. It would appear to be logical to 

expect that the opportunity for a women to secure a job is a prerequisite to her arranging for leave from 

that job for the purposes of maternity. Coinciding with the introduction of the amendment to The Fair 

Employment Practices Act are the proposed changes to the Bill of Rights in The Fair Accommodation 

Practices Act in order to deal with a broader spectrum of obstacles often faced by women in the work 

place and elsewhere. The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission is also proposed, Mr. Speaker, to 

actively advance and to promote the principle of human dignity and freedom. An on-going system of 

consultation will be arranged between the Women’s Bureau of the Department of Labour and the 

Commission in order to co-ordinate the efforts of the two agencies in coping with the problems of 

working women. 

 

In addition to maternity leave which will certainly be on the agenda for discussion there will also be 

additional questions of genuine anxiety to women and women’s organizations such as discrimination on 

the basis of marital status and age, the opportunity for women to obtain career promotions on an 

equitable basis, the establishment of effective and practical machinery to facilitate the enforcement of 

the principle of equal pay for equal work, the question of child care facilities for working mothers and a 

host of other questions. 

 

Through contacts with employees and potential employees affected and their representative 

organizations, the Government will be in a position to develop an appropriate overall strategy applicable 

to working women. In the meantime it seems fair to say that the Human Rights legislation being 

introduced, inasmuch as it overlaps the concerns expressed in the legislation, represents the first step 

along the path to statutory maternity leave. 

 

It might be useful, Mr. Speaker, very briefly to indicate the rationale for the solicitude of this 

Government about those among the fair sex who have entered into the world of work. There has been a 

dramatic increase in the number of female workers in the labor force and their role in economic and 

social development is becoming significantly greater. 

 

IN 1951 there were just over 50,000 working women representing 17 per cent of the total labor force in 

Saskatchewan. By 1961 the number had increased to 77,000 or 23.7 per cent of the labor force. In the 

last ten years the number of working women has increased by 37 per cent to 106,000 and now accounts 

for 29 per cent of the work force in the province. 

 

Another important phenomenon in this regard relates to the 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1262 

marital status of female employees. Twenty years ago out of every 100 women working, 32 were 

married; today 58 out of every 100 employed women are married. It should be pointed out that a high 

percentage of women in the productive age group are working and are accordingly potential and eligible 

for maternity leave. 

 

There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the part played by women in our society is changing very rapidly. 

In the past most married women who worked withdrew from the labor force as soon as they acquired 

family responsibilities. The nature of today’s society is such that growing numbers of women continue 

to work in this kind of setting, a reflection of a multitude of social and economic factors including the 

emergence of new attitudes towards working mothers, the demands for skills of women, the need to 

ensure a relatively high level of family income which may require both parents to bring home a pay 

cheque and the results of advancing technology freeing housewives from many of the household tasks 

that formerly occupied them on a full time basis. 

 

In recognition of the trends towards greater employment of women with family responsibilities, a 

number of international organizational instruments on maternity protection have been passed. These 

instruments, including a formal convention, cover all aspects of the consequences of pregnancy with 

regard to working women. 

 

It is also apparent that the granting of maternity leave is becoming more prevalent in actual employment 

situations. This fact has been revealed by a number of surveys made by the Canada and Saskatchewan 

Departments of Labour. The most recent information published on this topic is based on a study of 

major collective bargaining agreements in the manufacturing industry in Canada. 

 

The study indicates that one-third of the agreements covered provide for maternity leave with a time 

limitation before and after the date of birth. In one-quarter of the agreements, seniority is retained where 

leave is granted. It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, an acknowledgement of current trends of its 

obligation to lead the way, the largest employer in the province, the Government of Saskatchewan, 

agreed last fall to provide female civil servants for the first time with specifically identified maternity 

leave. 

 

The leave covers a total of 17 weeks, 11 weeks before and 6 weeks after confinement date where an 

employee has completed 12 consecutive months of employment in the public service. The employee is 

protected against dismissal or layoffs on pregnancy grounds and is guaranteed reinstatement to her 

former position without loss of certain specified benefits. 

 

This provision is a clear indication, Mr. Speaker, of the Government’s recognition of the principle 

enunciated in the ILO convention and in the recommendations of the report of the Royal Commission on 

the Status of Women in Canada. 

 

May I reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that the Government is fully cognizant of the motivation of the mover of 

the Resolution in advocating legislative action to establish maternity leave. There is no doubt that this 

matter is one which deserves the close attention of provincial policy makers and indeed policy 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1263 

makers across the country. As spelled out in the first part of the resolution, the Canada Labour Code 

now makes provision for maternity leave. 

 

We will be carefully studying the code and other procedures in this connection with a view to the 

introduction of suitable measures in the Saskatchewan context. If something is worth doing, Mr. 

Speaker, it is worth doing properly and we shall accordingly be looking at all of the implications of 

programs which are intended to be of benefit to working women and the way in which maternity leave 

will best fit in to the relevant statutory framework. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the principle of the motion. I would propose to amend it 

to place the question of women’s right in the employment sphere in a better and more global 

perspective. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Weyburn 

(Mr. Pepper) that Resolution No. 8 be amended thereto, 

 

That all the words after the word “leave” in the fourth line be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

and commends the Government of Saskatchewan for including maternity leave in the current 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Association agreement and further commends the 

Department of Labour for initiating an investigation designed to examine all facets of the 

particular concerns of female members of the labor force, including such questions as: 

 

(a) maternity leave; 

 

(b) discrimination in employment on the basis of sex, marital status and age; 
 

(c) access of women to promotional opportunities; 
 

(d) methods of enforcing equal remuneration for equal work; 
 

(e) child care facilities for working mothers; 
 

the completion of which will facilitate the development and implementation of a well-integrated 

legislative program applicable to working women. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The debate continued on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, we are constantly hearing about things that ought to have occurred 

between 1964 and 1971. Of course, those magic dates arise because 1964 was the year in which 

Saskatchewan was blessed with a Liberal Government. 

 

The Hon. Member did not tell us why he, with a government that professed labor and people as a top 

priority, did not do this between 1944 and 1964. These people are always saying that they have always 

given this type of thing top priority but it is a good thing for them that there were seven years of Liberal 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1264 

rule because they would have had no excuse for not bringing this in if it hadn’t occurred. 

 

I remind the Hon. Member and I am sure that he does remember that it was our side of the House and 

not his that brought the age factor into the various statutes that he referred to. Age was not one of the 

matters of discrimination that were protected by the legislation as submitted by the Government. 

 

Age was one of our concerns. With a Government that is so concerned about people and their problems, 

age is a serious concern and that was one of the problems that we absolutely insisted should go into 

legislation. 

 

I also want to draw to the attention of the Members of the House that this resolution appeared in August 

of last year, that was a session of the House that was unnecessary but if it was to be a session held for 

the purposes of Government congratulations it should have done a few things. And one of the things that 

we put on the Order Paper was this resolution that relates to the allowance of maternity leave to women 

who have been employed at least one year. It wasn’t until some time after the resolution was put on the 

Order Paper that the Government was moved to take steps, as an employer itself, to allow women 

employed by the Provincial Government to have maternity leave. 

 

They were prompted to do so because they knew that they would see a repeat of this resolution in this 

session and they wanted to be able to stand up and tell everybody that they themselves had instituted 

such a policy. But I do regret that the amendment seems to imply that they will not put this kind of 

legislation on the books for other employers. 

 

The amendment implies that they are going to talk about it, they are going to study it and they are going 

to think about it, but the one thing they are going to do is put this legislation on the books. 

 

If they put it on the books it is clearly by implication not coming at this Session. We have now had two 

sessions of this Legislature both of which were presented with this kind of resolution. It is not a difficult 

piece of legislation and it is a far more necessary piece of legislation for people employed around the 

Province of Saskatchewan than some of the ‘fluff’ legislation that we have had in this Session. I said 

‘fluff’ but I could have meant ‘flub’ legislation. 

 

It is quite obvious that they are not intending to adopt ‘hasty’ legislation in this regard. I very much 

regret that they have implied that they are going to defer this to some future date. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1265 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 – HISTORIC OBLIGATION OF RAILWAY COMPANIES 
 

Mr. M. Feschuk (Prince Albert East) moved, seconded by Mr. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to remember the historic obligation of the 

Railway Companies to transport agricultural products to markets, and recognize the importance 

of exports, particularly agricultural exports, in providing national income and employment and 

earning foreign exchange, now given direction, assistance and instruction in all aspects of 

grain-handling and transportation with initial and particular attention to the utilization and 

re-organization of railroad facilities and grain-handling and loading facilities. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, in saying a few words to this resolution may I first say that I intend to be very brief. 

 

I believe that when this country was first developed and that when the government of the day had the 

foresight that a railroad was necessary in Canada, the government of the day went to the bargaining 

tables. I believe the government of the day bargained in good faith. I believe that they took into 

consideration the economy of our country and were acting in the best interests of its people. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we should remember some of the terms of reference that were 

acknowledged and some of the concessions that were made. I believe that we ought to remember where 

the responsibilities lie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the people of this nation elect a Government of Canada and when matters of 

inter-provincial interest are involved, I submit that the Government of Canada must sort out the 

priorities. With this in mind, Mr. Speaker, let me say that the Government of Canada in the late 19th 

Century gave the railway company great powers and more than generous concessions. The Government 

said that the company may for the purposes of the undertaking enter into and onto Crown lands without 

previous licence thereto, and upon the lands of any person whomsoever, lying in the intended route or 

line of the railway and make surveys, examinations and other necessary arrangements of such lands for 

fixing the right of way of the railway and set out and ascertained such parts of the lands that are 

necessary and proper for the railway. 

 

The Government of Canada also said that the railway company could receive, take and hold all 

voluntary grants and donations of lands and other property or any bonus of money or debentures or other 

benefit of any sort, may do it for the purpose of aiding in construction, maintenance and accommodation 

of the railway. The Government of Canada also said that the railway could purchase, take and hold, 

often from any person, any lands and other property necessary for the construction, maintenance and 

operation of the railway and also, alienate, sell and dispose of, all goods and lands and property of the 

company which for any reason have become not necessary for the purpose of the railway. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Canada of that day gave the railways even more powers 

when they gave the railway the right to cross any railway or join the railway with 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1266 

the necessary conveniences for the purpose of such connections. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you and to this House that there is no excuse why the Federal 

Government of Canada today can not give the necessary direction and instruction to the railway 

companies to reorganize their facilities and move western grain to the Vancouver port. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no excuse such as too much snow or rock slides or no railway tracks as my friend 

the Hon. Member from Lumsden (Mr. Lane) said a few days ago. When we consider that was said 60 

years ago by Sir Wilfrid Laurier, speaking at Niagara Falls on September 18, 1907 and I quote, 

 

We have undertaken the construction of another railway, the Hudson Bay railway. At the present 

time all of the wheat, as soon as it is tracked is sent out to Lake Superior. We want to provide 

another railway by Hudson Bay. There will then be the present route and the Hudson Bay route 

and a man who raises his wheat and cattle will have two outlets for his production. 

 

The trade of Canada is too great even for these two outlets. The Government will build the 

railway or rather someone will be trusted to building it for the Government, but whatever we do, 

all the terminals and all the elevators shall be built by the Government and redeemed under all 

and every circumstance by the Government so as to ensure the largest measure of benefit 

possible to the Canadian people of the northwest provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you and I submit to this House and I submit to the people of Canada that it is 

not the amount of snow in the mountains, it is not the out-dated railway system, it is not the shortage of 

space in the terminals, I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that we have an out-dated Liberal Government in 

Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feschuk: — Mr. Speaker, as far back as 1919 the Liberal Prime Minister, Mackenzie King 

promised the terminal grain storage facilities at Prince Rupert, British Columbia would be built to 

facilitate efficient grain traffic flows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is going back to the days of Sir Wilfrid Laurier in 1908 when he recognized that 

railways, terminals and elevators should be owned by the Government of Canada to ensure the largest 

measure of benefit possible to the Canadian people, when the Government of that day recognized that 

two outlets were not enough for this country, that was over 60 years ago when the Government in 1908 

recognized that the trade of Canada was too great and too important to lose. I submit to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Federal Liberal Government is over 60 years behind the times. And that Federal 

Liberal Government has failed the people of Canada and particularly those in Western Canada. 

 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that since the last few days it was possible to divert some 18 trains to the 

Pacific Great Eastern lines and surely it is possible to reorganize the railroad facilities for grain-handling 

and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1267 

(Mr. Hanson) Resolution No. 14. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, the historic obligation of the railroads in 

Canada to move agricultural produce has not been upheld. The deterioration that has occurred in the last 

10 years in the handling of grain is a deliberate attempt, Mr. Speaker, on the part of the railways and the 

Federal Government to shut down our branch lines and move us toward the establishment of interior 

terminals and unit trains and finally to adjust the Crow’s Nest rates upwards. I’d like to quote a couple 

of statements from a news release by the Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association dated March 11th. It says, 

 

The Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association’s First Vice President, Art Thompson of Pense says he 

is ‘damn good and mad’ at the way Canada’s grain-handling system is being managed. Mr. 

Thompson returned today from attending the 13th National Farm and Business Forum of the 

Winnipeg Chamber of Commerce. ‘Government and grain officials are now admitting publicly 

what we have been saying for two years. Charlie Gibbings, a Wheat Pool Commissioner, told us 

yesterday that Canada has been passing up wheat sales opportunities for two and a half years 

because the Port of Vancouver couldn’t take any more grain. When we said that same thing last 

year, we were branded as instant experts and virtually told to mind our own business.’ Mr. 

Thompson also said that Mr. Gibbings’ announcement probably came as a result of the Hon. 

Otto Lang telling the House of Commons last week that grain sales through the Wet Coast had 

been curtailed because they had reached their capacity to handle it. 

 

I find today’s statement of the diversion of two trains of grain a welcome reality, emphasizing the 

importance of a Provincial Government with guts to declare an emergency debate on this matter to get 

public and senior government attention to our proposal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — I must congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your ruling permitting debate which woke 

somebody up down East. It is a fact that in the last couple of weeks the railroad diverted 18 trains to the 

Pacific Great Eastern or British Columbia Railway as it is now known. But only two of these trains 

carried grain, both barley, at a time when the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool terminal was out of wheat. I 

wonder if the experts on research sitting opposite know just how many cars the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool unloaded last Wednesday, for example. Was it 300, 200 . . . ? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — 100? 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Not 100, not even 50. 14 cars were unloaded by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool last 

Wednesday. I would suggest that this terrific record of performance, when Vancouver need to unload 

800 cars per day just to meet our sales, is a real example 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1268 

of just what the people in charge of the grain situation are doing. Under good conditions, Mr. Speaker, 

the facilities at Vancouver can only handle about 600 cars per day. The total number of cars being 

handled at the West Coast is about 700 cars per day. Thunder Bay will also need about 1,700 boxcars a 

day from April 15 on to meet their requirements when the shipping season starts. It is an impossible 

situation, Mr. Speaker, under the present administration. The credibility of the Liberals was once again 

proven to be non-existent. 

 

I should like the House to recall the comments by the Hon. Member from Lumsden (Mr. Lane) during 

the emergency debate with regard to the use of Pacific Great Eastern trackage. I seem to recollect the 

Member saying ‘no track’ continuously after we brought up the proposal and he also stated, ‘I’ve been 

in touch with officials and they need 30 or 40 miles of track’ and he suggested that this was just another 

dream scheme by the NDP. Yet this diversion worked as do most of our NDP proposals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Accepting the superboy’s from Lumsden IQ to be real high, I have prepared a map 

with colored routes using the three most easily distinguished colors, Mr. Speaker, marking the different 

routes so that he may understand the complex situation in the diversion we requested to use. Could I 

have a Page to deliver the map to the Hon. Member? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — He left the House. 

 

Mr. Hanson: — I think perhaps we can deliver it to the agriculture critic then, the Member from 

Cannington (Mr. Weatherald). 

 

The Canadian National line from Edmonton is marked in green and goes either to Vancouver or Prince 

Rupert, the ‘Y’ or switch off being made at Red Pass Junction. The Canadian Pacific line from Calgary 

which is marked in blue goes through Rogers Pass which is a very bad slide area, then west to 

Kamloops, Ashcroft, Lytton and on to Vancouver. The Pacific Great Eastern or British Columbia 

Railroad, as it is now known, is marked in red and travels northeast from Vancouver intercepting with 

the Canadian National at Prince George. Let’s just take a quick look at the Canadian National. By 

simply continuing westward at Red Pass Junction as though their destination was Prince Rupert, they 

can switch on to the British Columbia Railroad at Prince George and then head south to Vancouver. The 

Canadian Pacific, to use this diversion, would probably use the Canadian National tracks from 

Edmonton westward. If you will notice, the British Columbia Railroad and the Canadian National and 

Canadian Pacific are within 30 miles of each other near Lytton and Ashcroft and I would presume this is 

the stretch of track that the Hon. Member was mentioning that we were requesting be built. 

 

We in this Government are demanding that a connecting track be built from either Ashcroft to Clinton 

which would be 30 miles. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1269 

Mr. Hanson: — Or from Lytton to Lilloet, remember, the diversion we suggested has already worked. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Both routes, Mr. Speaker, are not that impractical to build as highways connect these 

centres through two valleys or depressions and the grades are not that severe. 

 

Recognizing that the two slide areas most hampering the grain movement are in the Hope region which 

is the Fraser Canyon region north of Hope, anyone can see that with these diversions we could have a 

workable route 98 per cent of the time without the added 150 miles involved in the Prince George 

diversion. 

 

You may say, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of 35 miles of track through the Rockies isn’t justified or that 

the added 150 miles of hauling via Prince George is costing the farmers too much. Probably an 

additional three cents per bushel or $1 a ton for the use of trackage in extra miles hauled would be 

involved. We farmers in these prairie provinces has been paying an average demurrage charge of $3,000 

per day per ship for ships waiting for grain to arrive in Vancouver. Some days in January and February 

when there were 20 to 27 ships collecting demurrage charges, we were dishing out $50,000 to $70,000 

per day. 

 

The British Columbia Railroad can handle about 400 cars per day making possible at least 800,000 

bushels arriving daily when other routes are blocked by slides. This is enough to load one very good 

sized ship. Remember, if we are to meet our sales commitments, Vancouver must unload an average 800 

cars per day and Thunder Bay 1,700 cars per day after April 15th. They said it couldn’t be done, this 

hare-brained diversion onto the British Columbia Railroad. We said it could. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Now it is a reality. But will they continue to use it or build the additional track needed 

for sensible connection? Knowing the mood of the railroad officials and the Federal Government, I very 

much doubt it. 

 

I welcomed last week’s announcement of the harbour improvements budgeted for Prince Rupert. They 

are contemplating on spending some $5 million, Mr. Speaker, to upgrade the grain-handling facilities 

there. But will the money be spent, I ask the Hon. Members? I doubt it. Remember my statements about 

the Liberal Party being experts in the ‘say lots, mean little, do nothing philosophy’. I want to bring to 

your attention the fact that Prime Minister Mackenzie King promised such a project in 1919. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, that was just yesterday! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — I’m sure glad it is an election year. I might have believed the announcement. Prince 

Rupert has handled as high as 17 million bushels in the 1965-66 season but has averaged only 10 million 

bushels per year over the last ten years. Do the Hon. Members opposite know why ships don’t like going 

there? 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1270 

They take on their cargo but can’t even fuel up for the trip home. They have to go to Vancouver for fuel 

and I suggest that real senior government concern over the use of this ort is not thee when they won’t 

even provide a fuel station to service ocean-going freighters. 

 

I should like the Members opposite to listen to a few facts about the Prince Rupert facilities. One ship 

refuelled this year out there and how did it do it? By a tank truck floating on a barge. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A typical Liberal approach! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — The Port of Prince Rupert can unload 60 cars a day when there are cars available. Only 

one switch engine is there in the CN yards. Sometimes the elevators have to wait hours for just a simple 

shunt of cars. The elevator at Prince Rupert can unload 100 cars per day six days a week and clean the 

grain. We don’t need the inland terminals for cleaning if they can just get the grain. Mr. Speaker, with 

100 cars unloading per day and two shifts, we could handle 1.2 million bushels per week at the Port of 

Prince Rupert. The shipments averaging out to 10 million bushels per year at Prince Rupert that I quoted 

works out to an average full time weekly load of two shifts working six days per nine weeks out of the 

year. That’s the record of performance for the Port of Prince Rupert. Working to full capacity, they work 

only nine weeks. 

 

As I said at the start, I believe the ultimate aim of the railroads is to negotiate the Crow’s Nest rates but 

they want us to give in some minor things. Minor things, I say, like branch lines before they really hit us 

hard. I say let’s negotiate now before the economy is wrecked by their blackmail attempt to reach their 

final goal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — We need, Mr. Speaker, someone solely in charge of the movement of grain and of the 

Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Mr. Speaker, we need a Minister with guts to tell the railroad what is bet for Canada’s 

farmers, what is best for Canada’s people and not just what is best for Canada’s railroads. We need 

someone with guts to research every alternative possible when the bottlenecks occur – that’s not Otto. 

And more important, we need someone who will research every alternative before they occur – the 

bottlenecks. This we do not have and no matter how loud the Members opposite sing praises to Otto 

Lang, the farmers know they have already lost grain sales this year through a failure to tackle the 

problems in shipping. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would give a word of suggestion to the Members sitting opposite – wake up, 

boys, you can’t keep everybody in the dark just because you can’t see. Buy yourselves a candle, open 

your eyes, open your ears, and most important of all, open your minds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1271 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to participate in this debate, but 

after listening to the Member, the rookie Member for Qu’Appelle, there is only one suggestion I have. 

Fire your speech writer, for goodness sake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the past three weeks we have witnessed one of the greatest grandstand performances 

that makes less sense on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan than any resolution that has ever been 

put before this House. And I want to explain, Mr. Speaker. First of all we sent the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) and the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) to Vancouver to inspect the 

grain-handling facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, we sent them at the taxpayers’ expense, and do you 

know what they came back and said? That the top priority of that particular Party and the top priority of 

that Government in the grain-handling problem and situation in Western Canada was to build a new 

railway or a connecting link of railway in case every five years we had a snow slide. This is the height 

and sense of that recommendation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the grain-handling problem. Mr. Speaker, imagine, sure this year we have a 

snow slide problem in the Fraser Valley, no question about it. But if they consider that that is the 

solution and the top priority of the Western Canadian farmer in order to solve the grain-handling and the 

delivery system in Western Canada, then there is something wrong with their agricultural knowledge. 

Let’s have a look at the delivery system problem. First of all there are many problems. 

 

You listen, Mr. Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer), because you need a little advice too. First 

of all, we have got an antiquated delivery system in Saskatchewan. We’ve got elevators, Mr. Speaker, 

that were put up in the horse and buggy age. They should be modernized, they should be centralized, 

they should be relocated, naturally. Number two, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got inadequate rail facilities. First 

of all, in relation to hopper cars, in relation to good delivery systems in order to get the grain out on a 

unit basis or whatever is required. Number three, we’ve got track problems relating to the Canadian 

winter which would occur periodically, Mr. Speaker. This is the first time it’s been of any serious 

proportion as long as I have been in this House. The fourth thing, Mr. Speaker, we have inadequate 

cleaning and handling and loading facilities at the West Coast. But most important of all, Mr. Speaker, 

we have inadequate storage facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Pacific rim is fast becoming one of the major ports for the major markets for Canadian 

wheat. If we intend to ever reach a one billion capacity export sales, the one thing we are going to have 

to do is to increase the capacity at the West Coast terminals. This is without question. Mr. Speaker, the 

serious problem is related not to how we get the grain out there but the fact that we don’t have enough 

storage facilities out there and because these are relatively new markets, none of the existing companies 

on the West Coat are willing to invest the capital to build up those storage facilities. Mr. Speaker, these 

problems, of course, have been brought to light in the last two or three weeks with the problem 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1272 

of the snow storms in the Fraser Valley. Now what does the NDP recommend for this, Mr. Speaker? A 

diversion of the rail system to handle a ten day problem once every five years as their priority. Every 

farm organization, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Farmers’ Union, the Canadian 

Federation of Agriculture and every farm organization in Western Canada said there is one priority and 

that is to increase the storage capacity on the West Coast. That’s the number one priority. And if we 

have got any money to spend let’s put it there so that if there is a snow storm in the Fraser Valley, the 

ships can continue to load and we don’t have demurrage payments and there won’t be any hold-up on 

the export sales in Canadian wheat. That’s Mr. Speaker, is the top priority and quit talking nonsense 

about building a new railway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another thing that they must remember. What this House needs, Mr. Speaker, is a 

real sincere resolution that is not politically orientated, that is not there as a gimmick or as a grandstand 

performance of the Minister of Agriculture and the Attorney General. You know, they must have 

somebody to see out in Vancouver, they leave on a Friday night and they come back on a Monday 

morning. They could have picked up the telephone and phoned 10 organizations in Saskatchewan and 

provided the same information they gave in this House. It was a face, it was phoney, it was ridiculous 

and it is exactly the same as this resolution, Mr. Speaker, that is before the House. If they want to do 

something for the Western Canadian farmer and the grain-handling situation on the West Coat, then let’s 

put a resolution from this House asking the Federal Government to immediately increase the storage 

facilities on the West Coast. That’s what is needed. We’ve got a railway that is hauling carloads of 

wheat for $400 a car approximately taking them away from carloads of other commodities that give 

them $800 a car. They are trying to deliver wheat on a crisis basis when five or 10 or 15 or 20 ships 

come into port instead of a systematic hauling to a regular system and a big storage capacity. And if they 

could turn around and deliver carloads of wheat every day of the year and they had storage capacity at 

the West Coast there wouldn’t be the problem that exists today because of the snow storms in the Fraser 

Valley, Mr. Speaker. Never, since I have been in this House has there been a bigger insult to the 

Western Canadian farmer than to say the top priority is to build a diversion of the railway to look after a 

ten day snow storm when the storage capacities and the handling situation and the cleaning facilities and 

everything else are the number one priority and every Western Canadian farmer knows it and every 

Western Canadian farm organization knows it and it’s time the Minister of Agriculture started to quit 

talking nonsense. Mr. Speaker, I have not had time, as I say I wasn’t going to enter this debate, I have an 

amendment to this resolution that I hope every Member in this House will urge the Federal Government 

to give priority where priority is required instead of talking gobble-de-gook and nonsense. Mr. Speaker, 

I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1273 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 41 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 41 showing: 

(a) Whether there has been any change in Government policy since July 1, 1971 respecting 
reforestation of areas in which timber has been cut for use by MacMillan Bloedel at Hudson 

Bay. 

(b) If so, the substance of the changes. 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Stand. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Can I ask the Attorney General whether there have been any returned turned in to this 

House since the House opened? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’m not sure. I think there have been but I am not sure. Well, I think the Member 

from Lumsden (Mr. Lane) in the course of debate brought to my attention the wording of one return that 

was returned back over my name. 

 

Mr. Lane: — That was from last summer. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’m not sure. I could check into it and find out. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Never in the history of this Legislature have we been in session 25 days and 

never got one return. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We are dealing with adjourned debates not on returns. This should be raised on 

question of Orders of the Day and not in the midst of adjourned debates. 

 

RETURN NO. 42 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 42 showing: 

(a) Whether there has been any change in Government policy since July 1, 1971 respecting 
reforestation of areas in which timber has been cut for use by Prince Albert Pulp Company, 

Prince Albert, at Hudson Bay. 

(b) If so, the substance of the changes. 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Stand. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, is the request to stand debatable? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Any item on the Order Paper according to our rules can 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1274 

be left to stand at the request of the Government. The Government can request them to stand even if 

private Members, even a private Member’s motion it must be the request of the Government although 

we haven’t tried to enforce that rule. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the question I’ve raised to your attention, Sir, is whether or not 

the request of the Government to stand is debatable. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I don’t think it is debatable. The question could be put if there was too much 

objection it would be decided immediately by the House but not debated. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I may be wrong, Sir, but it seems to me that when we utter on one side or the other 

that word ‘stand’, it is a motion that the question do stand. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, what would happen . . . 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — As such it should be. If it is agreed to it should be debatable shouldn’t it? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If some Members say No, then I would have put the question. Is it the wish of the 

House that the motion shall stand? 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when do we get a chance to speak on the question of whether or 

not it shall stand and that’s the point I should like to comment on now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The motion is not debatable. It is the same as a motion to adjourn. A motion to adjourn 

is not debatable but the question must be put right away but it is not debatable, it is not a debatable 

question. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I submit to you that the motion to stand is a 

courtesy motion which has been allowed by both sides of the Assembly over a period of time. But I also 

submit, Mr. Speaker, that it not necessarily be allowed when a Member has a motion in his name and he 

asks for it to stand, if another person wishes to speak on that particular motion, he may do so. The 

reason we have not done so in the past was usually because we allowed the courtesy of leaving it on the 

Order Paper in that particular place. But I submit that if you check back over the rules that you will find 

that when a Member asks the motion to stand that another Member has the right to stand up and speak to 

that motion if he wishes. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I should like to read to the House Standing Rule No. 9. It says, 

 

Questions put by Members and motions not taken up when called may, upon the request of the 

Government, be allowed to stand and retain their precedence, otherwise they 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1275 

will disappear from the Order Paper. They may be however, renewed. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on that Point of Order, Sir. That, of course, means the 

precedence of staying on the Order Paper, that is not related, Sir, to the right to speak. Any time a 

motion in this House, Sir, that the individual whose name is on the Order Paper and that person asks it to 

stand, any Member in the House who disagrees with that privilege or that courtesy request can stand up 

and speak on the motion, Sir. The only thing that Rule 9 of the blue book indicates is as to whether or 

not that will remain and carry its precedence on the Order Paper or whether it will have to be 

resubmitted. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Might I very briefly and hopefully add a few words to this Point of Order. I really 

haven’t turned my mind to the technicalities of whether or not a stand is debatable or not. I am prepared 

to abide by your ruling, Sir. I have always viewed a ‘stand’ as, by and large, taken as the Member from 

Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) says, by courtesy. If a Member says ‘stand’, then certainly I don’t recall 

this Session that we have challenged ‘stands’. Bills have been stood by Members of the Opposition. 

Motions have been stood. We’ve stood a couple of them. I should certainly hate to see the House, in 

effect, break an informal understanding, if I may use the word, if a Members asks for ‘stand’ that he is 

usually trying to get more information to the matter. Certainly that’s the case here. I think it would be a 

very bad situation if we have Opposition Members asking to stand some Government Bills and the 

matter being put to a vote. On that basis, we are prepared to take their observation if they are not ready 

to go, same with us, on courtesy and I put it in that light and perhaps maybe Members would reconsider 

the business of debating the stand request. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, this is a private Members’ day. These are questions that we have asked and 

if the motions are all in the Government Members’ names that they have adjourned it, these motions are 

moved by Members on this side of the House and they stand, you might as well do away with the private 

Members’ day because we have no opportunity to get the information, we have no opportunity to go 

down the Order Paper, it’s all in the Government’s hands and this is a farce as far as we are concerned 

when they won’t give us the information. They just get up, ‘stand, stand’ and they rule us out three to 

one. If you don’t make a fair ruling we might as well go home. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order again. I can certainly tell the Hon. Member and 

the Members of this House that the reason why items two to six inclusive have been stood is because we 

are still seeking to obtain the information and the Members of the House will have an opportunity to 

debate these motions. We do not intend to use the ruse that the Member from Rosthern says implies, we 

do not do that. I am asking Members to give us more time. The matter will be back up again at the next 

private Members’ day and I hope that on the next private Members’ day the situation can be resolved 

one way or the other. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1276 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on that and with deference, Sir, I don’t want to turn this into a 

political debate but that is ridiculous. When the Order for Return is passed the Government can take six 

months if they want to get the information. We are not asking them to pass whether or not they will give 

us the information today, we’re asking them whether or not they are going to pass these Orders for 

Returns, Sir. We are not wishing to go against the courtesy of the House in relation to ‘stand’. What we 

want to point out, Sir, is that the Estimates are now before us, the purpose of asking questions in the 

House is to obtain information so that we may use them in the Estimates and all we want to do on this 

particular motion is to point out to the Government that we have been in here now about 23 or 24 sitting 

days and they have yet to return one Order for Return to provide information to the Members of the 

Opposition in order to be prepared for Estimates. We do not demand this information immediately if it is 

not available. When you pass an Order for Return, Sir, some of them are passed the first day, they are 

not yet tabled, we are not asking him to provide the information at the date of approval. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order. I think the position of the Government has been 

misunderstood. With respect to these which, I think Members opposite will agree, have just appeared on 

the Order Paper, I don’t mean very recently but they are not old, they are Motions for Return Nos. 41, 

42, 38, 37, they are not Nos. 1 or 2. As Members will know, a government looks at these motions when 

they are put on the Order Paper to see whether the information can be provided in the form requested 

and if not, it is traditional to move an amendment to put them in a form where it can relatively easily be 

given. This is perfectly standard and I hope that is not open to argument. Admittedly, we should get 

around to analyzing these things quicker than we have in this case, I am prepared to admit this. I am just 

saying that of these particular five, the last four are in the field of Natural Resources and the Minister of 

Natural Resources was in Winnipeg on legitimate Government business last week for a couple of days 

when we might have got this work done. We just haven’t got to it. The Minister was in Crown 

Corporations Committee today when we hoped to get it done. I just spoke to the Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Kramer) on this, and he says that he has had a quick look at them and they look all right. 

We will undertake to get them right in and we’ll accommodate them to get these off the Order Paper one 

way or the other. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — I certainly accept what the Premier has indicated and there is no way in which 

we can request him to speak on a ‘stand’ motion and we had no intention of trying to force the 

Government to provide the information immediately. But we did want to take the opportunity to point 

out that this was the purpose of these questions – for Estimates. The Premier has given us his assurance 

and we’ll accept that until the next private Members’ day. 

 

Mr. Guy: — On the Point of Order. I should like to have one point clarified. It is not an argumentative 

point. It is my understanding and I certainly stand to be corrected, that on a motion such as this, if he 

doesn’t wish to speak on it at that time he can say ‘stand’. Am I correct in my understanding then that 

any other Member in the Assembly has then the right to 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1277 

speak, but the Member in whose name it stands does not lose his right. In other words, he can get up at a 

future time – I believe if I recall correctly, the Premier did that last year on one debate, it was standing in 

his name, somebody else spoke, he spoke afterwards – I should like to have that clarified not for this 

particular motion but just as a rule of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SPEAKER’S RULING ON ‘STAND’ ON MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I think if the House will bear with me so that I won’t take time to make a prepared 

ruling, I may be a little repetitious. On this question here of ‘stand’ as No. 9 says, “Any order can be 

‘stand’ at the request of the Government”. The usual practice, if a private Member has asked to ‘stand’, 

if there was no objection taken, it has been allowed to ‘stand’. But it would be if we followed the rules 

strictly that the Government, a Member of the Treasury Benches, must request it to stand otherwise it 

would be dropped if it wasn’t taken up. If a motion is made that it ‘stand’ that is not debatable but if a 

Member says No it would be my duty to say, “Those in favor of the motion ‘stand’ and we would take a 

vote. 

 

In answer to the question of the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy), if some Member adjourns a motion 

and they don’t rise to speak to this motion when the motion is next called, they just sit there, some other 

Member may get up and speak. That person who has the adjournment in his name has not lost the right 

to speak. But if he gets up and asks that it ‘stand’ then he has made a second motion and he would then 

have lost his right to speak. But if a Member who has adjourned a debate like a number of these we are 

on now, if they don’t speak or don’t rise, some other Member could speak and the other Member has a 

right to come back and speak afterwards. It is quite plain in Beauchesne that having adjourned the 

debate you are not deprived from taking part in the debate later on if you do not exercise your right to 

speak when first called. But a second motion would eliminate that, so to say ‘stand’ would eliminate it if 

the House rejected the motion to stand. I hope I have made this clear for the Members of this House and 

we can proceed on this understanding. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Just one further question, Mr. Speaker, Did I understand you correctly that if a Member 

from the Government says ‘stand’ then no other Member of the Assembly can rise and speak to that 

motion at that time. Is this correct? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If they wish to rise and speak at that time then the House would have to decide by 

majority whether the debate should continue or whether it should stand. Because they’ve made a motion, 

the same as an adjourning motion, only it is a standing motion. So it becomes a motion which is not 

debatable and the House by majority would decide at that time. If the House rejected the ‘stand’ motion, 

other Members could speak. If they didn’t, it would stand in the name of the Member who had asked it 

to stand if the Government agrees to it. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to clear up one more point. On March 21st, according to 

the White Paper here, it was moved by Mr. Guy that an Order of Assembly do issue for Return No. 41. 

Today is the 28th, and when the Premier says they 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1278 

only appeared on the Order Paper for a couple of days he is not telling the facts. You had eight days’ 

time to make up your mind whether you are going to answer the question or not and apparently you 

don’t want to answer the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We must not start debating that because we could get into a long debate if we started 

debating those things and it would interfere with what we are trying to do now. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Just one further point on this, just for clarification. The Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) 

mentioned that I had referred to an Order for Return the other day that I have received that was an Order 

for Return made in the special session last summer. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 – OPPOSING PROVIDING OF PRINTING CONTRACTS TO SERVICE 

PRINTING COMPANY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): 

 

That this Assembly go on record as opposing any policy of the Saskatchewan Government which 

would provide printing contracts to Service Printing Co., which is solely owned and operated by 

the CCF Publishing Co. Ltd., which is owned by the membership of the New Democratic Party 

(Saskatchewan division). 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: 

 

that all the words after the word “as” in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

favoring a policy of providing, as near as practical, an equitable opportunity for Saskatchewan 

printing companies to obtain printing contracts regardless of political affiliation, provided they 

are capable of doing such work on a competitive basis under fair wage and working conditions. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — When I adjourned the debate on this matter I had called the Members’ 

attention to Section 14 of The Legislative Assembly Act and I had also quoted that particular section. 

That section, Mr. Speaker, sets out the principle that binds all of us as Members of this Assembly and 

basically we are not to obtain any profit or any office because of our election as Members. I have traced 

that back somewhat, I find it is exactly the same in the 1920 Revised Statutes and I have taken it back to 

the Territorial Legislative Assembly and it is just about exactly the same on that point, indicating, of 

course, to all of us that this principle has been binding on Members of Legislature and Members of the 

British Parliament probably since its inception as a democratically elected parliament. It is something 

that we can’t take lightly and when we are dealing with the question of Service Printing, I have raised a 

matter that Cabinet Ministers are required by tradition of this House – and it is not stated in 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1279 

The Legislative Assembly Act – to give up all outside offices. It is not because we don’t trust Cabinet 

Ministers, the reason is that there is a potential for abuse in the public’s mind and they are requested to 

give up all other outside offices and directorships. It is this potential for abuse that is in reality the 

principle in Section 14 of The Legislative Assembly Act and it is the potential for abuse that has been 

covered in all the legislation on this particular aspect. The principle is over-riding I submit and I stated 

the last time that it is not the question as to whether Service Printing can bid competitively or tender 

competitively, it is this principle of a potential for abuse that we are arguing in favor of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This tradition and the historical tradition that has existed in protecting the public and ensuring that the 

public has a concept before them that the Members of the Legislature have removed the potential for 

abuse, as I say, has a great historical tradition. Now, what has been done about this principle is that over 

the years the principle has not necessarily worked in all circumstances and in many, many cases, there 

are some very, very common sense situations that arise that Members should be allowed to enter into 

contract or be able to deal with the Government and not take away from the principle. 

 

In the Territorial Legislation, as I say, the similar section, the only except was that the section would not 

be construed to apply to the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, allowing them, of course, to take those 

offices. Whenever there has been an exception, it has been put into statute and the exceptions and I 

submit correctly so, have been put in Section 15 and these have been amended from time to time to 

bring them up to date, such things as allowing a Member to receive moneys for expropriation of his 

lands by a government agency who being a municipal official performed services and is also a Member. 

The principle has been so upheld and so ingrained that by statute only have exceptions to the principle 

been allowed. So we have the principle that there shall not be a potential for abuse by Members and 

where in a common sense situation there should be exception to the rule, they are stated in the statute. I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, if the Government opposite feels sincerely that Service Printing should have 

government contracts, I submit that the Government should bring in an amendment to The Legislative 

Assembly Act to allow for this type of practice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — I submit that the principle of whether or not as I have said Service Printing should have 

government contracts is not the point. It is not the point that they can bid lower or anything else, it is in 

the public’s mind I think there already is an idea with the question of Service Printing and there is a 

potential for abuse because of the Members of the Party being so involved in the printing company. I 

submit again, Mr. Speaker, if the Members opposite feel so strongly that Service Printing should have 

government contracts that the only correct and proper way to do it is to bring in an amendment to The 

Legislative Assembly Act and amend Section 15 to allow this practice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1280 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I am speaking on the amendment not on the motion. 

 

I want just to bring to the attention of the Assembly that the amendment moved by the Minister of 

Public Works (Mr. Brockelbank) deals with political affiliation. I should like to suggest to the House 

that political affiliation and a political ownership are two different things. There is no question that the 

Service Printing Company is owned solely by the New Democratic Party. I don’t think that the people of 

Saskatchewan, in due deference to what the Premier has said that he sees nothing wrong with it, will 

agree that they are prepared to see their tax dollars go from individuals who are of any or all or perhaps 

no political persuasion to the benefit of a single political party regardless of what the political party 

might be. It is wrong and I wish the Premier would stand up in his seat and explain to the House and the 

people of Saskatchewan why he believes it is right. I think, in view of the fact that he made a press 

release earlier in the year saying he did approve of this practice, that he should be prepared to stand up 

tonight while this resolution and amendment is before the House and give his reasons why he believes 

that the taxpayers’ money should go directly to the CCF Printing Company. If he can justify it then 

perhaps the people of Saskatchewan will accept it. Until he is prepared to justify it on much sounder 

grounds than he has to date, so far they are not sound, all we are saying is that it is wrong morally and 

ethically to use the taxpayers’ money for his own political Party by directing it through the Queen’s 

Printer. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — I just want to say one word on this. I am not going to prolong the 

debate, Mr. Speaker. I am concerned about the amendment and I should like to bring it to the attention 

of Members opposite. I am not sure, I am not a lawyer, perhaps the Attorney General of the Premier can 

say. Is this amendment of the Minister of Public Works suggesting that I, Cy MacDonald or I, Allan 

Blakeney, sitting in this Legislative Assembly with a printing company that I own and operate, that I 

have a right to all government business and bids and take contracts from any government business 

because that’s the way I read this amendment. It negates that principle whereby a Member of the 

Treasury Benches will resign his position as a board of director of a company, it negates every principle 

that I understand is sacred and precious to the democratic process and the parliamentary system and the 

cabinet system. I am not sure, Sir, if I understand this correctly, but that is the only interpretation I can 

take from this amendment. Mr. Speaker, I just suggest that I hope there isn’t one Member in this 

Assembly who will vote for a resolution that says that the Premier of this province can own a printing 

company and that he can do government business as long as he does it on a fair and equitable basis. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a few words to this debate. Firstly, 

I should like to deal with the matter raised by the Member for Milestone. What we are doing in this 

amendment is to point out that we favor a policy of providing an equitable opportunity for Saskatchewan 

printing companies to obtain printing contracts regardless of political affiliation provided they are 

capable of doing such work on a competitive basis. That seems to me incapable of misinterpretation by 

anyone 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1281 

who tries to read it fairly. Let me say, of course, if the Members opposite want us to move a 

sub-amendment we will be happy to support a sub-amendment to provide that all would be subject to the 

provisions of The Legislative Assembly Act. I would not have thought it necessary to say that we were 

proposing that the law of the land be adhered to. But if we want to add that the law of the land shall be 

adhered to we are happy to say that we believe the law of the land should be adhered to. 

 

And that is indeed the law of the land. As the Member for Milestone well knows, if any Member of this 

House personally owns a business we cannot do business with the Government, or that business cannot 

do business with the Government. He also knows that it is entirely possible for people beneficially to 

own shares in companies which do business with the Government. The Member well knows and I 

suspect, without wanting to name names, I suspect that there are Members of this House who own 

shares in companies which do business with the Government of Saskatchewan. This is perfectly legal 

and proper under The Legislative Assembly Act. It has been the custom for many, many years and I 

would have thought it surprising that this is put into question. If it is, it will be a very great widening of 

the custom which currently prevails. If Members opposite feel that ought to be the law they can 

introduce a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly Act. It seems to me that this would be something 

that has not been done anywhere else in Canada. 

 

Now then, let me see where we are. It is clear that if the Member for Milestone or the Member for 

Lumsden owns shares in a printing company, that printing company could do business with the 

Government. It is now somehow suggested that because some people have a political affiliation with a 

group which wants to be free to bid on Government contracts that this is some how irregular. Surely this 

is not nearly as close to affiliation as if one owns shares in the company. This is and has been perfectly 

proper under the laws of this province. 

 

I should like to make another few side comments. I frankly see no conceivable distinction between this 

company which is associated in part – and I will come to that in a moment – with a political party in this 

province and an advertising agency which has the advertising account for a particular political party and 

when thereupon the Government of the Day gives a substantial amount of Government business to that 

advertising agency. It seems to me that the likely benefit to Members of the Government is just about 

exactly the same. Let everybody be perfectly assured that if anyone can draw any subtle distinction in 

those particular areas they are indeed subtle. 

 

May I also meet the point raised by the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). Here I am giving straight 

information to the House and notwithstanding what the most recent record on the records of the 

Provincial Secretary say, the CCF Publishing and Printing Company is not solely or mainly or to any 

substantial extent owned by the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. And the record files there is 

simply wrong and I invite him to look back at some of the older ones which were right. I am not denying 

that the company is affiliated. It has some connections with the Party so I don’t think we should put that 

in issue. I think the straight question is whether or not that type of an affiliation is any different that any 

number of other affiliations such as the ownership of shares which, I submit, has long been the custom 

in this Legislature, whether it should be or not or the 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1282 

arrangement with an advertising agency which has long been the custom in these Legislatures, whether 

it should be or not. 

 

If we want to say that there should be a complete divorce between the political party and the 

Government in power, let’s say it. But let’s not pick out this particular arrangement and suggest that it is 

somehow different in principle from the arrangements which had prevailed. I want to urge upon the 

conscience of Members opposite whether or not any of them or their colleagues have not owned shares 

in companies that do business with the Government. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You worry about yours and I’ll worry about mine. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) always, I know, feels that his conscience is 

above reproach. Humility is not one of his most outstanding virtues. But everyone on his side of the 

House may not have the similar conviction. I think, as I say, before we nail our colors to the mast on 

this, I invite everybody to check. Because I think that we have in this House and in all the other 

Legislatures and in the Parliament of Canada long had a tradition of whereby it was not considered 

improper to own shares in a company that did business with the Government. And if that be the case, 

surely there is nothing wrong with having a much more tenuous, much more tenuous, relationship with a 

company which wants to feel free to bid competitively on contracts with the Government. 

 

I think this is what we are talking about and I don’t think there is any reason why Members opposite 

should feel that they are free at least of implied criticism of the kind raised by the Member for Lumsden 

(Mr. Lane) because there are all sorts of Members of this House, past and present, who have had indirect 

associations with agencies that do business with the Government. I am not about to start listing them 

because it sounds like I am impugning motives. But there is no difficulty in listing some if Members 

opposite feel that this would contribute to the debate as I think it won’t. I invite you to review the facts 

concerning Members past and present and see whether some do not have indirect affiliations with 

companies which are doing business with Government agencies, with Government Crown corporations 

or the like. 

 

These are the facts. And frankly, I think government is so all pervasive today that if we tried to make a 

rule which said that nobody can have any type of affiliation with a company or business that does 

business with the Government, we would be barring a very large number of people from participating in 

public life. I think this is true because people habitually own mutual fund shares – to use the most 

tenuous relationship – they own shares of a fund which in turn owns shares in a company which owns 

shares in a company which does business with the Government. This is very tenuous. Next one up, they 

own shares in companies, great national corporations, which do business with the Government. Next one 

up, they own shares in smaller private companies that do business with the Government. And at some 

point, obviously, you have to draw the line and say there is a conflict of interest. But I think that in 

fairness to all legislators in this Legislature and elsewhere, we should not rush to draw the line before we 

are sure just what its effects will be on all legislators. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1283 

I invite all Hon. Members to consider what is really a basic question of principle and I suggest that the 

amendment before us states a principle which we all should be able to adopt. It sets out a policy of 

providing, as near as possible, an equitable opportunity for all Saskatchewan printing companies to 

obtain printing contracts regardless of political affiliation providing they are able to do the work on a 

competitive basis, under fair wages and working conditions. I couldn’t imagine why anyone would vote 

against that. I certainly intend to vote for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, indeed the Premier is on thin ice today and I am 

frankly surprised about his attitude on this particular subject because I can assure him I do not at all 

agree with his opinion on this particular subject and I intend to describe precisely why. 

 

He makes the point that there would be a number of Members in this Assembly that are shareholders in 

companies. Unquestionably there are. I also submit to him that this is a vastly different situation, Mr. 

Speaker. I can assure him that if I was one who is a major shareholder in a company that does business 

with the Province of Saskatchewan, I would acknowledge it, I would declare my interest in that 

company. 

 

A major shareholder, Mr. Speaker, because there is a fantastic difference between owning 50 shares in a 

company that has 10 million out and being over the 50 per cent shareholder as such is the situation 

which presents itself to us today. 

 

I cannot see in any stretch of the imagination how a Member who may own 100 shares with some 

company that has one million shares outstanding can possibly influence that company to any extent or 

even would probably have any desire to try to do so. It is well known that anyone who sits on a board of 

directors withdraws from that company’s board of directors simply because he is in a position to 

influence the policy of that particular company and has influence on the government. 

 

It is a far cry, Mr. Speaker, from the person who owns a few shares in that company and probably has no 

influence whatsoever over its policies, if indeed, he even knows any of the administration running that 

particular company in question. I think it would be well accepted by all Members here that any person 

who does have sufficient shares to occupy a position of influence in a company should declare them. If 

he hasn’t declared them he certainly should be doing so if the company is doing business with the 

Government of Saskatchewan of which he is a Cabinet Minister. 

 

In respect to the party opposite, it is obvious that they do have a very, very strong influence both through 

the Government and through the publishing company. They have precisely the type of relationship 

between the Cabinet and the company which I suggest should not exist between industry and the 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1284 

Mr. Weatherald: — I think that this is the point which the Premier has very, very widely missed. 

 

With respect to what the relationship is between an advertising agency and the Government or any 

government and I presume that he is talking about the previous Government, this again I suggest to him 

is a much different situation as well. And the reason I do that, Mr. Speaker, is because presumably he is 

talking about a campaign contribution or donations of any kind. I suggest to him, Mr. Speaker, that if he 

is sincere, which I suggest he probably is, that he and his Government should pass the laws which 

govern these situations so if any contributions forthcoming can be made public knowledge. 

 

I remember when they were in Opposition they often moved a resolution and I suggest that if he wants 

to have a relationship that is understood by everyone governing business and political parties and I think 

he was referring in his comments of the possibility of campaign contributions simply because the 

Government does business with an advertising agency, then I suggest that his Party and his Government 

should pass laws which will bring these contributions under scrutiny so there will be no question as to 

their legality and feasibility. 

 

So I suggest that he is skating on extremely thin ice, Mr. Speaker. He has attempted to try and make 

something sound as though it is all right. It isn’t all right. The conflict of interest would exist very much 

between a major shareholder in a company doing business with the Government of Saskatchewan. And 

if the Party opposite sees no conflict of interest between their Party and the Service Printing Company 

then I think that the people of Saskatchewan will look very differently upon this prevailing situation. It 

is pretty obvious that much printing is very standard type printing. And many of the contract prices 

submitted will be very, very close together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when those prices are submitted and are very even it is going to be exceptionally easy to 

divide up the business so that a portion goes to Service Printing and a portion goes to the other printers 

simply because the prices will be exceptionally close together on the standard type of printing operation. 

There is no way, Mr. Speaker, that the Party opposite can convince the people of Saskatchewan and 

those of us in the Opposition that a conflict of interest does not exist between the Public Service Printing 

Company and the Government of Saskatchewan. And we intend to point this out and will continue to 

press for some relationship between the Party opposite, the printing company, that does not make a farce 

of what has been very strict laws governing a conflict of interest situation in the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I obviously will be supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I think it is well at this moment to return to 

the original motion which says that we oppose any policy of the Government to provide printing 

contracts to Service Printing Company which is solely owned and operated by the CCF Publishing 

Company Limited which is owned by the membership of the New 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1285 

Democratic Party (Saskatchewan division). 

 

The Premier went through what is frequently referred to as a judicial polka and he drew some fancy 

distinctions. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is a great deal of difference between a company 

which is incorporated for profit – to put money in the hands of shareholders – and a company such as 

Service Printing Company Limited which is entirely owned by a political party for the purpose of 

promoting a particular philosophy and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — . . . for the purpose of using the profits that it earns to elect Members of the 

Government and, directly or indirectly, to sponsor and promote that philosophy. 

 

Any attempt by the Premier to compare the CCF Publishing Company Limited with any other company 

is not justified. It is inadequate and it is nothing like a subtle distinction. Comparing a minor shareholder 

in Imperial Oil with a Member of the Benches across the way is not reasonable and not fair and will not 

be swallowed by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — We have here an attempt by this Government – I shouldn’t call it an attempt – it is 

more than an attempt, it is actually a successful transference of public moneys, moneys of the people of 

Saskatchewan to a political arm, a subsidiary of a political party. And nothing the Premier can say will 

change the fact that what is happening is that this Party is using public money to get themselves 

re-elected if they can do it. I suspect that part of what they are doing is a form of political gerrymander. 

 

There was a lot of talk of principle back in February, March of last year. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sensitive about that . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I have no reason to be sensitive. Not only do I not have reason to be sensitive, you 

can do what you like with the seat – you will have trouble winning it anyway. 

 

But you are suggesting, ridiculously, self-righteously that the CCF Publishing Company Limited is in 

the same category as some accidental piece of business done by a company which may have a share 

ownership by a Member on this or that side of the House. That is ridiculous and will not be accepted. 

 

I have one more comment – that I favor the amendment. It is sensible. It would be very sensible except 

for the fact that it totally glosses over the fact that you deliberately and arrogantly and apparently are 

determined to continue the policy that you have started out, namely, you are going to use public funds 

for your private purposes, your political purposes and you do not intend to be deterred and if necessary, 

you obviously intend to use your overwhelming numbers to continue that bad practice against principle. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1286 

I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 4 – PUBLIC WORKS PROGRAM 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Matsalla (Canora): 

 

That this Assembly commend the Government of Saskatchewan for action taken in bringing 

forward public work programs in the early fall of 1971 and in extending and supplementing 

Federal Government programs for the relief of winter unemployment; 

 

Expresses regret at the tardiness of the Government of Canada in announcing its winter 

employment programs and at the dilatory manner in which municipal applications under the 

Local Initiatives Program were processed by the Department of Manpower and Immigration; 

 

And further that this Assembly endorses the proposal for a joint examination of the existing 

programs, by federal, provincial and local governments, to evaluate the effectiveness of existing 

programs and to prepare criteria, guidelines and contingency plans for the winter of 1972-73 

under varying assumptions of unemployment levels. 

 

Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, to me it is inconceivable that this motion 

be brought before this House by a Government Member. 

 

The facts of unemployment are obvious to all Members of this House. To imply that the Government to 

your right should be commended for its actions to relieve winter unemployment is contrary to all the 

facts. If the Member was serious when he moved the resolution then I can only assume that he had his 

head in the sand. This is the attitude assumed by the ostrich when it is unable to face the realities of the 

surroundings. The ostrich thinks that if he hides from the problem, ignores it, or does not himself see the 

problem, then he foolishly thinks that there is no problem and that it has disappeared. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rest of the world knows that the ostrich only fools himself and that it is a silly attitude 

to assume. 

 

The motion before us commends the Government for its action on the unemployment problem. How can 

a Member commend this Government when it produces one of the highest unemployment problems this 

province has ever seen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla) commends the Government while 20,000 

people are walking the streets looking for jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I had thought the facts were known to this House but for 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1287 

the benefit of the Member for Canora I will review them. 

 

June, 1971, the unemployment rate 2.5 per cent; July 2.7 per cent; September 2.8 per cent; December 

5.4 per cent; February 6.1 per cent. Does the Member really feel that a commendation is justified in the 

light of these facts? 

 

Let’s look at in terms of people. In June when this Government took office there were some 8,000 

unemployed. By September-October 10,000 people were looking for jobs. November 12,000 people 

were looking for jobs. December 18,000. February 20,000 people looking for jobs. I wonder if the 

Member for Canora expects the 20,000 people out of work to join him in commendation of this 

Government’s inaction, in this Government’s blunders regarding unemployment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite find it very easy to try and shift the blame of 

this to the Federal Government. Again, let’s look at the facts and we will see that this is again simply an 

act of hiding his head in the sand. 

 

One year ago Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. It was not 6.1 but rather it 

was 4.6. This took place, let me remind him, under the management of a Liberal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The lowest in Canada. I didn’t hear the Member opposite commend the 

Government for its action at that time. In fact, we saw the contrary. Members opposite berated the 

Government one year ago. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how the Member opposite justifies his position when 

he downgrades efforts that produced 4.6 per cent unemployment and then commends the action that 

produces 6.1 per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Simply unjustifiable, just a case of burying his head in the sand. 

 

One year ago Saskatchewan enjoyed the lowest unemployment in Canada. This is not the case today. 

There are three or four provinces lower than we are. Alberta to the west is lower, Manitoba to the east is 

lower. The NDP Government has made Saskatchewan into an island in the prairies where 20,000 people 

are looking for jobs. If there is any Government in Canada that should avoid talking about the actions 

regarding unemployment, it is the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — This motion brought forward by the Member for Canora must be an 

embarrassment to the Premier and to the Cabinet. The Member is, in effect, commending the Premier for 

producing one of the highest unemployment rates our province has ever seen. The Member is 

commending the Cabinet for allowing 20,000 people 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1288 

to go without jobs. The Member is commending the NDP Government for its ineffectiveness. I will 

admit, Mr. Speaker, that I do not know the Member from Canora very well. Maybe I misjudge his 

motive. It is possible that the Member has some kind of dry sense of humor. It is possible that he is not 

able to make his voice heard in caucus. It is possible that some Members opposite are concerned about 

the problems of unemployment. This motion may have been put facetiously. I can’t think of a better way 

for the Members on either side of the House to draw attention to the ineffectiveness of the Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — It is possible that commending this Government for this crisis it created is indeed a 

useful tactic to draw attention to the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this side doesn’t really care if either criticism or embarrassment will cause the Government 

opposite to take its head out of the sand and face the challenge of creating jobs. Then we will be 

satisfied. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Province of Saskatchewan should thank the Member opposite for bringing 

forth this farcical motion to draw attention to the ineptitude of his own Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Member talks about public works. Public works – the NDP’s answer to all the 

problems. In fact, public works is the only NDP answer to creating jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP is not even making a success of its only ace in the hole. The Government, by 

innuendo, deed and action has discouraged private development. The Government is supposed to have a 

better method than that used by free enterprise and that better method, of course, is a fantastic public 

works program. The motion before us commends the Government on its public works program. It 

commends the very program that allows well over 20,000 people to walk the streets. It commends the 

program that was and is totally inadequate to deal with the urgency and the seriousness of the problem. 

What is even worse is that it commends the program that compared to programs instituted by free 

enterprise governments is pitiful and ill-formed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, in public works programs the free enterprise governments have 

beaten the NDP in their own backyard. The socialist Government has not even done a good job when 

they try to do their own thing. I suggest the Member from Canora compare this Government’s program 

to that of the program one year ago that gave our province the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1289 

Mr. MacDonald: — I ask the Member to check Saskatchewan Budget figures for the 1970-71 and 

1971-72. He will find that job creating capital expenditures are down this year by over $6 million. Mr. 

Speaker, this Government has shown its priorities when in a year of record unemployment the 

Government cuts back on capital expenditures. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They are going to hire them all in the Civil Service. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Before commending this Government I suggest the Member compare the 

Saskatchewan public works program with that of Alberta. It should be remembered that the free 

enterprise Alberta Government doesn’t put a top priority on public works to create jobs. The Alberta 

Government puts a top priority on private development and it’s obvious that they are very successful. 

However, notwithstanding this, let’s compare the two programs. 

 

Alberta public works $42.5 million, Saskatchewan $11.7 million. Let’s go even further and look at 

capital expenditures. Alberta $223.4 million, Saskatchewan $66 million. What is even more important in 

this time of high unemployment the Government of Alberta not only will be spending $223 million but 

recognizing the unemployment situation this figure has been raised by $29 million over last year. In 

Saskatchewan the Government apparently not concerned with unemployment, capital expenditure is not 

up by $29, but is actually down by $6.2 million. How can this Legislature be asked to commend a 

Government for its actions when these very actions create unemployment. 

 

The Government opposite says that they are concerned about unemployment next summer. The answer 

is PEP. This Government is fooling no one by using the name of PEP. This is substantially the same 

Liberal STEP program. This is a program designed when unemployment was 4.6 in February. This year 

it is obvious that unemployment will be higher in the summer of 1972 than it was in 1971. The 

unemployment rate this February is not 4.6 per cent but it’s 6.1 per cent. So, has the program been 

expanded to handle the anticipated unemployment program in the summer of ’72? It has not. The 

program will employ less students this summer than it did last. Under this program the unemployment 

rate will not reach the low level of 2.5 per cent in June achieved under the former Liberal Government. 

This is an example of the callous approach taken by Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Member from Canora downgraded projects under the Local Initiatives 

Program. He said they were not approved quickly enough and that they had other deficiencies. I would 

remind the Government opposite that it can take full blame for this. These Federal programs to alleviate 

winter unemployment showed their effect in every province in Canada except Saskatchewan. While 

other provinces showed a decline in the unemployment, our province climbed higher. The Saskatchewan 

NDP Government did the worst job of any Government in Canada in assisting local governments to take 

advantage of Federal programs. This Government gave bad advice and incomplete advice to local 

governments. This Government directed municipalities into the wrong programs. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1290 

As a result of the ineffectiveness of our Government we will see that Saskatchewan will not derive the 

same benefits from Federal programs that the provinces on either side, Manitoba and Alberta, will 

receive. As a matter of fact even though Manitoba has an NDP Government, I will admit that the 

province did an excellent job of taking advantage of Federal programs. 

 

There seems to be a different priority by the two NDP Governments in Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 

The priority in Saskatchewan is to discredit and undermine the efforts of our Federal Government. There 

is no genuine effort made by the Saskatchewan NDP to co-operate with Ottawa to alleviate problems. 

The only effort made is to embarrass the Federal Government no matter what the cost to our citizens. 

The NDP want to win Federal ridings in Saskatchewan and they are prepared to sacrifice the people of 

Saskatchewan, the unemployed of Saskatchewan for their own political purposes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I submit a motion, an amendment, seconded by 

my seatmate the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) that Resolution No. 4 be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line down to and including “Department of 

Manpower and Immigration” in the 10th line and substitute the following therefor: 

 

expresses its regret that the Government of Saskatchewan did not develop a public works 

program in the fall of 1971 sufficient to alleviate the severe unemployment problem that existed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The debate continuing on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would just think that . . . I know that the Member 

for Canora (Mr. Matsalla) is very, very anxious . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order . . . 

 

Mr. D.F. MacDonald: — I sent a copy. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — I know, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Canora would want to listen with 

great care to the remarks of the Member for Moose Jaw and I know that he would want to re-examine 

his own conscience on his motion and I’m sure that he will be most anxious to stand up when he closes 

the debate and support the motion or the amendment of the Member for Moose Jaw and in order for him 

to gather and collect his thoughts, in order for him to stand up and give the kind of support that the 

Member from Moose Jaw needs in this particular motion, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1291 

INTERIM REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE REVIEW OF LIQUOR 

REGULATIONS IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River) moved, second by Mr. D.M. McPherson (Regina Lakeview), That the 

Interim Report of the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor Regulations in Saskatchewan be 

now concurred in. 
 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak upon the report of the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor 

Regulations in Saskatchewan. At the conclusion of my remarks I will move, seconded by Mr. 

McPherson that the Interim Report of the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor Regulations in 

Saskatchewan be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this report I first want to commend the Hon. Member for Saskatoon-Mayfair 

(Mr. Brockelbank) for the fine work he did in chairing the Committee up to and including the 

completion of this interim report. Undoubtedly the public hearings were among the finest I’ve ever 

heard in terms of an atmosphere of openness and friendliness. Mr. Brockelbank’s chairmanship was 

characterized by his natural graciousness and good humor for which both he and his father are 

deservedly well noted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — I wish also to record my own sense of loss at the passing of Mr. Russ. Brown, the 

representative from Souris-Estevan. His good judgement, wide experience and friendly manner were 

missed by all the Members of the Committee. 

 

The Committee, in my view, has worked hard and worked well. The subject matter is controversial. The 

members of the Committee range in their personal habits in the use of beverage alcohol from total 

abstinence to the use of significant amounts. A wide range of religious views are represented. Despite 

this, the viewpoints expressed have never been along political party lines. It has been a good experience 

working with this Committee and I look forward to its future deliberations. 

 

The Committee’s terms of reference were that we should conduct an enquiry into all aspects relating to 

the sale, advertising, distribution of alcoholic beverages in Saskatchewan. The Committee believed that 

it was the intention of the Legislature that its enquiries be thorough and therefore set out three areas of 

study and research. 

 

1. A review of present legislation and regulations regarding alcoholic beverages in Saskatchewan, 
 

2. A review of existing legislation and regulations regarding alcoholic beverages in other 
jurisdictions, 

 

3. A review of production, distribution, advertisement, sale and use of alcoholic beverages. 
 

Wide publicity was given to the Committee’s work and particularly for the eight days of public hearings 

which were held in Saskatoon, Lloydminster, Tisdale, Regina and Yorkton. The Committee received 

over 150 written briefs, 74 of which were 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1292 

heard at the open public meetings. In addition the Committee met in closed sessions with law 

enforcement and other public officials. As a result of these public and private hearings it was agreed that 

certain changes should be made and that it was in the public interest that they be made soon. There were 

other recommendation which, while not of urgent nature, were included in this interim report s imply 

because of the unanimity of the Committee in regard to them. Indeed, every recommendation in this 

interim report was unanimously agreed upon. There are on the Committee no dissenters from this report. 

While the recommendations of this report have received unanimous approval that is not to say that 

approval was given for the same reasons. I add that caveat lest it be thought that in presenting the 

reasons why I feel that the various recommendations should receive this Assembly’s approval it is 

thought that I am thereby presenting every other Member’s view. 

 

In a matter as highly controversial and emotionally charged as liquor laws every man’s conscience must 

be his guide. Each of our consciences has received different sets of information from our various 

religious, social and personal experiences. I can only say that, for myself, I am deeply concerned about 

the abuse of drugs in our society. The best evidence that I can find tells me that the most commonly 

abused drug in our society is beverage alcohol. It is of interest that in briefs to the Committee that even 

among those who may have personally felt that prohibition was desirable, they did not advocate it as a 

public policy. There are those who advocate voluntary total abstinence as the safest and wisest course 

but this is on a personal basis. The use of beverage alcohol is an accepted practice in our society. 

Voluntary total abstinence remains a meaningful, personal option but public policy must be aimed at 

encouraging moderate and sociably acceptable patterns of consumption. Drunkenness and alcoholism, 

which are not the same, must both be avoided. 

 

When the final report is tabled it is our hope to have a package of policies that will help reduce both 

drunkenness and alcoholism. This interim report in many regards might be said to deal with relatively 

minor issues. It is certainly not as far-reaching as the 1958 report on its impact on drinking patterns. 

That early report was an excellent document and provides many guidelines which stand today. In 

looking at the particular recommendations, the first three stand together. Lowering the age of majority 

by one year, establishing a system of identification cards, and increasing the penalties for those who 

abuse the age limits, stand together as a package. It is not a tremendously significant thing to lower the 

age by one year, yet in defending the arbitrary decision to draw the line at any particular age, any 

parents in discussing this matter with their children may now point to the consistency of this age limit 

with the right to vote in Provincial and Federal elections. There is some logic to say that if you are old 

enough to vote and you are old enough to fight for your country, then you are old enough to drink. The 

logic lies in the fact that rights and responsibilities must go together. If an 18-year-old has these rights 

then he must have the corresponding responsibilities. Both the identification car and increased penalties 

for abuse of this age limit indicate that we expect this limit to be enforced and indeed enforced more 

stringently than at present. These laws do not deal with the real problems that already exist with the age 

at 19 and that is that every day experience and countless social surveys show that many 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1293 

young people experiment with drugs including alcohol long before they are 18. They do this 

experimentation often under very undesirable circumstances, using harmful substances, undesirable 

companions and often with harmful results. Hopefully, the final report will deal with this vexing 

problem. 

 

The serving of wine, beer and spirits on Sunday and holidays from noon on received wide support from 

the public. It is felt that there is no logical reason why people should not have the public right to do what 

is already a private right in their homes. Those who are opposed to the public consumption of alcohol on 

Sunday should logically be opposed to public consumption of alcohol on every other day. While there 

are those who personally hold this view, there are very few who advocate it as a public policy. 

 

The fifth point simply extends licensed dining rooms into the provincial parks. This is in line with the 

1958 proposal that the consumption of alcohol be associated with meals as much as possible. 

 

The sixth point merely extends to beverage room customers the right to drink a spirit if they prefer it to 

the beer and wine already available. 

 

The next three points are for the Liquor Board Stores. The Committee feels that the public desires the 

more attractive facilities associated with a self-service store. I might add a personal note in saying that 

the present design of liquor stores seems to suggest that purchasing liquor is a criminal activity. I see no 

reason why they should not be far more pleasant in their décor. The reasoning behind the 

recommendation for the later hours for Liquor Board Stores in major urban centres is to curtail 

bootlegging. Law enforcement officers made it very clear that not only does bootlegging exist but that it 

benefits from the early closing of liquor outlets. They emphasize that bootlegging does not exist in 

isolation from other crimes but helps finance gambling, prostitution and other criminal operations. 

 

The tenth recommendation is based upon similar reasoning. The option is given to operators to close 

earlier as in fact local customs will dictate the hours rather than the hours dictate the customs. 

 

The eleventh recommendation is meant to provide a service to tourists in the North of the province that 

they can already receive in the South and, incidentally, to deal a blow to northern bootleggers. 

 

The twelfth point merely extends to aircraft within the province the privileges which are associated with 

interprovincial flights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an interim report. The final report will deal with the more complex issues of 

research, education and rehabilitation. We hope to complete the report sometime in August. I hope to be 

able to point to a report that will lead the nation in the prevention of drinking problems. No other area of 

life is more important than that the privileges and responsibilities of a citizen be closely related. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move this motion. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1294 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.M. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about the 

report and just go into some of the details. I was going to ask the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) to 

leave the House while I made these remarks but I see he is still sitting here. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I should like to commend the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Brockelbank) who was 

our first chairman, for the excellent job that he performed. I must say, Mr. Speaker, he was certainly fair 

and conducted the hearings and all the Committee meetings in a very wonderful manner that was the 

way they should have been. I might say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that it was a good Committee and the 

Committee looked into all aspects of the liquor problem. Mr. Speaker, I for one and the rest of the 

Members on this side of the House appreciate the manner in which the Committee undertook to solve 

the problems of liquor. There was a total of 150 briefs presented to the Committee, many personally and 

others written. The hearings were well organized with all people who desired to speak before the 

Committee having an opportunity. Mr. Speaker, the report is unanimous with both the Government 

Members and the Opposition Members working hard to bring in an interim report that would present to 

the people of Saskatchewan the changes that have been required for many, many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the field of education and rehabilitation, the Committee could not deal fully with these 

subjects at this time. I can assure this House that the Committee to a man realizes that both education 

and rehabilitation programs must be increased. 

 

First on education, Mr. Speaker, it is the aim of the Committee to see where alcohol education in the 

schools can be improved. It is my aim, as a Member of this Committee, to urge the Committee to request 

a sum of money that will tie in with the Education Department and the education system to bring to our 

young people one of the best alcohol educations programs for all grades in Canada. I believe this and the 

Committee believes that this is one way that we can teach the young people the dangers of excessive use 

of alcohol. 

 

It is also my goal, Mr. Speaker, to see that Members of the Committee are put in a position where they 

can recommend that further sums of money be set aside for the Alcoholism Commission to provide the 

kind of rehabilitation program that the Province of Saskatchewan needs. The people in the rehabilitation 

at this time are doing an excellent job but they need more funds to halt the ever present drinking 

problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say again that every member of the Committee is dedicated to make sure that, 

 

1. We put funds in the education system to provide education for the students on alcohol, 
 

2. The Committee wants to provide sufficient funds so that we may provide an adequate 

rehabilitation program for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I would urge the Government to make available adequate 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1295 

space both in Regina and Saskatoon to provide in-patient and out-patient departments in these centres so 

that we can keep up this worthwhile program that is being conducted. 

 

On the education program, Mr. Speaker, first for the primary prevention action, we would like to 

provide information that would enable people to avoid problems involving the inappropriate use of 

alcohol, secondly, we need a secondary prevention action. We want to provide information so that 

people could recognize alcohol problems in the early development stages and where to seek help and 

where to go. 

 

To achieve the above needs, Mr. Speaker, there are four main population segments that must be reached. 

First, the young people. We must reach them in the schools and in the homes. Secondly, the employed 

people. We must talk to management and to unions. Thirdly, problem people, the addicts and their 

families. Fourthly, helping people – professional people – to provide services to reach through 

undergraduate and graduates of formal training. 

 

In the rehabilitation program, Mr. Speaker, first, we must find a cure for alcoholism. It is a disease. 

Secondly, prepare individuals treated for a meaningful role in society and this we can do very well. 

Desirable treatment objectives should be a complete cure. A complete cure means alleviating the manner 

of the system and the elimination of the cause. The breathalyzer has been put in the city of Regina. I 

would like to go over a few of the figures that have been presented by the Chief of Police. Last year the 

number of breathalyzer tests conducted were 1,166 and as a result, a number of suspensions over a 

24-hour period amounting to 996. The number of Criminal Code drinking-driving charges were 957. 

There is one thing I should like to make very clear. A lot of people are worrying about the young people 

but there was only one fatal collision where the driver had been driving and that driver was of the age of 

19. 

 

I bring these points out, Mr. Speaker, so that all can see that the Committee has done a report, an interim 

report that deserves the support of the House. There are many Members, Mr. Speaker, who would like to 

speak on this and I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 

(Attorney General) that Bill No. 9 – An Act to provide for the appointment of a Person to 

Investigate Administrative decisions or acts of Departments of the Government and certain other 

Organizations and to define the Person’s duties, functions and powers be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to take part in this debate, first I should 

like to say that in recent years social and technical innovations have so affected the complexity of 

society that the individual has increasingly had to look to his government to play a greater part in 

influencing those events which 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1296 

affect him. It is in Canada, Mr. Speaker, however, our tradition that the state is a servant and not our 

master. We believe that a citizen has important rights which the state cannot disregard in its dealings 

with the citizen. As the scope of government endeavor broadens and the complexity of its activity 

increases, it becomes more and more difficult to ensure that these rights to which a citizen is entitled are 

not either denied or overlooked in his dealings with his servant. Any country which believes in 

individual rights must therefore provide itself with an adequate system of checks and safeguards on the 

misuse and abuse of the authority invested in the government officials. One such safeguard, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Ombudsman scheme. The Ombudsman’s function is to examine administrative action to 

ensure that citizens are fairly dealt with. The need for appointing an official, Mr. Speaker, lies primarily 

in the fact that the average citizen has neither the experience nor the access to information necessary to 

ensure that he has been fairly dealt with by the government. 

 

Is there a need in Saskatchewan for such an office? A look at the Alberta experience is instructive in this 

regard, Mr. Speaker. Of the 791 complaints received in 1970 by the Alberta Ombudsman, 286 were fully 

investigated by him. The other complaints were either outside his jurisdiction or were referred to other 

agencies. Of those 286 complaints investigated 22 per cent were found to be justified and of those 22 per 

cent justified there was only one instance where the Ombudsman felt he had been unable to suitably 

rectify the problem by use of his powers of negotiations. This means that in the area where the Alberta 

Ombudsman has jurisdiction only one individual did not get redress where the Ombudsman was of the 

opinion injustice had been done. It is important, Mr. Speaker, also to remember that 78 per cent of the 

complaints were found to be not justified. In most of the cases the individual ultimately received an 

explanation and a hearing and many frustrations caused by misunderstanding were disposed of. Also 

important, Mr. Speaker, 78 per cent of the civil servants unjustly accused of bias, bad faith, etc., were 

supported by the Ombudsman which leads one to believe that the Ombudsman can favorably affect the 

morale of the Civil Service, at the same time, bringing fair hearing to the complaints. 

 

What arguments can be levelled against the concept which appears to have on balance worked very 

well? First, Mr. Speaker, an Ombudsman is unnecessary when we have 60 MLAs and an interested 

Press. This argument is a smoke screen, Mr. Speaker. The major tool an Ombudsman has for exposing 

injustice is his power to call for departmental files and summon witnesses. Obviously, MLAs and the 

Press do not and cannot have this power. It has been suggested that the Ombudsman is an expensive 

luxury in a province the size of Saskatchewan. Not correct, Mr. Speaker. The expenditure necessary to 

support an Ombudsman scheme is trifling compared to other less useful Government expenditures. And 

if the Ombudsman functions were expanded to take in local government, he would, without a doubt, 

have as much work as he could handle. 

 

Third, Mr. Speaker, the McClure Commission on Civil Rights in Ontario cautioned that the Ombudsman 

may become a red herring obscuring the need for more far-reaching reforms. This Commission seems to 

have accomplished something that others have had difficulty in achieving and that is to put the 

Ombudsman idea in proper perspective. They preface their conclusions 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1297 

on the matter in this way, Mr. Speaker, 

 

In coming to any conclusion as to whether an Ombudsman or parliamentary commissioner 

should be established for Ontario, one thing is clear, and we place great emphasis on it. An 

Ombudsman is not a substitute for a proper legal framework which provides adequate 

substantive and procedural safeguards for the rights of the individuals. 

 

Much has been said and written about the Ombudsman as a protector of the rights of the individual and 

this is misleading for the public and goes far beyond any claims that are put forward for the office by 

those who occupy it in any country. The real safeguards of the rights of the individual lie in good 

legislation and good rules of procedure designed to guide and direct those who make decisions in the 

administrative process of government. Rules that give a right to be heard before decisions are made 

affecting the rights of individuals and the rights to written reasons for decisions when decisions are 

made together with a right of appeal or review by a superior body having power to correct rights for 

which Ombudsman is no substitute. 

 

Fourth, Mr. Speaker, it has been suggested that an Ombudsman scheme is non-compatible with our 

system of ministerial responsibility. In our parliamentary system the Minister has the power of control 

and direction of the administration of his Department. The fact that he has power is the reason he can 

hold and be responsible. It follows, therefore, that the system cannot operate, that is the Minister can no 

longer be held responsible if some of his control is usurped by an Ombudsman. Responsibility is not 

affected, however, where the Ombudsman has powers of recommendation only because this in no way 

detracts from the Minister’s control. In fact, a properly designed Ombudsman scheme actually enhances 

ministerial responsibility by making certain that infractions come to light immediately. An Ombudsman 

must not be able to investigate and criticize a Minister’s decision. He must, however, be able to 

investigate and criticize a Deputy Minister’s decision and a Deputy’s recommendations to his Minister. 

There may well be intervening facts which will cause a Minister to accept and act on or reject a 

Deputy’s recommendation. It is, however, Mr. Speaker, the Minister’s decision and in our system he is 

responsible for the justification of that decision. That is ministerial responsibility. 

 

Does Bill 9 introduced by the Government meet the needs of a workable Ombudsman scheme? We 

should ask ourselves this. For that purpose it is desirable and imperative that the Ombudsman have the 

full scope of operation consistent with ministerial responsibility. Controls are necessary that would not 

be needed in a different constitutional structure which as the one the Swedish Ombudsman operates 

under. First of all, Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman must not be allowed to investigate the Cabinet, the 

Assembly, a Committee of the Assembly or the Judiciary. Secondly, the Attorney General must be 

empowered to suspend the Ombudsman at any time for misconduct subject to ratification by the House 

at the earliest opportunity. Third, Mr. Speaker, the Assembly must have power to make rules for the 

guidance of the Ombudsman. Fourth, the Ombudsman must have no power to reverse a decision on his 

own motion but he must rather have power of investigation and recommendations only. Because of the 

natural constraints our system imposes on the Ombudsman, it is highly desirable that the Ombudsman be 

given as much scope and independence as possible. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1298 

What does Bill 9 do, Mr. Speaker? Bill 9 goes on to impose restrictions on the Ombudsman which make 

him all but impotent. Consider the following provisions in Bill 9. It prohibits the Ombudsman from 

investigating any act of a Deputy Minister or an Acting Associate Deputy Minister. Secondly, Bill 9 

prohibits the Ombudsman from investigating an act of any person appointed or employed who is, in the 

opinion of the Attorney General, directly responsible to the Minister. Bill 9, Mr. Speaker, prohibits the 

Ombudsman from investigating any act done by any person in the employ of the Provincial Government 

in relation to any dealings he may have with a municipality, school board or with the Federal 

Government. Bill 9 also prohibits the Ombudsman from investigating any proceedings in local 

government or school boards. Bill 9 also, Mr. Speaker, allows the Attorney General to stop by issuing a 

certificate to the Ombudsman any investigation which in his opinion is not in the public interest. Mr. 

Speaker, Bill 9 also allows the Attorney General to withhold any departmental document which in his 

opinion might disclose deliberations of Cabinet which in his opinion might be injurious to the public 

interest. Nor does Bill 9 do away with Crown privilege generally in respect to such information as does 

the Alberta Act. 

 

The very suggestion of such unnecessary restrictions is incredible. The McClure report has cautioned 

that even an Ombudsman with appropriate power may be a red herring. That such an Ombudsman may 

be a red herring, it is obvious that an Ombudsman as emasculated as the one proposed by the 

Government can be nothing but a red herring. 

 

The NDP raised the issue of an Ombudsman in this House in the Throne Speech of February 6, 1964. 

The Premier introduced the idea from the Opposition after that time on several occasions. Surely, after 

eight years of consideration and with the benefit of the Alberta experience behind us, the NDP could be 

expected at this time to introduce a model of Ombudsman legislation. Instead, they have brought 

forward a Bill which is the least effective of any proposed or adopted anywhere in Canada with the 

exception, of course, of British Columbia. 

 

Supporters of the Ombudsman concept, Mr. Speaker, are sorely disillusioned and disappointed by the 

empty Bill that the Government has seen fit to introduce. How could the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, 

have missed the mark by so far. I can hardly tell. It appears that the Attorney General either intends 

deliberately to make the Ombudsman a meaningless showpiece or he has relied on draftsmen who have 

no concept of the function of an Ombudsman, his scope and his relations to other controls in the 

administrative process. Might I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that either alternative is not particularly flattering 

to the Attorney General or the Government opposite. 

 

The reluctance of the Government to open up all but the narrowest area of Government activity to the 

scrutiny of the Ombudsman is undoubtedly the major objection to the Bill. There are a number of other 

changes which should perhaps be incorporated into the legislation. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I should like to point out to the House that Nova Scotia has enacted Ombudsman 

legislation which brings the activities of local government under the sphere of the Ombudsman. An 

Ombudsman scheme has been proposed in Ontario which would have regional Ombudsmen checking on 

the local government. It is at a local level, Mr. Speaker, where most dealings 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1299 

direct with the citizens occur. That is where an Ombudsman may be most useful to everyone. 

Saskatchewan is not yet so populous that an Ombudsman could not cope with the local matters as well 

as provincial. Far from contemplating such a move, the Government refuses to allow scrutiny even of 

the Provincial Government dealing with the local governments. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that if we do not 

insist that local governments be included now, we have been given no reason to believe that the NDP 

will ever consider their inclusion. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the independence of the Ombudsman both in 

fact and in appearance is crucial. 

 

Several suggestions should be considered in this area. First, Mr. Speaker, they bring in the salary of the 

Ombudsman. The salary of the Ombudsman should not a fixed figure. If it is, then salary increments 

awarded to officers with similar responsibility could be withheld from the Ombudsman if he was to 

displease the Government at any time. Rather, the Ombudsman’s salary should be tied to that of say a 

Deputy Minister and would increase automatically if a Deputy Minister’s salary went up. Secondly, Mr. 

Speaker, a two-thirds majority vote of the House should be required to remove the Ombudsman from the 

office which would make it less likely that he would be removed for particular reasons or for taking a 

stand which might be generally unpopular at a given time to the Government. Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, a 

provision should be included in the Act that the Ombudsman not be allowed to hold any other office or 

to engage in any occupations for reward outside the duties of his office. It might be necessary to pay a 

higher salary if such a provision were included. And, Mr. Attorney General, I want you to take that into 

consideration. Third, Mr. Attorney General, the Ombudsman should not necessarily be restricted from 

investigating a matter merely because complaints do not have sufficient personal interest. Possibly the 

Ombudsman could act on such a situation on his own motion under section 12(2) but this matter is not 

clear and should be spelled out very clearly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 32 of the Bill sets out the offences and penalties but it does not direct that a 

prosecution must be undertaken at the request of the Ombudsman nor on the direction of the Attorney 

General. Once again, it appears that the Attorney General, as the section now reads, might have 

discretion to sweep something under the rug. In short, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the Saskatchewan 

Ombudsman Bill is one of the most ill-considered Bills to be placed before this Assembly at any time 

during the sessions of this House. The implementation of the legislation would seem to give us an 

Ombudsman, but in fact, it would really be a disaster. If the Attorney General is serious about providing 

the province with a meaningful Ombudsman he must withdraw this Bill and start all over redrafting. I 

urge the Members of this Assembly to join with me in rejecting this Bill and then in working to provide 

the people of Saskatchewan with a public watch dog who will indeed have the ability to watch. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, before the Member takes his seat, if you will permit a question. Is the 

Hon. Member advocating that the Ombudsman should have the right to investigate administrative 

decisions taken by local governments in Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — No, I am not, Mr. Attorney General. 



 

March 28, 1972 

 

1300 

Mr. A. Taylor (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, the Member who just finished said a number 

a things with which we can all agree. He mentioned the complexity of society and the need for an 

Ombudsman because of this. There are very few of us who would disagree with this. There are many 

citizens who just don’t know where to turn in order to correct a wrong that they have faced. The fact, as 

the Member from Lakeview mentions, that Alberta found that 22 per cent of the complaints were 

justified, I think is all the evidence that is needed to prove this point. And yet it seems to me that just a 

few days ago the Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) on the same Bill said that there was no 

need for an Ombudsman with 60 MLAs and an active Press. 

 

It seems to me that there is at least a basic difference of opinion. There has been some reference to the 

cost involved in establishing such a position. I was happy to hear the Member from Lakeview say that 

cost really didn’t matter in this case because I think he is right. This is no luxury. It cannot be considered 

as such when we are protecting the rights of the individual. Protecting individual rights is never a 

luxury. He went on to mention good legislation that guarantees rights. I think this is what is being 

presented at this Session with the various Bills concerning discrimination such as The Fair 

Accommodation Practices Act. 

 

Now, I can’t help but wonder by the Deputy Minister should be different from the Minister in respect to 

the Ombudsman. My understanding has always been and it may be wrong, but it has been that the 

Deputy is an extension of the Minister and acts on his behalf. If this were not the case, then it seems to 

me that the Deputy and Minister would find themselves in rather a unique position. 

 

Now, there was some concern that the Federal Government or its agencies manages to escape under the 

type of Ombudsman that is suggested by this Government. I cannot help but wonder just what an 

Ombudsman would have said about a year or so ago if he did have the power to investigate Federal 

actions when the Federal Government withheld payments under the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — That is one time I would have certainly favored an Ombudsman being able to look into 

the question. 

 

It seems to me that what we are doing is making a start and it’s a start in the right direction. Now if the 

Members opposite don’t want to make that start that’s their business. I, for one, think that it is time, it’s 

time to get underway and we hope, of course, if there are any glaring errors or omissions they can be 

corrected in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

 


