



















































Hansard: February 24, 1972


 

 

704 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

10th Day 

 

Thursday, February 24, 1972. 

 

The Assembly met at 11:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION AND RETURN OF MR. A.R. GUY 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral Officer a certificate of the 

following election and return: Of Allan R. Guy, Esquire, as Member for the constituency of Athabasca. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

VACANCY IN REPRESENTATION 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to inform the Assembly of the following 

vacancy in the representation in the constituency of Souris-Estevan by the death of R. Brown, Esquire, and 

the certificate of the following election and return of K. Thorson, Esquire, as Member for the constituency of 

Souris-Estevan and of J. Wiebe, Esquire as Member for the constituency of Morse. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

RETIREMENT OF J.E. BROCKELBANK AS DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that I have received the following communication from The 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank, Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly: 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 
 

Circumstances make it necessary that I ask the Legislative Assembly to allow me to retire 

from the post of Deputy Speaker, a position which I have felt greatly honoured to have 

occupied. 
 

I have endeavoured to uphold the traditions connected with the office, and if any success has 

been achieved therein, it is because of the support and co-operation received from yourself, 

and the other Members of the Assembly. 

 

Please convey my sincere thanks to them. 

 

Yours very truly, 

John E. Brockelbank. 

 

APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a motion consequent upon your last 

announcement. I should like to move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow: 



 

February 24, 1972 

 

 

705 

 

That Beverly M. Dyck, Esquire, Member for the Constituency of Saskatoon City Park be 

Deputy Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

Agreed to. 

 

PROROGATION 

 

At 11:07 o’clock a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having entered the Chamber, and having taken 

his seat upon the Throne, was pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I 

wish to thank you and congratulate you on the work you have done. 

 

You have taken important steps to restore free access to health care services by removing 

deterrent fees and by extending free medical and hospital care to persons 65 and over. 

 

You have removed a discriminatory financial burden from families of the mentally ill. 

 

I thank you for moving so expeditiously to restore free collective bargaining and to improve 

hours and conditions of work in the province. 

 

You have provided greater security for farmers facing financial difficulty by enacting The 

Family Farm Protection Act. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your 

energies to the activities of the Session and wish you the full blessing of Providence. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Romanow, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative 

Assembly be prorogued until the time set by His Honour for the Second Session of the 

Seventeenth Legislature for the dispatch of business and the Legislative Assembly is 

accordingly prorogued. 

 

 


