



















































Hansard: February 29, 1972


84 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

4th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 29, 1972 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock pm. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. J.E. Brockelbank (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, during this introduction of 

students I wish to apologize for being so anxious to introduce this group of students from Saskatoon. 

They are from Bedford Road Collegiate and they are accompanied today by their principal, Mr. Grassly 

and one of their teachers, Mr. Sorienko. I am sure that you, Mr. Speaker, and all the Members of the 

Assembly welcome them here and hope that they will be able to take something home of value from the 

debates this afternoon. However, I am in the unfortunate position of not being able to guarantee the 

quality of the debate this afternoon. Consequently, they will have to take their chance. I am sure they 

will enjoy themselves this afternoon. We all want to welcome them here and wish them a safe journey 

back to Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B.M. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add to the remarks of the Hon. 

Minister of Public works in welcoming the students of Bedford Road in Saskatoon. I had the privilege 

and pleasure of teaching in that collegiate for a number of years. There is a fine group of students 

coming from that collegiate and I hope they have a very interesting and informative afternoon. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 

welcome the members of King George School. I believe they are taking Grade Eight. They are 

accompanied by their teachers Mr. Stall and Mr. Christianson. King George School is in the heart of my 

riding. Many of the members of my family went to King George School. It is one of the very well 

known older schools in the city of Saskatoon. While I am on my feet, I should like to join in welcoming 

the students from Bedford Road Collegiate as my Hon. Colleague, the Minister of Public Works has 

done. Bedford Road Collegiate is my old alma mater. That tells you a lot about Bedford Road 

Collegiate, but it’s a good school. I’d like to welcome them all here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

OPERATOR’S LICENCES 
 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — I wish to direct a question to the Attorney General regarding the operators’ 

licences that are now being billed. Will the 25 year and under by paying the same fee as those who are 

25 years and over? 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

85 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — The situation with respect to the 25 year olds and under is, 

Mr. Speaker, that there will be no change but the whole matter is under review. 

 

FEE FOR LICENCE PLATES 
 

Mr. Boldt: — I’d like to ask the Minister in Charge of SGIO another question. If I bought a car just 

before Christmas, a new one, and I paid $94 for the licence plates, if I bought them now, would I pay 

$10 more and if I do is that an increase? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Hon. Member, as I indicated yesterday, there is a new 

category which involves 1972 model cars and 1973 model cars only. In that regard the fee insurance rate 

is $104. May I say, that is the situation with auto rates. They remain unchanged except as stated earlier 

in the House. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister has informed us wrongly because there were 1972 cars. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! We can’t have a debate on Questions. Members can put questions and the 

Minister may answer. If Members are not satisfied with the answer they can put a substantive motion on 

or raise it at a later time. We can’t have a debate on Questions on Orders of the Day. 

 

AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENT INSURANCE FUND 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Attorney general has a reply to my 

question yesterday which he said he would take under consideration, about the automobile Accident 

Insurance Fund. What is the legal requirement for the Automobile Accident Insurance Fund and what is 

the state of that fund as of January 1, 1972? 

  

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I should be pleased to answer that question if the Hon. Member would 

put it in writing. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

MOVEMENT OF GRAIN AT THE WEST COAST 
 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, Members of this House will know that last 

Friday the Attorney General and myself went to the Coast to take a look at the grain handling situation 

there. I have a statement that I should like to make. It might just be a bit longer than normal and I ask the 

indulgence of the House in making that statement. 

 

In the Vancouver Province on February 29, it was stated that 19 ships were waiting to be loaded with 

grain or were in the process of being loaded with grain. At that time, both national railways were 

struggling with slides in the Rocky Mountains and the Fraser Canyon allowing only limited volumes of 

all grains to be loaded at the facilities on the West Coast. The fundamental reason for 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

86 

the shortage of export grain in the Vancouver terminals has been the inability of the railway to deliver 

grain from the Prairies to the West coast. The physical problems of weather and the winter weather in 

particular, the unreasonable number of slides that they have encountered in the last while has 

compounded this problem. 

 

There are three lines entering the Vancouver area which can handle export grain. These are the Canadian 

Pacific which hauls about 55 to 60 per cent of all the grain, the CN and the Pacific Great Eastern 

Railway, which is owned by the Province of British Columbia and which interchanges with the 

Canadian National at Prince George. While the Canadian Pacific may find some difficulties in handling 

this CPR grain via CN and the Pacific Great Eastern into Vancouver, no such problem exists for the 

CNR. The Pacific Great Eastern is capable of handling 400 full cars of grain or approximately four 

trainloads per day from Prince George into Vancouver and 400 empty cars from Vancouver to Prince 

George. 

 

During the last three weeks of January when both national railways were blocked by slides not one car 

of grain was diverted from the CN at Prince George into the Vancouver area. In the same period of time 

the Pacific Great Eastern got only four hours of stoppage. In the last several weeks in February the CN 

has diverted a few cars via the Pacific Great Eastern into Vancouver. Using an average of 2,000 bushels 

per car, 400 cars per day would be the equivalent of 800,000 bushels per day or 4,800,00 bushels in a six 

day week. The Canadian Wheat Board claims that it is now 18 million bushels behind in shipments into 

the port of Vancouver. Surely, in such a situation loaded grain cars can be diverted to the CN and to the 

Pacific Great Eastern in the national interest to maintain our market commitments out of the West Coast. 

 

In summary, the immediate problem is to utilize all of our railway facilities regardless of the corporate 

interests so-called or the individual railway companies in order to maintain our commitments to our 

foreign customers. When we look ahead at total exports of Canadian grain amounting to somewhere in 

the order of 900 million to one billion bushels per annum, it is quite obvious that the physical facilities 

are just not now available. At the present time, 300 million bushels per year appears to be the limit of 

grain exports through the West Coast. This figure would have to be increased by 200 million bushels if 

the one billion bushel export figure is to become a reality. The absolute limit of handling capacity at 

Vancouver is considered to be 700 cars per day unloaded and cleaned. If we are looking forward to 

unloading 500 million bushels, we must have additional storage at Vancouver, and additional cleaning 

capacity at Vancouver or at the interior terminals on the Prairies. There are, of course, other factors such 

as the volume of storage taken up by screenings in Vancouver. The great variety of grades which occupy 

valuable space which many consider as not essential for large export sales and, of course, the increased 

physical capacity of the railway system itself. 

 

We are convinced that more storage for both clean and track run grain must be established in 

Vancouver. We are convinced that the CPR should be linked up with the Pacific Great Eastern Railway 

to assure alternative access when the Fraser Canyon is closed by slides. These recommendations are not 

the answer to the total problem of movement of bulk commodities through the Vancouver area but they 

should be considered immediately by the grain trade 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

87 

and the Federal Government and we are taking action in that regard to see that they are considered and 

pursued. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — I believe that we are entitled to a reply from the statement 

made by the Minister. We welcome the statement made by the Minister and we concur that the situation 

in Vancouver points to the tremendous movement of grain that is taking place in this country at this time 

due to Otto Lang and the Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We also agree, Mr. Speaker, with his statement when he suggests that we need an 

improvement in our handling facilities and an expansion. As for the other information that he provided 

for the House, this could all have been gained and has been available through a telephone service just 

about anywhere from your Legislative Office without a trip to Vancouver. It’s been available for a long 

time to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Wheat Board or just about any elevator you want to get it 

from and did not require a trip to Vancouver. The minister has made a trip to Vancouver and he has 

made a statement on a lot of information that I can get in ten minutes from our back room here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

COMPLETION OF ICE ROAD TO THE GULF MINERALS MINE SITE 
 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the 

Day, I would like to make a brief announcement. I wish to inform the House that the 155 mile long 

winter ice road to the Gulf Minerals mine site on Wollaston Lake in northern Saskatchewan has been 

completed. It is estimated that 8,000 tons of equipment, materials and supplies will be hauled over the 

road to the mine site during the winter months. Preparations for the road began January 6, 1972 and it 

was open to traffic on February 15. Beginning 154 miles north east of La Ronge near Oliver Lake, the 

road traverses 120 miles of lake ice and 35 miles of land portages. In addition, a 15 mile access road has 

been prepared to the Wollaston post settlement and a two mile ice road to the settlement at South End 

has also been prepared. Travel distance from Prince Albert to the mine site is 460 miles. Preparation of 

ice roads has been very difficult this winter due to early heavy snowfalls and very difficult sustained 

cold weather conditions. The road has been prepared for high volume five axle truck operations. It will 

service some northern communities as well as the Gulf mine site. Preparation of the road has involved 

the removal of snow on a 100 foot width. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

88 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. A. Taylor (Kerrobert-

Kindersley) for an Address-in-Reply: 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before adjourning the debate yesterday, I congratulated 

you on your appointment. I had reminded the House that the election of the NDP last June was to 

provide a New Deal for People and I reviewed some of the recipients of the New Deal to date and came 

to the conclusion it was mainly those with NDP membership cards that have seen the benefit up to this 

time. I then asked the Premier to put an end to the purge of the civil service which has seen almost daily 

firings of civil servants at an hour’s notice without warning and without cause. Replacements, 

unfortunately, are usually defeated NDP candidates and some long time supporters who are appointed at 

unbelievable salaries with no consideration for experience, training or ability. No exams are required, 

the Public Service Commission is not consulted and salaries are set at the whim of the Minister. I 

suggested that our civil servants are not receiving a New Deal under the new Government. 

 

I also suggested that the Province could not afford the overwhelming number of Executive Assistants 

and Special Assistants that have been gathered from all parts of Canada and the United States. I pointed 

out that where the former Premier had three, the Premier today now has seven of these Assistants. I 

concluded that it was not a New Deal for a province of 900,000 people to have to pay out more than 

$100,000 to the Premier’s staff, $134,000 for Ministers’ Assistants, and $180,000 or better for the 

Premier’s Planning and Research Council. This total close to one half million dollars paid to the friends 

of the Government certainly does not provide a New Deal when our university graduates and our civil 

servants are excluded from this organization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Finally, before adjourning the debate, I brought to the attention of the Members of this 

House a situation which the Opposition views with grave concern. On November 3 the Saskatoon Aid 

Centre Society was incorporated in this province with the main objective of maintaining detailed 

information on civil, fraternal, labour, professional and service organizations and to provide information 

regarding these groups. We submit that these objectives show the intent of this Society to keep a dossier 

on every individual in every public and private organization in this province. We do not believe that in a 

democracy that this type of activity is necessary or desirable and that certainly the taxpayers should not 

be called upon to finance it. 

 

What was even more disturbing was the fact that two days after their incorporation, a request was made 

to the Government for a grant of money, and within twelve days this organization was granted $5,365 of 

the taxpayers’ money. I would suggest to other organizations in the province that have cause to go to the 

Government for a grant to insist that they get the same treatment and the grants are processed in exactly 

the same speed as they were in this particular case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

89 

Mr. Guy: — There are five Directors of this Society, and since their articles of incorporation do not 

include the usual clause on what would happen to the money if they disbanded, it is conceivable that the 

society could disband tomorrow and the five Directors could divide up the money. 

 

The fact that one of the Directors at the time of incorporation and at the time the grant was received was 

the NDP MLA for Saskatoon City Park (Mr. Dyck), we suggest, does not reflect well on this Assembly. 

There is nothing filed in the Provincial-Secretary’s Offices as of this morning to show, indeed, that the 

MLA is not still a member of this Society. Since this practice leaves itself open to abuse and the 

suggestion, warranted or not, that MLA’s are using their authority for private rather than the public 

interest, I ask the Premier and the Attorney General to give us the assurance that this organization will 

not infringe on the rights of any individual or organization in this province and that the MLA involved 

will not have access to the Government grant for his own personal use. Examples like this are certainly 

not in the best interests of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I turn my attention again to the Throne Speech, I am going to digress for a few 

moments and make a few comments that I was unable to make earlier since the Government prevented 

me from taking my seat in the Special Session last summer. I want to say, first of all, that I am proud to 

represent the great constituency of Athabasca in the Opposition. Under the leadership of our new leader, 

Dave Steuart (Prince Albert West) I am sure that we will give the province the leadership they expect 

and show ourselves as a credible alternative to the present Government four years from now. 

 

Now that the election is eight months behind us it is easier to look back and place the events of last June 

in their proper perspective. I believe many people are doing that today and are arriving at conclusions 

that were not so evident in the heat and emotion of the election campaign. I think it is fair to say that the 

Liberal Party today finds itself on the Opposition side of the House because we were prepared to lose an 

election on principle rather than win it by deceit and misrepresentation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — We placed the issues clearly before the people and we appealed to reason and common 

sense. The NDP, not being able to sell their program on the same basis, opted for a campaign based on 

deception, emotion and giveaways. They tried to wreck what they couldn’t contest, they bribed the 

taxpayer with his own money, they sold their souls to every self-interest group in the province for their 

votes, and they forsook the basic principles of honesty, truth and integrity for political expedience based 

on their hunger for power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, this is not only the assessment of groups outside the NDP, it is also the 

feeling of their own Waffle supporters, that the present Government was and still is prepared to forsake 

the principles of socialism and the dictates of their followers for political power. I cannot support the 

Wafflers’ program for a socialist state in Saskatchewan, but I can 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

90 

wholeheartedly support the straightforward and honest approach to politics which they take. I can 

sympathize with their feelings toward the present government and Premier Blakeney. If he is a Socialist, 

he should say so, if he is a free-enterpriser, he should admit that too, but after eight months, I suggest the 

people of Saskatchewan and his own supporters are entitled to know in which direction he intends to 

lead us. 

 

The Throne Speech, unfortunately, does little to answer that question. 

 

It is evident, unfortunately, that the Wafflers are losing strength and relevance in the NDP. Their 

humiliating defeat at their recent convention has left them demoralized. The deliberate appointment of 

John Richards as a Legislative Secretary and thus a supporter of Government policy have effectively 

silenced their most effective Legislative voice. So unless they have more courage to stand up to the NDP 

establishment than they have shown in the last few months, I’m afraid that their days appear to be 

numbered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the people of Saskatchewan needed any further proof that the NDP won the election on 

misrepresentation, irresponsibility and political skulduggery, we have it in this document presented as 

the Speech from the Throne last Thursday. 

 

For months we have been led to believe by speeches of Members opposite that a beautiful new world 

was ready to unfold in Saskatchewan. A world free of unemployment, pollution, student-teacher ratios, 

taxes and other burdens of a capitalist society. 

 

Well, if there is such a world, other than in the pipe dreams of the socialist planners, it certainly isn’t 

here in Saskatchewan. The Throne Speech, awaited with such anticipation spoke of no bright future, had 

no new solutions to our current problems and voiced no New Deal for Saskatchewan people. 

 

The only expression applicable to the Throne speech is that it was a fraud and a hoax. It is fraudulent in 

both what it says and what it doesn’t say. 

 

The Government prefaces its Speech with “My Government will proceed at this Session to enact 

legislation in fulfilment of its four-year program”. Well, if what is enclosed in this document is an 

example of the New Deal for People promised by the Socialists last June, it will be 20 years before their 

four-year program is complete and they will be removed from office long before that. 

 

75 per cent of the programs listed are programs that were either underway or being planned when the 

Liberals were defeated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The other 25 per cent is merely a reorganization of departments which in themselves 

means nothing. 

 

What is not mentioned is more significant than what is. Mr. Speaker, I submit the people of 

Saskatchewan are entitled to know what happened to the promises to reduce hospitalisation and 

medical care premiums, to reopen small hospitals, to lower automobile insurance rates and to reduce 

the mill rate for education. The Throne Speech is strangely silent in regard to these commitments. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

91 

The people of Saskatchewan also want to know the future of the Home-owner grant and the programs to 

wipe out unemployment and replace the jobs that were lost when industrial projects were eliminated. 

But again, the throne Speech has no answers. 

 

I think all people in the province were pleased to hear the improved note of optimism expressed in the 

Throne Speech and in the remarks of the mover and the seconder yesterday. But it’s hard to believe that 

the Premier and his colleagues who composed this speech were the same Members who in Opposition 

painted such a dismal picture for the future of this province just eight months ago. 

 

The credibility and integrity of the Government would have been enhanced if they had admitted that the 

economic upswing that was achieved in 1971 was the result of the sound, business-like practices and 

policies of the former Liberal Government rather than the election of a Socialist government in June. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — In fact, the improvement that has occurred has put the lie to the dire predictions, the 

misrepresentation of fact and the prognostication of gloom and doom that the NDP spread during the 

election campaign as they attempted to discredit our province for their own political gain. 

 

The upswing in the economy last year did substantiate the faith that the Liberal Government has in our 

province and showed that our programs for development, diversification, public works, and sound 

government were what was needed at that time. 

 

There is no question that the policies of the Liberal government during the past two years as well as the 

effort of the Hon. Otto Lang and the Canadian Wheat Board were responsible for the fact that 

Saskatchewan showed improvement in farm and business income, retail sales and housing starts during 

the past year. 

 

Even the Premier has admitted that. In fact, it was surprising how quickly the new Premier saw the 

improvement after the election. In September, he appeared in Toronto speaking in glowing terms of the 

upward swing that had taken place from January to June in the Saskatchewan economy. I hope that in 

view of this anaemic Throne Speech that he will be able to make similar claims in September of this 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, had the Premier been honest enough to make his Toronto speech in June with his praise for 

balanced budgets, diversification of the economy and assistance to the potash industry which were all 

Liberal accomplishments, I submit we would still have been the government today. Instead, the now 

Premier at that time for his own political convenience deliberately misrepresented the true state of the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the definite improvement in the economy that was apparent to all and admitted 

by the Premier, it is fair, I believe, for the people of Saskatchewan to ask the question, “When are the 

major promises made by the NDP during the election campaign going to be carried out?” 

 

I must remind that people of Saskatchewan that there is no excuse for the failure of the Premier and his 

colleagues to live up to their promises and their platform. Eight months have 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

92 

provided the time. And if you remember, few if any promises had time limits imposed during the 

campaign. They were presented then as instant promises for immediate action. 

 

The Liberal Government made sure that they had plenty of money. We left them a nest egg of some 490 

million to start their programs and since then revenues have far surpassed the estimates of last spring. 

 

And lastly a buoyant economy supported by unprecedented expenditures by the Federal government 

have provided a favourable atmosphere for expansion. The only ingredient that has been missing has 

been the determination and inspiration of the Government opposite. 

 

One must ask why in view of these positive factors has the last eight months been one of dismal failure 

for the Government of Saskatchewan? Why has Saskatchewan stood still or reversed its advance? The 

blame must rest with the Premier and his Government 

 

Mr. Speaker, never before has a government created an atmosphere of repression, fear, uncertainty and 

indecision in such a short time. Never has a government broken faith more surely with its electors. And 

never has a leader procrastinated, retreated and foreclosed on the legitimate aspirations of his people as 

has the present Premier of this province. Confusion and uneasiness has reigned supreme in both the 

public and private sectors of our economy. 

 

The Premier and his Cabinet have completely abdicated their responsibilities to a bureaucracy of 

assistants, planners and researchers who in turn have turned the function of government over to 

committees, task forces, probes, public and private inquiries. At a time when positive action by our 

elected Government is required we have indecision, conflict of interests, bureaucratic red tape and 

confusion unparalleled in our history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech says, “Immediately upon taking office my Government took emergency 

action to create jobs.” What a complete distortion of the facts! The truth is that the Government took 

emergency action to reduce the number of jobs. They cancelled the two largest industrial developments 

in the history of this province that would have created tens of thousands of jobs and they passed labour 

legislation that will mean the loss of thousands of permanent and part time jobs in our cities and smaller 

communities. 

 

They have practically eliminated any hope for our unemployed and our students to attain work this 

summer. No alternatives have appeared or have been suggested in the Throne Speech to help these 

people. 

 

Their public works program has been a joke and a disaster. To date there has not been one tender called 

nor one dollar spent that was not in the Liberal government’s budget and work priorities last spring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — They speak of a provincial winter works program. There is no such thing. If it was not for 

the Federal Government’s winter works program and the co-operation of local governments, 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

93 

there would not be any projects in Saskatchewan this winter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The Federal Government is administering the program, providing most of the funds and 

approving the projects. The local governments initiate the projects, share the cost and supervise the 

work. The provincial role has been nothing but that of criticizing the Federal and local governments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — It is true that the Provincial Government has provided several million dollars in additional 

funds to the Federal program but they have accepted no responsibility, initiated no new programs and 

have shown little imagination to solve the unemployment crisis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that although unemployment is still too high in Canada, there has 

been a slight decline across Canada in all provinces except Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Today Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada where unemployment is higher than it 

was at this time last year. There has been no New Deal for the unemployed. 

 

The Premier’s answer to the overwhelming criticism of inefficiency that was levelled by the Federal and 

local authorities was to appoint a new Minister of Public Works. He immediately blamed the officials of 

his department for the mess the Government was in. This was most unjust and unfair to blame civil 

servants for a lack of program, policy and direction that is the Cabinet’s responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Now, Mr. Speaker, if there has been one area where the Government has been a total 

failure it has been in the field of industrial development. Nowhere has this been shown so obviously as 

in the Throne Speech. 

 

It is true that legislation was promised for merchants and small businesses. This will be of little value as 

there will be no merchants and small businesses left at the rate they are closing up. 

 

There was a sentence of referring to oil leases which is not new nor popular with the oil industry. And 

there was a sentence referring to a new road to the Uranium Mine at Wollaston Lake which if Members 

opposite were truthful they would have added that the construction of the road has been delayed for two 

years past the completion date set by the former Liberal government. 

 

Those three sentences, Mr. Speaker, were the sum total of the New Deal for industrial development 

proving what we have been 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

94 

saying for a long time that the NDP and industrial development do not mix. 

 

In fact, their record to date shows that to them industrial development is how many industries they can 

chase out of the province rather than how many new ones they can attract. One must say that they have 

had amazing success in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Government for seven years made the diversification of our economy by 

industrial development our top priority. In spite of many adverse factors prevalent in Saskatchewan the 

record of the Liberal Government in attracting industry was amazing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The Prince Albert Pulp Mill, the extension to the steel plant, the potash mines, Anglo 

Rouyn, Gulf Minerals, the Weyburn Distillery, MacMillan Bloedell and Simpson Timber complexes are 

just a few that will always stand as monuments to the success that we achieved. 

 

The thousands of jobs provided and the increased provincial revenues which were translated into new 

programs and tax relief for our people are all testimony to the benefits of industrial diversification. 

 

When the election was called last June Saskatchewan was on the verge of two of the greatest industrial 

developments in our history. The Athabasca Pulp Mill and the Choiceland Iron development were 

virtually assured after many months and years of negotiation. 

 

In these two major developments, Mr. Speaker, lay hope and promise for thousands of Saskatchewan 

people. The unemployed, those living at poverty levels, those on welfare, our students graduating from 

university and trade schools and those wishing to exchange the vagaries of an agricultural life for the 

security of a weekly pay cheque or a business of their own for the first time saw a future filled with 

employment opportunities in their own province. The taxpayers saw the possibility of tax relief as the 

tax base was widened. The Premier has returned these people to the depths of despair. 

 

Instead of a province flexing its industrial muscles as Canada enters a new period of economic 

expansion, we have a province where the door to investment and new industry has been closed and 

overnight the welcome mat of the Liberal government has been replaced with the sign “Keep Out — 

Development Not Wanted”. 

 

This barrier that is being erected to surround the socialist state of Premier Blakeney will forever commit 

our province to unemployment, welfare programs and the receipt of Federal subsidies and assistance. 

 

The cry that is being echoed by Saskatchewan people is “Why?”. Why is our Government shutting out 

industrial development? Why is our Premier threatening industry? Why are they anti-American? These 

are questions which the Throne Speech should have answered but did not. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

95 

The facts are that since the election the war on industry has been waged with unbelievable success. The 

first predetermined attack on industry by the Premier was his announcement that the Athabasca Pulp 

Mill was cancelled. While this was not surprising, it didn’t make sense. The people of the Meadow Lake 

area had shown by the re-election of a Liberal Member that they wanted it. The Indian and Métis people 

in the area where the mill was to be located voted overwhelmingly in favour of it and most of the trade 

unions in the province were in favour of it to create employment. Still the Premier cancelled it. Why? 

 

His claims about the effect on the ecology, the problems of reforestation and the financial deal were all 

his to control as head of the Government. He could have held public hearings and renegotiated with 

Parsons and Whittemore as he had asked us to do. But he refused to do any of that. He coolly and 

calculatingly cancelled the deal and the only assumption that can be drawn under the circumstances was 

that it was a pay off to the Wafflers and anti-American elements in his Party for their support and silence 

during the election campaign. 

 

The cancellation of the mill was a sad day for Saskatchewan but it was only the beginning. The Premier 

showed what a shrewd financial genius he was when he announced that not only he rid Saskatchewan of 

a pulp mill but he had paid $6 million in cold, hard cash to do it. Premier Blakeney, the imported 

financier from Nova Scotia said a cash outlay of $3.6 million to acquire a 30 per cent interest in the 

largest pulp mill in the world which would provide thousands of jobs, millions of dollars in revenue to 

the province was a bad deal, but a cash a good deal for Saskatchewan. He has taken more than $6 from 

every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan to make a sacrificial offering on the altar of anti-

Americanism as repayment to the Wafflers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — He said to the unemployed, the underprivileged and our students, “You are going to pay $6 

million for a New Deal for People that will ensure that you never get a job.” 

 

After his predecessors in the NDP had spent 20 years trying to get a pulp mill for Saskatchewan and his 

counterpart, the NDP Premier of Manitoba had spent $100 million trying to save their mill this brilliant, 

financial genius, the Premier of Saskatchewan, pays $6 million to destroy the one that he had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — With an industrial policy like that it is no wonder that he didn’t wish to mention it in his 

Throne Speech. 

 

Well, with the demise of the pulp mill the Premier and his then Minister of Mineral Resources, Mr. 

Bowerman, turned their attention to the destruction of the Choiceland iron complex. The fact that 

Canadian and Saskatchewan firms were involved did not deter our illustrious Premier. 

 

After a series of press releases to condition the Saskatchewan people he dropped the axe and another 

potential employer 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

96 

and a revenue producing industry was gone. 

 

And it was the handling of this project that led directly to the demise of the member for Shellbrook as 

Minister of Mineral Resources. He couldn’t get it through his mind that the Premier didn’t want an iron 

mine. On September 10 after the deal had been cancelled. Mr. Bowerman headlined in the press that he 

still saw the development of the Choiceland iron mine. In November the Premier says the Government 

was not negotiating but the Minister of Mineral Resources said the Government had not made a firm 

decision. The Premier said, “I don’t agree with the Mineral Resources Minister’s views.” However, the 

Mineral Resources Minister never gave up. On December 23 he tried again by stating the Provincial 

Government will likely make a decision early in the new year. Well, that was too much for the Premier. 

A few days later a decision was made all right. It was a decision that Mr. Bowerman was no longer 

Minister of Mineral Resources. And nothing more has been heard of the Choiceland iron mine since that 

time. 

 

With these two major resource developments of the former Liberal Government killed and no new ones 

on the horizon, the Premier then turned to harassment of industries already established in the hope that 

they too would leave the province taking their jobs, their royalties and their tax payments. 

 

The first to be attacked was the petroleum refining industry. I think we all agree that it was regrettable 

when Imperial Oil announced that they would be phasing out their Regina and Winnipeg operations 

within three or four years. But it is not surprising in view of the attitude of the NDP Government. I 

company will listen to the threat of confiscation and nationalization so long. For six months they waited 

for a statement of policy from the new Government but it was not forthcoming. Instead, not a week went 

by that the Wafflers did not demand the Government take over the oil industry. And with the Wafflers 

success in stopping the pulp mill and the iron mine is it not any wonder that Imperial Oil decided to get 

out of the province where they were not wanted. Mr. Speaker, I submit that Imperial Oil has not been the 

first or will not be the last to flee from the threat of socialist oppression. No, instead of trying to allay the 

fears of Imperial Oil, the Premier resorted to the big stick. But his threat of a boycott of Imperial 

products got nowhere. He succumbed to the demand of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, the 

Wafflers and the Communist Party of Saskatchewan to threaten the nationalization of the industry. One 

of the Legislative Secretaries speaking on behalf of his Government said, “The only alternative is for the 

Provincial Government to control provincial refining.” And as an additional threat to the industry he 

concluded payment of compensation should be conditional on co-operation by the petroleum industry. If 

the companies tried to thwart the Government’s attempts to nationalize the refineries, no compensation 

should be paid. Mr. Speaker, in view of this intimidation, is it any wonder that the oil refining industry is 

moving out of the NDP provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba? 

 

With the oil refining industry practically eliminated the Premier and his Government next turned their 

attack to the potash industry. Here the harassment started before the election with a plank in the NDP 

platform calling for the nationalization of the industry. On June the 8th, the now Education Minister, Mr. 

MacMurchy told a meeting in the heart of the potash country at Lanigan that a New Democratic 

Government will immediately lift the prorationing on potash. But again, Mineral Resources’ 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

97 

Bowerman blew it. He forgot the policy and what a terrible job the Liberals had done. He told a meeting 

of potash producers on December 9th that prorationing was a great success and that his Government 

would maintain it and also the floor price. In fact, the Minister got carried away to the point that for a 

moment he forgot whose terrible policy it was when he said, “We believe that because of our assistance 

through prorationing and price stabilization legislation the Province is entitled to some increase in 

revenue.” Now we in the Liberal Party are, of course, pleased that the NDP has accepted our program. 

However, we are rather sceptical as are the potash companies in view of the recent public meeting in 

Yorkton where a Legislative Secretary outlining Government policy said, “The two most important 

priorities of the NDP Government are to develop socialist alternatives for resource development.” They 

singled out potash and oil as two examples where this alternative is required. 

 

What the NDP finally decide to do, of course, will be their decision. We wish they would make their 

intentions clear because the threat hanging over the industry is harmful to our province. As was pointed 

out by the potash industry at the December meeting, customers are holding off on purchases as a result 

of speculation as to the government’s aims and the industry is floundering as a result of the 

Government’s failure to make its position known. Mr. Speaker, it was to be hoped that the appointment 

of a new Minister of Industry and Mineral Resources would stop this threatening and harassment of 

industry. I picked up the Leader Post on February 16 and I read the headlines, “Minister Says Free 

Enterprise Is Welcome.” I quickly read to see what province it came from because I didn’t think it could 

come from Saskatchewan. To my surprise I found that the new Minister had assured the Canadian 

Petroleum Association that free enterprise was welcome in this province. You know, Mr. Speaker, for 

one fleeting moment the hope was born that the new Minister had convinced his Premier that resource 

development was welcome. But the hope died as quickly as it was born as the new Minister continued, 

“However, I warn you that if you do not carry out more exploration of the Crown land you hold under 

exploration permits someone else will, perhaps the Government.” It is obvious that Industry Minister 

Thorson was not speaking Government policy when he welcomed free enterprise to the province. Mr. 

Speaker, the examples I have cited are only a few but they are typical of those that occur week after 

week, month after month. The threats, the intimidations both in words and in actions make this the most 

anti-investment, anti-business and anti-industry Government in the history of this province. The industry 

already lost plus the failure of the Throne Speech to emphasize industry and resource development will 

give cold comfort to the thousands of unemployed, the hundreds of university students looking for 

summer jobs, the welfare recipients in the underprivileged areas of our province whose only hope for a 

new deal lies in the development of our resources. 

 

Now it is noted that little is said in the throne Speech regarding Dominion-Provincial relations. Again, 

with good reason, as next to industrial development and unemployment, it is in this area that our Premier 

has been a dismal failure. Whether we like it or not Saskatchewan is still dependent to a large extent on 

its relationship with Ottawa. During the seven years that we were the Government Saskatchewan was 

respected as a spokesman for Western Canada and we continually gained status as an equal partner in 

Canadian Federation. Unfortunately, this is no longer the case. The NDP have never felt themselves part 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

98 

of the Federal-Provincial community and they have never been concerned about the role Saskatchewan 

will play at the Federal-Provincial Conferences. The only concern of the NDP Government under T.C. 

Douglas, W.S. Lloyd and now Allan Blakeney has been how much they can milk out of Ottawa to apply 

to their own provincial socialist program. They go cap in hand like a poor relation contributing nothing 

to the discussion but a demand for money. 

 

The Finance Ministers’ Conference held in January was a typical example. For years the present Premier 

berated our Government for our lack of success at Federal-Provincial Conferences. He claimed that he 

could do better and he finally got the chance. Prior to the conference the Premier and Provincial 

Treasurer said he was gong to take a hard line. When he came home, Mr. Speaker, virtually empty 

handed, I think the best comment appeared in the Carillon, the Regina Campus newspaper and certainly 

one that Members opposite cannot refer to as a pawn of the Liberal Party. They stated: 

 

Premiers stand a cheap PR stunt. The Premier’s statement of taking a hard line stand is really nothing 

more than a cheap and phoney political tactic since, if the former Liberal Government could achieve 

few results at similar conferences, what can the NDP Government achieve? 

 

And the people can say, “Amen,” to that! 

 

The disinterest of our new Government towards Federal-Provincial relations was made perfectly clear 

by Premier Blakeney at the time President Nixon imposed the 10 per cent surcharge on Canadian 

exports to the United States. 

 

The seriousness of the situation was quickly seen by the Federal Government as Trade Minister Pepin 

called an urgent Federal-Provincial Conference to deal with the problem. Premiers, Finance Ministers 

and Trade Ministers converged on Ottawa from all over the country. 

 

Did Premier Blakeney go? No, he did not. Did he send a Cabinet Minister? No, he wouldn’t do that. Did 

he send a Deputy, did he send anybody with the knowledge to speak on behalf of the Province? No, 

instead he sent a backbench MLA, a man whom he did not even consider for his Cabinet, to speak for 

Saskatchewan on this urgent occasion. Not only did it show Saskatchewan’s lack of concern on a vital 

issue but it was a deliberate affront to Ottawa to send anyone below Cabinet rank to attend a meeting of 

this magnitude. Let us hope in the future that the Premier, if he is unwilling or unable to attend, he will 

at least send one of his Ministers to speak on his behalf and avoid any further embarrassment to our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as MLA from Athabasca, I am particularly concerned with the policies and programs of 

the present Government for the development of the human and natural resources of Northern 

Saskatchewan. Until 1964 I was dismayed at the failure of the former CCF Government to adequately 

develop these resources. For the last seven years I was proud to be a Member of a Government that 

placed northern development and assistance to Indian and Métis people as a top priority in its program. 

It was satisfying to see the economic and resource development, the roads and airstrips, the new schools, 

the training and educational 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

99 

programs and the numerous other new programs to provide job opportunities and better living standards 

for our northern people. 

 

The results of seven years of Liberal Government in developing our North and providing new hope and 

opportunity to our people of Indian ancestry has been an inspiration to all of Canada and will stand as 

one of the major accomplishments of Premier Thatcher and his Government. 

 

Today, I am seriously concerned that this era of progress is over. I have however noted with interest the 

reference in the Throne Speech to legislation which will make possible sweeping changes in the 

Government’s approach to the people of the North and the problems of northern development and which 

will replace the Indian and Métis Department with a new Human Resources Agency. 

 

The idea of a Department of Northern Affairs is not new but one that has been considered for years. As a 

northern Member whose area would be primarily affected I am fully aware that there are both 

advantages and disadvantages from such an approach. I wish to say at this point that it is not our 

intention to prejudice these two pieces of legislation. We on this side of the House recognize that the 

problems of our Indian and northern people are many and varied in scope and require support and co-

operation of all Saskatchewan people. The legislation will be judge solely as to whether it is in the best 

interest of the people concerned. However, I must say that preliminary policy statements and actions 

taken during the last eight months by Members opposite make me less than optimistic that the NDP have 

a new and satisfactory approach to northern problems and our Indian and Métis people. At present there 

is little to show that the attitude of the NDP towards the North has changed since they were the 

Government before. 

 

The appointments of the member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) as Minister of Natural Resources 

and the Member for Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) as Minister of the Indian and Métis Department was 

unfortunate in view of their previous association with northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Northern people have not forgotten the accusation by the minister of Natural Resources when he was in 

Opposition that northern pilots, Indian and Métis and others, deliberately start forest fires so they can be 

paid to suppress them and his contention that money spent to fight fires north of the timberline was a 

waste of money. The Minister of Indian and Métis Departments and the new Indian Northern Affairs 

Department has a similar record. They recall after he was no longer a civil servant his commercial 

fishing business on Reindeer Lake which tried to put co-op fisheries out of business. Also the 

appointment by these two Ministers of two defeated NDP candidates for Meadow Lake and Athabasca 

as their assistants, either appointed directly or through contract, has not helped the feeling of uncertainty 

that no new relationship will be forthcoming. 

 

I had hoped when the Minister announced last fall that he was going to appoint an advisory council that 

the members would be truly representative of the North and not picked on a basis of politics, but it 

appears that this was not to be the case. Three of the four members on this northern council have been 

associated in one form or another with the NDP organization. There is only one who is non-political as 

well as being the only person of Indian ancestry. One would have been more impressed if the mayors or 

councillors from La Ronge and Uranium City or the chairman or members of local community 

authorities had been 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

100 

appointed to this first council since they are elected officials in their areas. 

 

To add insult to injury the Minister also appointed a southern Indian to represent the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians thus overlooking dozens of northern chiefs and councillors who are quire capable 

of acting on this council. Under the circumstances it is not surprising that the Métis Society has refused 

to appoint a member at this time due to the lack of consultation and promise of financial assistance. And 

although Mr. Bowerman has tried to create the impression that northern people are to be consulted his 

statements and actions contradict him. 

 

On several occasions he has admitted that the Advisory Council have already begun planning local 

programs and early in February he announced that the acting Deputy Minister of the Indian and Métis 

Department had left for a ten day tour in the North but no public meetings were anticipated. Mr. 

Bowerman said that the discussions were for the purpose of briefing Advisory Council members of 

Government policy. 

 

It is the consensus of northern people, Mr. Speaker, that six people appointed by the Minister should not 

have the responsibility to plan local programs but it should be done by the people or their elected 

representatives in the area concerned. 

 

I think the thinking of our Government concerning our Indian people was best summed up by their 

Minister, Mr. Bowerman, when on December 22 he told a press conference: 

 

The main portion of the Indian and Métis Department work would likely be taken over by the Welfare 

Department. 

 

With those words, Mr. Speaker, the Indian and Métis people of this province have returned to the 

poverty, despair and hopelessness that existed before the Liberals took office in 1964. That is why I say 

that the reorganization and creation of new departments will not achieve a New Deal for our northern 

and Indian people unless they are accompanied by new policies and new approaches to the people at the 

same time. 

 

I was pleased to note today that the road to Gulf Minerals has been completed. This was a program that 

has been carried out the last couple of years under the Liberal Government and has gone ahead this year 

in the same way. Perhaps a little later in its completion but we all know that sometimes weather 

conditions play a part. My major concern at this time was a statement that was made the other day by 

one of the Waffle members that even Gulf Minerals, the independent company up there, was going to be 

brought under the scrutiny of the Government opposite. So it would appear that in that case there is 

another industry that’s going to be harassed from start to finish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is obvious from my remarks that the election of the NDP Government has 

not brought a New Deal to Saskatchewan as promised. Instead it has brought waste and extravagance, it 

has brought despair to our civil service, and to our business community, to the unemployed, to 

university students and to the underprivileged. The Throne Speech does not come to grips with any of 

the urgent problems facing our people but is more concerned with enhancing the political image of our 

Premier and his government. For that reason I must oppose the motion. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

101 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I first want to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the 

Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. Taking into account the numerous amount of 

backbenchers I think they and their constituencies can be justly proud with the honour which they have 

both received. I also want to congratulate them on an excellent job of oratory, but I had the feeling from 

their remarks that they were not very proud of the Throne Speech as they both spent very little time in 

dealing with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must say how pleased I am to have been afforded the privilege to serve the people of my 

constituency and in turn the Province of Saskatchewan in this Legislature. I should like as well to 

congratulate the Hon. Member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) in his success at the polls and also in 

his new responsibility as Minister in charge of Industry and Commerce. I trust, Mr. Speaker, that he will 

show the same zeal and drive in attracting new business and new job-producing industries to this 

province as he showed during his recent campaign. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I should like once again to thank my constituents in Morse for the confidence and 

trust they have shown in me and in my Party and to say that the responsibility which they have given me 

will be uppermost in my mind. It is a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, of representing a constituency which 

after 16 years of CCF representation gave this Province its first Liberal Premier in 20 years. It is a 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker, which during the past 11 years has been outstanding representation by one 

of the greatest men this province has every produced. A man with outstanding qualities and dedication 

to the people of this province and to this Legislature. A man of whom I was very proud to have had as 

our representative and an association with this man which I valued greatly. 

 

During the past 11 years which included four provincial general elections, the constituency of Morse has 

been exposed to all forms of political tactics on behalf of the NDP in their vigorous attempts to unseat 

the Liberals in Morse and hopefully cause the former Member to suffer personal defeat. We were 

deluges by an onslaught of NDP workers and high party brass that converged on the Morse constituency 

like locusts during election time. This vigorous attempt by the NDP has left Morse with probably the 

best-organized and politically knowledgeable electorate in this province. This, Mr. Speaker, had a great 

deal to do with my winning the by-election in Morse. 

 

This by-election, Mr. Speaker, was no exception. The NDP Government regardless of the outcome of 

the by-election would still remain the government. They thought that finally they now had a chance to 

win back the Morse constituency. They brought the Premier, they brought his Cabinet Ministers, his 

backbenchers, Federal Members of Parliament, Executive Assistants, union organizers, constituency 

presidents and workers from all parts of this province. The only big gun which they didn’t bring back 

into Morse was their National Leader. He was there in June but he fired one of the biggest blanks you 

ever heard. In a way, Mr. Speaker, you can’t blame the NDP for not bringing him back, there is no point 

in re-using ineffective ammunition. The Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris) spent the whole month of 

November in Morse. From the statements he has made in Morse and which he has also made in the 

House, I should like to wish him the same success in Arm River in 1975 as he had in Morse on 

December 1. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

102 

Mr. Speaker, we won that by-election by 426 votes, but had the Premier, his Executive Assistants and 

organizers from all parts of this province been eligible to vote the NDP candidate would have won that 

by-election. Mr. Speaker, I am proud of my executive in Morse, proud because they single handily 

defeated the NDP political machine. The ammunition which they used was a record of the present 

Government and its proposals regarding agriculture and rural life in this province. 

 

The Agriculture Minister and the new NDP candidate for Morse both speaking at the nominating 

convention declared that this by-election would be fought on provincial agricultural issues, fought on 

The Family Farm Protection Act and fought on the proposed Land Bank. Mr. Speaker, we took those 

issues to the people of Morse and they said No to the Family Farm Protection Act. They said No to the 

proposed Land Bank. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — The constituency of Morse is comprised of people involved in agricultural and rural 

life. The economy of Morse revolves around the agricultural industry. Mr. Speaker, the people of Morse 

told this government what they though of its agricultural proposals. Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we 

won that by-election by 426 votes. The Conservative candidate polled 680 votes. In effect, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP lost that by-election by 1,106 votes. This clearly indicates that those involved, connected and 

dependent on agriculture are opposed to socialism and to this Government’s agricultural legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Friday afternoon I had my first real opportunity to witness and take part in the 

proceedings of this Legislature. As the newest Member of this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, I was amazed at 

what I saw and what I heard. An emergency debate had been called to discuss the wheat situation at the 

West Coast. I must admit that I was royally entertained by the Members opposite. But I fail to see what 

we as a legislative body accomplished other than a bit of publicity and a weekend holiday to the West 

Coast for the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Bobsey Twins. 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — I am pleased to see that this Government is concerned about the wheat situation at the 

West Coast but I cannot see where it was justified in calling an emergency debate. I would rather have 

seen the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) call an emergency debate on the unemployment crisis in this 

province… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — …and this Government’s inability to solve that crisis. As well, an emergency debate 

should have been called by the Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Thorson) regarding the exodus 

of industry from this province and the closing down of business in this province. 

 

It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is only concerned about situations not in their 

jurisdiction and situations outside this province which they are not responsible for. They are unwilling to 

call an emergency debate or do 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

103 

anything about crisis situations that affect their Government and the well being of this province. I hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that they will soon stop basking in the glory of their large numbers and start solving some 

of the problems which they have created here at home. 

 

During my campaign there were a great many constituents who voiced their concern for this 

Government’s hasty and unthoughtout legislation in The Family Farm Protection Act. They were 

amazed at some of the remarks made by the Premier during the campaign when he said and he appeared 

to take the credit for it that the farmers accounts in business places and with implement dealers 

throughout this province were quickly being paid off. He gave the credit for this to the Family Farm 

Protection Act. What cash did this Act project into this province? None. Then why was the Premier 

taking credit for something that his Government never did? I can and so can the farmers in Morse tell 

you where the cash came from to pay their accounts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers in Saskatchewan sold more bushels of grain in 1971 than they sold in all of 

1969 and 1970 combined. That’s where the cash came from to pay those accounts. I see now from a 

recent article in the Leader-Post that the Premier is now claiming credit for the two-price system of 

wheat, the hog premium and the final wheat payment. You know it’s just about as bad, Mr. Speaker, as 

one of my constituents whom I called on during my campaign. He told me that he had a difficult time 

deciding whether he would support me or not. I asked him why. He said that a couple of days ago a 

certain Cabinet Minister from the NDP Government had called in to see him and he had told this farmer 

that the reason the farmers were selling so much wheat was because the people of Saskatchewan elected 

an NDP Government and that the NDP, in turn, were selling this wheat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that they will take credit for anything possible. The Cabinet Minister, 

however, could not have made a very good impression upon this constituent because when I asked him 

who it was all he could talk about was a legal domino. I think, Mr. Speaker, that when I left this fellow’s 

yard he realized that it was Otto Lang and the Wheat Board that was selling this wheat and not this NDP 

Government. 

 

Getting back to The Family Farm Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) if this legislation was really necessary. In light of the hardship which it has 

caused the smaller farmer in his attempt to obtain the new credit which he so vitally needs to expand his 

farming operations. I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that it would have been good legislation at that time if this 

government had accepted this burden instead of placing it on the implement dealers, the banks and the 

credit unions. The farmers themselves realized that this was a bad deal and poor legislation. They 

showed their mistrust in this Government by not using this legislation. When asked how many farmers 

had taken advantage of this Act the Minister of Agriculture stated that literally thousands had taken 

advantage of this Act, but there was no way of knowing exactly how many. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are the exact figures? The Administrator of The Family Farm Protection Act was 

asked this question by the Leader-Post. His answer, “To be on the safe side, I guess I could say less than 

a dozen so far.” Mr. Speaker, was it really worth all the fuss? The farmers have clearly shown that it was 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

104 

legislation that they could not use and according to the figures that no one in this government seems to 

know, they did not use this legislation. The farmers did not want this extra burden of having to make a 

double payment plus interest one year from now and in turn hurt their credit rating which is so vitally 

important to the farming industry of this province. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Agriculture 

Minister will allow this piece of legislation to die a natural death on July 31, 1972. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — Let’s look at another New Deal that this government has given the farming 

community of this province – succession duties. We all know what it’s all about. Mr. Blakeney said that 

it will help the small farmer He announced during the final stages of the campaign that there would be 

an exemption in some cases of up to $150,000. How is this bettering the smaller farmer? Under the 

former Liberal Government there was no such tax on small farmers. What do we consider a small farm 

or an average farm in Saskatchewan? I think that all of us would like to see the goal of one to two 

sections as the average farm. I believe that in the majority this is the case now. What would or could that 

average farmer’s estate be worth today. This average farmer would be in a position today where his 

beneficiary would be assessed a succession duty tax. Mr. Speaker, not only must we be concerned about 

land prices and the values of estates today but we must also be concerned about what the values of 

estates will be five years from today. I can assure you they won’t do down, Mr. Speaker, they will be 

going up. And anyone who is under the $150,000 exemption today, two, three, four or five years from 

now their estates could be in a position where they would be assessed succession duty tax. Not only is 

this estate, Mr. Speaker, going to be required to pay succession duties but it will also be required to pay 

a capital gains tax. It would also be required to pay income tax on that estate for that year. Just exactly 

how much tax is the beneficiary whose husband or father had made a moderate success of his life going 

to have to pay in order to die? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that the succession duty tax is wrong and I feel that it is unjust and definitely unfair 

for any man who along with his family wishes to make a success of his life and his farm. What 

alternatives does his widow or son have? These taxes must be paid immediately. Where are they going 

to find the money to pay this? Is this, Mr. Speaker, where the Land Bank comes in? Is this individual 

going to be forced to sell his land to the Government and in turn become a share cropper and lease that 

land back from the government in order to pay his succession duty tax and have enough capital left over 

to continue farming? Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we are on the subject, let’s look at the Land Bank. I wish to touch on a few points 

which concern me and which concern my constituents in Morse. One of our concerns is that the Premier 

and the Minister of Agriculture stated that they are not anxious to sell the land and would prefer a lease 

arrangement and under certain conditions where farmers could eventually after five years have the 

opportunity to pay for this land and buy it out and in turn pay cash. As you know, Mr. Speaker, it is very 

difficult for a young farmer to find the cash to pay out that land. Another concern of mine is the fact that 

there is a clause in the lease agreement which states, “Leases may specify the use which may be made 

by given parcels of land.” Does this mean, 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

105 

Mr. Speaker, that the young farmer will be told what to seed, when to seed, when to harvest and what 

and where to sell? Mr. Speaker, again, I certainly hope not. 

 

Let’s look, Mr. Speaker, at what it would cost a young man who wishes to start farming under this lease 

arrangement. Let’s say, for argument’s sake, that a good-sized farm unit is six quarters of land. The 

Agriculture Minister has stated that the rental fee will be from $2.50 to $10 per acre depending on the 

type of land and the cost of money. Let’s take an average here as well of $5 per acre. This then means 

that the young farmer must pay a rental of $800 per year and on top of that he will be required to pay the 

taxes and also it will be compulsory for him to take out crop insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right now I want to deal only with the cash rental. He is leasing six quarters of land at $800 

per quarter which comes to $4,800 per year which he will be required to pay in cash in order to farm six 

quarters of land. He is a young man just starting out and we can safely say that he will have 30 years of 

farming ahead of him. This then means, Mr. Speaker, that this young man during his farming career will 

pay to the Government $144,000 just for the privilege of farming that land. He may be considering 

retiring after 30 years. The Minister of Agriculture mentioned that the main reason for this Land Bank is 

to provide the retiring farmer with an opportunity of retiring with dignity and financial security at a time 

of his own choosing. If this young man was not given the opportunity of purchasing that six quarters he 

will not have built up an estate, he will be broke. Mr. Speaker, after spending that $144,000 on that land 

he will have nothing much to retire on. Mr. Speaker, this is one of my main objections to this Land 

Bank. I believe that the young men in this province should have the opportunity to begin farming, to 

have the opportunity to own that land and to have an opportunity of becoming a successful farmer and in 

turn to have the opportunity of acquiring an estate that will allow them to retire with dignity and 

financial security. 

 

I should like to read to you a letter which I received from one of my constituents and it reads as follows: 

 

The following are some thoughts which occur to me regarding the Government’s proposed Land 

Bank. You may already have considered most of them. As far as purchase goes, if the purpose and 

priorities listed are the way they say, I don’t see too much wrong with it. But they mention the 

advisability of young leasing as opposed to buying thereby leaving said young farmers with cash for 

other purposes. Well said! However, in recent press releases the land would be let out on a cash rental 

basis to run from $2.50 to $10 per acre. Now a bit of calculation tells me that this amounts to as much 

as most farmers have to pay to the Farm Credit Corporation where this method has been used to 

acquire land. A bit of research should bear this out. I think of my own son who bought last spring 

through the Farm Credit Corporation, 860 acres. Payments amount to $2,600 per year including 

interest and life insurance. He made no down payment at all. True, Farm Credit Corporation seem to 

insist on my signature on the Mortgage. Now if this was a rental deal from the Land Bank how much 

extra cash would he have for Anything else? At least after 30 years he will have an asset to sell and 

perhaps buy a house in town or whatever, whereas a person renting all his life could be a ward of the 

public upon 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

106 

retirement. Maybe it wouldn’t matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not too many young farmers in Saskatchewan today are fortunate enough to have a father 

who is able to co-sign or guarantee their mortgage. But, Mr. Speaker, this Government can guarantee 

that note, this Government can say to this young man, “We will sell you those six quarters of land, you 

can obtain the money from the Farm Credit Corporation and we will guarantee the mortgage. This 

means then that after a period of 30 years this young man will own those six quarters of land instead of 

it costing him $144,000 in rental fees it will have cost him $78,000. This farmer, then Mr. Speaker, is in 

a position to sell those six quarters of land and retire with dignity and financial security. This type of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly endorse and I urge the Government o seriously consider it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — During the June campaign and also during this by-election the Premier and his 

colleagues campaigned up and down this province claiming that they had a New Deal for People. Mr. 

Speaker, what has this New Deal meant for some of the people of the Morse constituency? The business 

community and the residents of the town of Herbert, one of the most expanding and growing towns 

along the No. 1 Highway, are quite concerned about his New Deal that the Department of Highways 

seems to be proposing for their town. 

 

The previous Minister of Highways in the construction of the four-lane highway past Herbert realized 

the dependency which the town of Herbert has on vacationing and commercial travel along the Trans 

Canada Highway and agreed to their request in constructing two access roads into the business 

community, one from the east and one from the west. Under the present Government the New Deal now 

appears that they will be getting only one access road and the government has decided in its wisdom that 

the business community of Herbert no longer needs the revenue from the commercial and vacationing 

traffic. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that the new Minister of Highways (Mr. Byers) will look into this 

matter and show his concern for the people of Herbert and not apply his New Deal but give them back 

the old deal. 

 

What has the New Deal meant for the ferry operator at Riverhurst? A young man with a growing family, 

it meant, Mr. Speaker, that only hours after the Government changed he was personally given notice that 

he was not to return to work for the 3:00 o’clock shift and was given until the end of the week to vacate 

the government house in which he was living. He was given no explanation as to why he was fired and 

he had no opportunity whatsoever to obtain a new job or to find a new home for his wife and family. 

This New Deal, Mr. Speaker, meant extreme hardship. 

 

What has the New Deal meant for a widow at Central Butte? A woman who now has the responsibility 

of sending a daughter through university and a son through high school. A major portion of her income 

was derived from her appointment by the Government as motor license issuer for Central Butte and area. 

Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand a letter dated January 12, 1972 which she received from the Treasury 

Department, Taxation Branch which reads and I quote: 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

107 

 

 

Dear Madam: This is to confirm that your appointment as motor licence issuer at Central Butte has 

been Terminated to take effect January 20, 1972. 

 

This letter then, Mr. Speaker, goes on to name a gentlemen who will be her replacement and concludes 

with the instructions on how to make the necessary transfer and records. This letter, Mr. Speaker, gave 

no reason nor has she received a reason as to why her appointment was terminated. The gentlemen 

named in the letter as her replacement upon finding out that it was the Government that cancelled her 

appointment and not the widow herself refused to accept the appointment. And to this date, Mr. Speaker, 

there is no one in the town of Central Butte who will accept the appointment. 

 

I commend the people of Central Butte for this action in this unheard of demonstration of ruthlessness. I 

congratulate them for taking this stand and in turn showing this government that they disapprove of such 

a discriminating act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can see some slight political justification for firing the Chief Electoral Officer of this 

province but how… 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe:  All right, gentlemen, let’s get back to normal. Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the 

Premier (Mr. Blakeney) what possible effect could these two jobs, the one at Central Butte and the one 

at Riverhurst, have on the security of the functioning and operation of this Government? 

 

I call on the Premier when he next addresses this House, and in turn the people of this province, that he 

give some political justification or any justification at all in the firing of the young widow at Central 

Butte and why the young man at Riverhurst was told to get out of his house. And I ask the Premier to 

call a halt to any further indiscriminate and ruthless acts of this nature in the Morse constituency. 

 

What has the New Deal meant for the small businessman and the weekly newspaper in Morse and 

throughout the province? I should like to read an article which appeared in a weekly newspaper in my 

constituency and I quote: 

 

The new labour regulations which came into being on January 1, 1972 have thrown the business 

community into a state of confusion. The small businessman is again hit and just when they thought 

they might pull out of the downward trend over the past two years. Costs of goods and services will 

have to go up to meet the new regulations and no one gains in the long run. Now the Government of 

Saskatchewan changed and only one Queen’s Printer order has been had since June. A small one. Now 

the 40-hour week which the staff already had and a boost in wages. Unless there is a definite upswing 

in the economy as some economists are predicting it is difficult to see the wisdom in the new Act. 

 

I must as well, Mr. Speaker, add my voice to the concern that is expressed by the small businessman 

about the 40-hour week and the new minimum wage legislation. What has happened because of this 

legislation? To the small businessman in rural Saskatchewan it has meant an extra burden in operating 

costs. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

108 

It has caused him to cut back on the services so vitally needed in rural Saskatchewan. The 30 per cent 

increase in wages which he is not forced to pay has to be passed on to the consumer who now has to pay 

a great deal more for his goods and services. One example of this legislation and there are many similar 

cases, is the operator of a lunch counter on No. 1 Highway. Because of this legislation the operator of 

this lunch counter has to let one of her employees go and now relies only on her family to operate the 

lunch counter. This in turn means extra work for the family. What happened to the young lady who lost 

her job? She could not find work in Saskatchewan but I am happy to say that she was able to find 

employment and is now working in Dawson Creek, British Columbia. Is this an example of how this 

government proposes to stop the population drain? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with labour and the extra benefit which they now receive. I do, however, 

feel that the Government could have taken a more gradual approach. In this government’s wisdom in 

helping labour, I feel that they should also then be prepared to give some financial assistance to small 

businessmen in Saskatchewan which could help them over this difficult period and would allow them 

still to provide the services so badly needed in rural Saskatchewan and in turn put a stop to the laying off 

of employees and the necessity of them leaving this great province to find work. 

 

It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the New Deal for small printing shops and weekly newspapers is a drastic 

cutback in job work from the Queen’s Printer. In 1964 only $3,500 was given to these small printing 

shops and weekly newspapers. Where is this money going now? It is going to help refinance the NDP by 

this Government which is now placing its Queen’s Printer orders with the NDP owned Service Printing 

Company. Mr. Speaker, this is literally stealing from the taxpayer of this province to further the political 

aims of the NDP. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this Government will soon stop applying this New Deal only 

for itself and start a program and New Deal that is beneficial for the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have other remarks which I should like to make in regard to the Throne speech but I see 

that my allotted time is gone. In closing… 

 

An Hon. Member: — Keep on going. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — I can keep on going as long as I like? Good. 

 

I should like to point our then, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues and concerns that the electorate in Morse 

expressed to me regarding the effect that this Government has had on the rest of the province and on its 

economy. They expressed their concern about the alarming rate of unemployment in Saskatchewan. 

Let’s look at some of the causes. The cancellation of the Meadow Lake Pulp Mill along with the 

Choiceland iron ore mine development whipped out thousands of jobs in the depressed areas of this 

province. Cancellation has also prevented the multi-million dollar expansion of the Inter-Provincial Pipe 

Line Corporation plant at Regina with a loss of over 2,000 jobs. Without new industry to provide jobs 

for our young people this province will die. We need industry to shift some of the strain off agricultural 

production. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

109 

In June of this year Saskatchewan had one of the lowest employment rates in all of Canada. What has 

Premier Blakeney done to improve the unemployment record? Mr. Speaker, I suggest he has done 

nothing. All that he and his Government can do about the unemployment record is tear up and down this 

province blaming Ottawa and the Federal government for the increase in unemployment. Can’t he 

realize the cancellation of the pulp mill had something to do with it, the closing down of Husky Oil in 

Moose Jaw had something to do with it. What has he done to find jobs for these men and women who 

have been displaced by the exodus of these companies and with the cancellation of the pulp mill? 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has done nothing. All that he has done is cry to Ottawa and has been attempting to put 

the blame on Ottawa for our higher unemployment figures. The jobs and subsequent jobs that would 

have been created had this Government not cancelled the pulp mill would have been enough to create 

another city in this province the size of Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another letter that I have received from one of my constituents and I should like to 

read it to you at this time: 

 

You will have received a brief prepared by Mrs. Dow regarding the situation at the Brownlee School. I 

am writing you in support of this. We were given to believe that this Government would do everything 

for the small schools in rural communities at no extra cost, rather a reduction in the mill rate. We were 

promised the sun and all we want here in Brownlee is the moon and the stars. There is no doubt that 

the closing down of one room is just the beginning of a complete closure. How can this possibly do 

anything for a small rural community? Our young settlers are surely beginning to wonder. We feel that 

we have to get some action on this matter now or we will have another Francis-Sedley situation on our 

hands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have had many letters such as this and from various communities throughout my 

constituency. I ask the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) what shall I tell my constituents? 

Should I or will the Education Minister say that his Government only made those promises in order to 

get elected and the small rural communities of this province and that they have no intention whatsoever 

of fulfilling their promises that they made to the people of this province. 

 

They said that the student-teacher ratio has been done away with. In its place we now have a teacher-

student ratio and the onus is on the school trustees. The life of that schoolroom at Brownlee, Mr. 

Speaker, does not depend on the trustees, it depends on the grant which this government will give to that 

school unit. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I ask this Government to keep its promise and apply this New Deal to the people of 

Brownlee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, that concludes my remarks for the afternoon and I should like to say that I 

will not be supporting the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

110 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I first want to join with the others who have already in 

this debate extended their congratulations to the mover and the seconder of the traditional motion.  

 

I am very, very happy to do that. I have been amazed and more than pleased by the capacity and 

confidence displayed by so many Members of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Blakeney: — Pleased, for obvious reasons, because I believe that the work of this Legislature is 

important and requires men who are competent and dedicated. Amazed because it is no easy thing to get 

a working grip on the complicated and difficult task of being an effective MLA. To display the mastery 

of the job so soon as did the Members for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor) and the Member for 

Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski) is certainly cause for congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Blakeney: — I want to congratulate too, the Hon. Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe). I congratulate 

him first on his election and secondly on his maiden speech in this House which I think all will agree 

was a very creditable performance. He invited and was greeted with some comment throughout the 

course of his remarks and I think we all were pleased and congratulate him on the way in which he 

handled the modest interruptions. 

 

May I extend also my congratulations to the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) on his 

election as Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We join with many others in wishing him an enjoyable and at least on our part, a 

lengthy period of service in that office. 

 

I turn now to the matter raised by the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). I was puzzled by why the 

Member for Athabasca entered the debate at this early stage in the traditional spot reserved for the 

Leader of the Opposition. After hearing his remarks as a matter of fact, I was puzzled as to why he 

entered the debate at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Assuming that those are the best arguments which can be mounted by the Opposition 

in answer to the Speech from the Throne — assuming that for a moment — we then had to ask ourselves 

why the somewhat mud-spattered gladiator from Athabasca was hurled into the breach at this time. Then 

as the Member for Prince Albert West suggests, it occurred to me, because if he waited until next week, 

he might not be here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — By next week the law may have caught up with the Member for 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

111 

Athabasca. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — By next week he may well be gone! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He’ll be back! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And if does come back as the Member for Prince Albert West suggests, he will, I 

think, be the first man who was ever unseated in a controverted election proceeding in Saskatchewan 

and re-elected at the subsequent by-election. So all I can say is that the track record for the boys who 

have followed that route is not very good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, the Member for Athabasca dealt with important mattes of policy such as 

whether ministers should park their car at the front of the building or the back. He then went to allege 

that there had been wholesale firing from the Public Service but he very, very carefully stayed away 

from any names and he very, very carefully stayed away from any numbers as to how many people had 

been first. All I can say is that if I had the facts at this disposal I would stay away from the figures too. 

He did tell us that they were almost daily. I did a few calculations. There have been eight months since 

we assumed office, roughly 30 days in a month, 30 days has September, April, June and November, and 

we have 240 days. I asked myself how many people have been dismissed from the Public Service, but I 

don’t have all the facts, but I have the facts from the Public Service Commission — all the people who 

are under the aegis of the Public Service Commission — and I got the complete list of those who were 

fired almost daily over 240 days and it adds up to 31. Four of those were temporary appointments, two 

of them were probationary appointments, and four were permanent appointments, 13 Order-in-Council 

appointments and eight labour service appointments. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that these are all 

the people who have been dismissed and we have some thousands of people in the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, would the Premier mind tabling that document? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I will be happy to table the information as soon as I finish my remarks. 

 

I want to say that with a Public Service of some thousands of people there are necessarily going to be 

people who are dismissed for a variety of reasons. We have some here, one being drunk on the job, I 

trust you don’t expect that that is unreasonable. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was a carry over. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Others did not show up for work, others who did not return after vacation, one who 

tried to get into a fight with another employee during work and took a mop to him. I want to point out 

that it will be known that an out of scope employee of whom there were some 13 Order-in-Council 

appointments and possibly 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

112 

one or two other permanent appointments were out of scope, have a right to appeal under Section 39 of 

The Public Service Act if they feel they have been unjustly dismissed. This I think does not apply to 

Order-in-Council appointments but applies to all others. 

 

People who are part of the bargaining unit have a right to apply under Section 40 of The Public Service 

Act. I had occasion to enquire how many of these people who were unjustly dismissed used their rights 

to appear, I find that not a single person used any of their right to appeal under Section 39 or Section 40. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The reference by the Member for Prince Albert who sooner or later will enter this 

debate (when he screws up his courage), refers to an employee who is not covered by the Public Service 

Commission but by the Liquor Board. 

 

I point out, Mr. Speaker, that of the several thousands who are under the Public Service Commission 

some 31 have been dismissed. That is hardly the “almost daily” routine that the Member for Athabasca 

wanted this House to believe. 

 

The Member for Athabasca then went on to make some allegations about public servants who had been 

hired and of all those who came in from outside the province. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I’ll name them! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I’ll come to your names in a moment, Sir. It was indeed necessary for government to 

appoint a number of highly qualified people to the Public service. I want to ask this House why it was 

necessary. Because the previous Government drove out of this province dozens and dozens of top rate 

public servants. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They pushed them out and they elbowed them out and they eased them out. I could 

give this House a list of 100 top public servants who were pushed out of this province by the former 

Government. Suffice it to say that some of them… 

 

Mr. Steuart: — All NDPs. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — …maybe they are all NDP and I’ll tell you where some of them are. Mr. A. W. 

Johnson, the Deputy of the Hon. Bud Drury at Ottawa, Mr. A. T. Wakabayashi as a senior official of Mr. 

Drury’s Department. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who was that? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Wakabayashi, your former Deputy. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We didn’t force him out. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Some were forced out and some were starved out and some were elbowed out, but 

they all left under your Government. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

113 

Dr. Graham Clarkson who went to the Liberal Government at New Brunswick and hence back to 

Alberta. Mr. H. S. Lee, Assistant Dean of Graduate Studies at York University. Mr. D. D. Tansley, now 

Executive Vice President of the Canadian International Development Agency. He is now the second 

man of the Canadian International Development immediately under Paul Gerin-Lajoie, the ex-Liberal 

Minister of Education of the Quebec Government. These people may all be New Democrats but they 

find favour with progressive people of every persuasion across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. J. W. MacNeil, a senior officer with the Federal Department of the Environment. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. J. W. MacNeil, Jim MacNeil to you. Dr. Meyer Brownstone, now professor of 

Political Economy at the University of Toronto, I could go on and on. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The first five named were not pushed out. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, these are only a few, only a few of those who left under the 

Government of the former Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Member opposite is glad that he got rid of some of them. All I can say is 

that we should be glad to have any one of them back, any one of them. 

 

When we came to office we found a Public Service which was hard working and devoted but 

overworked particularly at the senior level. Now this was a foolhardy way to operate a government. Let 

me just cite one example. In spite of the growing importance of Federal-Provincial relations, of Federal 

shared-cost programs over the past several years, the previous Government had built up no organization, 

no organization to deal with Federal-Provincial relations, no organization to take advantage of Federal-

Provincial cost sharing programs. Mr. Speaker, you don’t get Federal money just because you are 

standing there. Plans have to be made to get the full benefit of cost-sharing programs. You have to plan 

and go after these funds. As a result of the Liberal penny-wise and pound-foolish attitude Saskatchewan 

lost millions of dollars in Federal assistance over the years. 

 

This is not the way to service Saskatchewan’s interests. One of our first actions as a Government was to 

put Saskatchewan in a position to get the best possible deal for Saskatchewan in cost-sharing programs. 

For example, when the Federal government announced its Winter Works Program, we immediately 

appointed a Provincial Co-ordinator at the senior level. A man with wide experience in municipal 

government, a wide experience in provincial government and also a person who left under the former 

Government. By this device we were able to get the maximum sharing with the Federal Government and 

we received over $9 million in Federal sharing. 

 

We appointed another full time co-ordinator to work with the 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

114 

Federal Department of Regional Economic Expansion on developing projects in Saskatchewan, his 

name is Mr. Svetkov. His immediate task has been to tidy up all the loose ends left by the previous 

Government particularly in the Meadow Lake special area. 

 

Personally I have seen the Minister of Regional Economic Expansion at Ottawa, Mr. Marchand, I have 

talked to his Deputy Mr. Love personally. I have personally talked in his office to the Assistant Deputy 

in Charge of Planning, Mr. Francis. I want to tell you that we are determined to plan and organize to see 

that Saskatchewan receives the full benefit from the DREE program (Department of Regional Economic 

Expansion) and all other Federal cost-sharing programs. This was something very largely ignored by the 

former Government. I make no apologies for getting top-flight people to do this job on behalf and on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Member for Athabasca said, “All right, you can get these people but why bring 

in these people from outside, what is wrong with Saskatchewan graduates?” He named a few. I think I 

ought to comment on some of these people. He mentioned Mr. Kinzel, Mr. Kinzel is not a Saskatchewan 

graduate, he’s only been in Saskatchewan since 1855. He’s only been here since how long? Since four 

years before the Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) was elected years to this House. Some of us don’t 

think time went back that far. When he came to Saskatchewan, how many of us were in this House? The 

Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) and Mr. Speaker and that’s all. All the ret of us have been 

elected since then, so it isn’t just a few days ago. Reference was made to the fact that he is an American 

citizen. He applied for Canadian Citizenship 12 years ago and was given Canadian Citizenship seven 

years ago and I am surprised that the Member for Athabasca, even in the case of the Member for 

Athabasca, that he is seven years behind the times. 

 

Reference was made to Mr. Don McMillan. Mr. McMillan was born in Saskatchewan, his father was 

born in Saskatchewan, he is a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan. Reference was made to Ian 

Phillips. He is a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan. Reference was made to Mr. Saddlemeyer, 

41 years old, 39 of them spent in Saskatchewan. He is a graduate in law and in administration from the 

University of Saskatchewan, worked for the Industrial Development Bank, they transferred him to 

Edmonton, we got him back. Reference was made to Mr. Koskie. He was born in Humboldt, graduate of 

the University of Saskatchewan in Education, graduate of the University of Saskatchewan in Law. It is 

true some of these men when we hired them were not in Saskatchewan, some of them were working in 

Ottawa, some in Edmonton, some in Whitehorse. They are among the talented and able people who had 

to leave this province like so many others… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — …during these last seven years. These seven lean, gaunt years of the Liberal 

Government. 

 

But they are coming back, Mr. Speaker, they are coming back and I am proud that our Government can 

attract men of this calibre. They have much to contribute to their native province. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

115 

Some were not born in Saskatchewan, I don’t know whether I can complain about this and I don’t think 

the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) can complain either. I’ll say this, the people we hired are almost 

all Saskatchewan people coming home. We in our Government didn’t move in the whole entourage of 

the MacLaren Advertising Agency as your Government did when you took power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We are pleased with the people we have attracted. We believe the people of 

Saskatchewan will be pleased that we have hired these people and we believe the people of 

Saskatchewan will be particularly pleased at the results which we are sure will follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won’t deal with the salary figures used by the Hon. Member for Athabasca, they were a 

bewildering mixture of fact and fancy. The actual figures are on the public record and if the Hon. 

Member would like to have the, I suggest that he get either a new research man or perhaps he could 

check the records himself. 

 

I turn now briefly to the Saskatoon Aid Centre Society. I had an opportunity very, very quickly to look 

at some records involved with respect to this Society and as I suspected this Society is not the sort of 

sinister thing which the Member for Athabasca suggested but it is a non-profit organization incorporated 

under The Societies Act to assist people who have multiple problems, for example, alcoholism, 

unemployment, family discord. The story is set out in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. Mr. Speaker, not only 

is there nothing sinister about the Society which, as I say, is non-profit, but there is nothing sinister 

about any individuals associated with it. No benefit could be gained by any member of that non-profit 

Society. That Society is an organization which by the provisions of The Societies Act itself cannot pay 

out or distribute any property to a member at any time during the existence of the Society and a Society 

which on winding up has no power to distribute any cash or anything else to its members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is my submission that without that power a society cannot under any circumstances 

distribute funds to its members. To Members opposite, I suggest he check with his legal advisor, the 

Member for the pocket borough of Albert Park and I think that Member will advise him. The money, in 

my judgment, would escheat to the Crown. I think that the House would be better served if Members 

would refrain from making baseless charges which expressly or impliedly reflect upon the integrity and 

probity of a fellow Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite have been suggesting once again that somehow 

we have driven out the iron ore development at Choiceland. And I want to have a word or two to say on 

this so-called development at Choiceland. I think it’s time that the Leader of the Opposition and the 

Member from Athabasca told us where they stand on this project. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

116 

Now let’s recall what this deal was. It was an agreement signed in May of 1971 by Choiceland Iron 

Mines, Denison Mines, IPSCO and the Saskatchewan Government. By the agreement the Saskatchewan 

Government would provide $10 million for shaft-sinking before anyone else was required to put up one 

dollar. $10 million of Saskatchewan money before anyone else put up another dollar. After the shaft is 

sunk, Denison would have a look at the ore. If it liked what it found, a plant would be built from money 

guaranteed by the Government of Saskatchewan. So up to the first $10 million, Saskatchewan takes 100 

per cent of the risk. After that, after the ore is proven, Saskatchewan would take about 90 per cent of the 

risk. Denison will invest little or nothing on a net basis. Denison would get 60 per cent of the equity, the 

Government of Saskatchewan would get 25 per cent of the equity. But let’s leave those aspects aside for 

a minute. Let’s look at the feasibility report — the feasibility report commissioned by the former 

Government. On the basis of that feasibility report ordered by them — not by us — and delivered to us 

in July, the cost of production would be $43.04 per ton. Would you remember that figure $43.04 a ton 

and the selling price would be $43.70 a ton. A margin of 66 cents a ton. To us this was far, far too small 

a margin for error and for contingencies. The agreement went on to say this, it provided that once we, 

the Government of Saskatchewan, received the GECO feasibility report we had to make a decision, Yes 

or No in ten days. And if we didn’t say No, let me make this clear, if we didn’t say No, the Government 

of Saskatchewan was committed to sink a shaft at an estimated cost of $10 million. 

 

The GECO feasibility report was received on July 12, 1972. We were faced squarely with a decision. On 

the basis of that decision do we say Yes and commit the people to spending $10 million without the 

private group obligating themselves to spend one dollar. Or do we say No? Should we say Yes in the 

face of the GECO report or should we say No? We said No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We have since been doing a great deal of work to see whether an iron development in 

Saskatchewan is feasible — that work is still going on — work which we say should have been done 

before any agreements were signed. But that’s by the way. Our choice in July was to say Yes or No. 

Now the Leader of the Opposition is critical of our decision to say No. The Member for Athabasca was 

critical and I ask him if he had been the Government would he have said Yes or would he have said No. 

If he has said Yes then this gives us an idea of what they would pay for what they call development. If 

they would say No then we would know where they stood on that. What the House is not prepared to 

listen to, I’m sure, and what I think the people of Saskatchewan are not prepared to listen to, is one of 

these bashful maiden approaches: she wouldn’t say Yes, she wouldn’t say No. 

 

The Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) is fond of saying, “Well, I wouldn’t have said Yes 

and I wouldn’t have said No. I would have grabbed the phone and I would have made a different deal.” 

Not good enough. That deal was made by the Government of which he was a Minister and of which the 

Member for Athabasca was a Minister in May of 1971. If it was a bad deal in May it was a bad deal in 

July. He can’t tell us now that he would have renegotiated the deal. He can’t tell us now that the deal 

they made in May was no good but he would have somehow picked up the phone and he would have 

made another deal in July and that 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

117 

would have got us a mine. It won’t wash. 

 

On the basis of the May agreement which the previous Government signed and on the basis of the 

GECO feasibility report which that Government commissioned, no man in his right mind would have 

gone ahead with the Choiceland mine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Every businessman in Saskatchewan who has looked at that agreement, that GECO 

feasibility report, knows that on that basis you couldn’t go ahead with the Choiceland mine. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition knows that. The Member for Athabasca knows that and I think each of 

them should stop laying games with the public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech sets out clearly the legislative action which the 

Government proposes to take. The Throne Speech makes clear that we propose to take action to keep 

our election promises. 

 

Some time before the election, Mr. Speaker, our Party published a booklet setting out the program which 

we proposed to launch in our first four-year term. And immediately before the election we published our 

1971 election program. And I’m glad we did. I’m glad we did because we know what we promised and 

we’ll do our best to keep our promises. We can’t keep the promises which Members opposite say we 

made, but we’ll certainly keep the promises which we made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And it is our intention as a Government to proceed step by step to keep those 

promises. The Throne Speech last July was Chapter I. This Throne Speech that we are now debating is 

Chapter II. By Chapter I we dealt with the immediate problems. We promised to remove deterrent fees 

— we acted. We promised to repeal Bill 2 — we acted. We promised to remove medical and hospital 

family tax for senior citizens — we acted. We promised to help the family farm — we acted by passing 

The Family Farm Protection Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We promised fair play to the mentally ill and we acted to remove the discriminatory 

charges against their estates. That was a good beginning. 

 

We are now taking further steps to carry out our election program. Mr. Speaker, we promised in 

education that we would take steps to revitalize the education system in this province. We promised that 

we would do something about a bursary program. Year after year, for seven years, for those seven lean 

and gaunt years, the Party opposite was prodded and besought by the students, by the educators and by 

the Opposition to set up a bursary program for students. Year after year they refused to do so. 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

118 

Other provinces set one up until we had the odious distinction of being the only province in Canada 

without a bursary program. 

 

For seven years, Mr. Speaker, within seven weeks of assuming office we have implemented a student 

bursary program for the current academic year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It has meant that many, many young people have been able to go to University during 

this term instead of out looking for jobs in the rather chilly climate created by Mr. Trudeau and his war 

against inflation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I know that the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and others will say that 

the pupil-teacher ratio still exists, Mr. Speaker. And it is quite true that someone, obviously, must decide 

how many teachers there are to be for so many students. 

 

But the crux of the matter is, who makes the decision, who makes the decision — the Department or the 

School Board? We have restored that decision-making power to the School Boards, Mr. Speaker, where 

it belongs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) will have an opportunity to rise in this 

debate, I hope. When his turn comes he won’t be quite as bashful as the Member for Prince Albert West 

(Mr. Steuart) and I know that when he does rise he will outline with some clarity the program of his 

Department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, to quote the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) using a very, very fine 

phrase, “We have a New Deal for the sick in this Province.” I’ve mentioned the abolition of deterrent 

fees and the removal of the hospital and medical care premiums for senior citizens. Interestingly enough, 

Mr. Speaker, there is no evidence, no evidence that because of the removal of these deterrent fees 

anyone is misusing our hospitals or our doctors’ offices. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Closing the beds down… 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Those few opposite who were in the House when they voted for deterrent fees were 

not only morally wrong but they proved to be financially wrong as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 29, 1972 

 

 

119 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I challenge them, I challenge them during this Legislature to defend the 

position they took just one year ago on deterrent fees. Mr. Speaker, at this Session we will be moving 

forward again in health care. We will be taking legislative action to facilitate the inclusion of 

chiropractic care as an insured service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We’re working and making progress on a prescription drug program, on a hearing aid 

program. The Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) will be saying more about this. We, in a few short 

months, will have a long series, Mr. Speaker, of promises made and promises kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal more to say about the Speech from the Throne and 

about the remarks the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and others and I accordingly beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:40 o’clock p.m. 


