
























































Hansard: April 05, 1972


1470 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

29th Day 
 

Wednesday, April 5, 1972. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to the 
other Members of the Legislature, the first group of students from Touchwood this year. There are 16 
Grade Nine students from the village of Goodeve in the Speaker’s Gallery, led by their principal, Mr. 
Bohay, and the bus driver, Mr. Denesuk. 
 
I would like to wish them a very educational day here in the Legislature. I must say that the town of 
Goodeve is a new acquisition to the constituency of Touchwood. It is the home of the Hon. Member for 
Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk). He is sick in bed and I know that he would have wanted to welcome them on 
his behalf, but instead of that I will do it. We wish them a very educational day and hope they have a 
safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to welcome the Douglas 
Park School. They are located in the west gallery, 53 students in Grades Six and Eight. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Martin and Mrs. Robinson. 
 
Douglas Park School as you know is located in the southeast part of the city, next to Wascana Centre. I 
also note that there is a group of students here from Wetmore School. Some of them are in my seat, the 
others are in the northeast. But they used to be in mine before the famous gerrymander. I want to 
welcome them here as well. 
 
I am pleased, through you, to extend the best wishes to them this afternoon and I might say that the 
Wetmore School students are accompanied by Mr. Culham. There are 35 in number and are seated in the 
Speaker’s Gallery. 
 
A warm welcome to these students and the teachers, and I hope their stay will be pleasant and very 
fruitful. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you 80 students who are located in the east gallery, from the Queen Elizabeth School in 
Moose Jaw. They are Grade Eight students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyone who is familiar with the geography of the city of Moose Jaw would be interested to know that 
the Queen Elizabeth School is situated somewhat in the northwest portion of the city which, I suppose, 
strangely enough to some people it would make it appear that it should not be in Moose Jaw South but 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1471 

rather in Moose Jaw North. I know that the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) will want 
to join with me in welcoming this young group of students here, principally due to the fact that 
geographically it does seem to fall into the area, at least a rational appraisal would seem to suggest that it 
should. I am sure that he will want to join with me in welcoming these young people and hope that they 
enjoy their trip here and that they have a very pleasant trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add my welcome to the 
students from Queen Elizabeth School in Moose Jaw. 
 
I would like to draw to your attention that they are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Cant, Mrs. 
Christeson and Mr. Power. They are having a tour of the city as well as the Legislature. They will be 
visiting the Natural History Museum an the Centre of the Arts and I do want to add my welcome to this 
Legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, permit me also to extend a word of welcome 
to the students from the Douglas Park School. I join the Hon. Member from Wascana in welcoming 
these students, primarily because it is the school that my children attend. I should like to welcome the 
teachers and the students and draw attention that my daughter is in the group. I hope they have a good 
stay in the Legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

FUTURE OF REGINA GREY NUNS’ HOSPITAL 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like 
to direct a question to the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). 
 
A leading Regina physician last night in City Council expressed concern about the future of the Regina 
Grey Nuns’ Hospital as to whether it would be continued as an acute care hospital and I should like to 
ask the Hon. Minister if he would clarify that situation at this time. 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to outline the Government’s 
position regarding the purchase of the Grey Nuns’ Hospital. 
 
On February 3, 1972 I announced that the Government had accepted an offer from the Grey Nuns’ 
Hospital to purchase the assets of the Sisters of Charity more commonly known as the Grey Nuns’ for 
the sum of $1 million. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1472 

This matter was then turned over to the solicitors of both parties to finalize the transaction. At that time 
it came to my attention that the city had attached a caveat to the property in 1913, restricting the use of 
the property for hospital purposes. As is usual, in the property transaction, I took the position that the 
purchase was subject to a clear title. Since that time the Grey Nuns’ have been asking the city of Regina 
to withdraw the caveat which is within their authority. It has been reported to me that this matter was 
discussed at the Regina City Council last evening. 
 
I am informed that there was a proposal made that the caveat be removed by the city if the province 
would give an undertaking to continue a 400-bed acute general hospital for the next 10 years on the 
Grey Nuns’ property. This proposal is unacceptable to the Government as it imposes similar restrictions 
to the caveat. 
 
I also understand that it was reported that I was given the undertaking to spend millions of dollars on the 
Grey Nuns’ Hospital in the near future. This is not necessarily so, Mr. Speaker. The point I make is that 
the Government is prepared to spend millions of dollars on hospital undertakings in the city of Regina. 
The distribution of these dollars between the hospitals will be decided after such matters as the purchase 
of the Grey Nuns’ Hospital has been settled. 
 
Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, just a supplementary question. Then at this time there is no clear-cut policy 
as to the future of the Grey Nuns’? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — That is correct, Mr. Speaker. 
 

SCHOOL GRANTS 
 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) in connection with school grants. 
 
In view of the great dissatisfaction expressed by many school boards with, not only the total amount of 
grants which differs from what the Minister told us in the House, but the distribution of them. My 
question is: does the Minister intend to bring in legislation or amendments to the present Foundation 
Grant Act in order the Members of this House can debate what it now appears to be his new 
non-formula? 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, we do not intend to bring in legislation 
as it is not required. 
 
The present Foundation Grant Formula is in keeping with the Foundation Act which was passed by the 
previous administration, which you are well aware of. 
 
It is interesting the comment with respect to dissatisfaction of many boards. We have met, in the 
Department, with some boards and not one board that we have met with, nor have I received any 
communication which expressed this dissatisfaction with the principle of the formula. Everyone agrees 
that it is 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1473 

a good principle. Everyone agrees that our application of it, our phasing in of it, is a good method and it 
is well accepted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I can supply the Minister with a good list of boards that have expressed 
dissatisfaction with the principle and the manner that he is doing it. 
 

RESOURCE REPORT 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand a publication put out by the Department of Natural Resources called 
Resource Report, prepared by a civil servant in Information Services called Nolan Matthies, Supervisor, 
prepared by Conservation Information Services for immediate release, put out by a civil servant. In it he 
attacks a Member of the House and a debate in the House. I would like to report to you, Sir: 
 

These statistics clearly and factually refuse the statements recently made by John Gardner, MLA 
for Moosomin. It had been suggested by Mr. Gardner that present DNR policy was allowing 
wholesale destruction of Saskatchewan wildlife. 
 

And then he goes on to make a political refutation of a statement made by a Member of the Legislature 
of the Opposition in this House, Sir, in a debate. 
 
Is this what the Premier intends Information Services and the Government of Saskatchewan to be doing 
for the next four years? 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the publication. I have heard of Mr. 
Matthies and that is all. He certainly wasn’t hired by our Government but by the Government that 
preceded us. He is not in any sense, as far as I am aware, a political appointee unless he was a political 
appointee of that Government. 
 
If he has put out material such as the Member reports to this House, I agree with the Member that if it is 
as I understand the Member to have said it, it is irregular and I will certainly look into it, because I agree 
with him that it is inappropriate for a public servant, if in fact this is what happened, to be using 
Government publications to refute statements made in this House by any Member of the House on either 
side. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I will send this over to the Premier as soon as I get it Xeroxed. We 
certainly want to keep this on file. I should like also to add that it is not necessarily the man it is the 
orders and the instructions that he comes under that I am concerned with. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1474 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 81 – An Act to provide for 
the Division of the Province into Constituencies for the Election of Members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure this afternoon to move second reading of Bill No. 
81 which is the Bill which will establish the Constituencies Boundaries Commission for the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can say this with, I think, more than the usual sincerity because I feel 
that this Bill transcends most, if not all of the others introduced thus far in this House, in its importance 
as far as the democratic institutions – probably the leading democratic institutions – of this Province are 
concerned, namely, the Legislature. 
 
I truly believe that future students of political science will look upon this Bill as one of the watersheds – 
that may be a bit flowery but I think it is true – watersheds of democracy as far as this Province is 
concerned. 
 
I think it will be so regarded because for the first time in Saskatchewan history an Act of this Legislature 
will guarantee that constituency boundaries will not be drawn in a manner which is designed to further 
narrow political interests and will not be drawn exclusively by the interest and controls of one political 
power party, namely, the party that is in power. 
 
This priority given to our democratic institution is a piece of legislative reform that I say has been a long 
time coming to this Province. This Bill makes history because it is drafted around the principle of a truly 
Independent Boundaries Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We have guaranteed that Commission will be chosen in a non-partisan fashion. We 
have spelled out that once the Commission is chosen it will be allowed to do its work in an atmosphere 
of independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to discuss with the Members of the House in some detail the principles of the 
Bill. As I have said the main principle of the Bill, upon which Members will be asked to either vote for 
or against, is the establishment of an Independent Boundaries Commission – the composition of which I 
will say a few words about later – that will determine the boundaries of the ridings of this Province and 
determine the population of each constituency on a census population basis. 
 
Members will know that the first Independent Boundaries Commission was established in Canada by the 
Parliament of Canada, at the time they passed the Electoral Boundaries Readjustment Act in 1965. The 
Commission established under that Act set up new Federal boundaries on a population basis about 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1475 

1966. The last Federal elections in this Province were conducted in accordance with those 13 
constituencies drawn in Saskatchewan by the Commission which I think, by and large, was independent 
and had the confidence of society. This was then followed by other legislation in Manitoba and in 
Alberta in 1969. 
 
In this Bill that is before the Members of the House the principle of determining the number of people 
that are being represented by the census is the basic principle that is adopted. That is the overall, 
generally stated principle of the Bill. 
 
Now I turn to the question of census. We have determined that population census of Canada should be 
the guideline with respect to the individual boundaries in respect to this Bill. Members will know that 
the population census of Canada is taken every 10 years under the Statistics Act of Canada. The last 
population census was taken in June 1971, a few months ago, and the next 10-year census will be taken 
in 1981. But that Act also requires that a census is to be taken in Saskatchewan every five years, so that 
the next five-year census – although it isn’t as comprehensive and exhaustive as the ten-year census – 
will be taken in 1976 and every 10th year after that. 
 
I should like to turn to the establishment of the Commission. Section 3 of this Bill deals with the 
principle of establishing the Commission. That Section provides that the first adjustment of 
constituencies in Saskatchewan is to be made based on the 1971 population census – the one concluded 
– and thereafter each 10-year population census, namely, the next one being in 1981. It is mandatory by 
the law that this Commission will be established at every 10-year interval, the first one upon passage of 
this Bill in 1971 and then in 1981 and so on. 
 
Under Section 3, sub-paragraph (2), provisions are stated there whereby a constituency boundaries 
commission can be established at the discretion of the Cabinet if Cabinet deems it to be in the public 
interest, once after a five-year census. That is the census that comes into play in 1976 and 10 years after 
that. As I have said the first quinquennial census would be in 1976. This is designed to build in 
flexibility. There may be a dramatic drop in population, although I hope that is unlikely. There may be 
an increase in population which I am sure Members opposite will agree with me is very likely especially 
with this Government in power. We want to make sure the constituencies reflect accurately that 
particular aspect of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) agrees with 
that last statement that I made and I am glad to see that he agrees with me on it. 
 
Section 3, subsection (3) of the Bill provides if the Cabinet orders a five-year constituency readjustments 
the order must be tabled in the House forthwith after it is made, if the House is in session. If not within 
10 days of the next session. 
 
Section 4 of that Bill provides that the proclamation establishing the Commission on a regular basis 
won’t have any control by the government, it must be made within 30 days after 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1476 

the Clerk of the Executive Council obtains a copy of the official census return for Saskatchewan from 
the proper authorities in Ottawa. So no matter who the Clerk is, when they receive the census return 
within 30 days, a proclamation is issued and the Boundaries Commission is re-established at that time. 
 
I would like to ay a few words, Mr. Speaker, about the Commission itself and the membership of the 
Commission because this will be a very important aspect of the Bill. In this regard it is proposed that the 
Commission shall consist of three men, a chairman, the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, named by 
office, and another person who is resident of Saskatchewan. The Bill provides that the chairman of the 
Commission shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan, at present Mr. Justice Culliton, 
either from among the judges of the Court of Appeal or after consultation with the Chief of the Queen’s 
Bench from among the judges of the Queen’s Bench Court. So that the chairman will be either one 
member from the Court of Appeal or one member from among the judges of the Queen’s Bench, the 
superior court of Saskatchewan. In the very unlikely event that there is a refusal to act as chairman in 
either the Court of Appeal level or Queen’s Bench then we have provided in the Bill that the Cabinet can 
after consultation with the Chief Justice make the necessary appointment of chairman. Though I stress 
this latter provision it is, I think Members will agree, a very unlikely occurrence and is used there in 
order to make sure the mechanism exists for getting the Commission started. The second member of the 
Commission will be the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. We feel that this is a good choice for second 
member of the Commission because this is the man and I am not only speaking of the present 
incumbent, but I think of future years as well, the man with experience as the Clerk of the House who 
serves all of us as Members of the Assembly as fairly and as impartially as he can. I think he should be 
able to render excellent service to the Commission. He very often knows the needs of politicians, knows 
the province very well and I think is a man who all Members as well should be able to place their faith 
and trust in. The third member of the Commission rounding it out will be appointed, Mr. Speaker, by 
yourself after consultation with the Premier, President of the Executive Council and the Leader of the 
Opposition. This provision is thought desirable because it will allow the inclusion or the appointment of 
a third person who will bear an influence from the non-political world, an ordinary citizen or someone 
who has a keen interest in political science but who has more or less the confidence of both the Premier 
and the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
We think that it is important that having now chosen a judge to be chairman and a Clerk, an officer of 
this Assembly to be one member, that this will allow the leeway for a valuable contribution to be made 
by a citizen of the Province of Saskatchewan. The Chief Justice and the Speaker will communicate the 
names of the judge and the other member to the Clerk of the Cabinet and Cabinet will thereupon appoint 
the three man Commission. Pursuant to Section 6, subsection (4) if the Chief Justice is absent or the post 
is vacant the acting Chief Justice will discharge his duties. Similarly if the Speakership is vacant the 
member discharging the duties of the Speaker at that time is empowered by law to make the 
appointment after consultation. A proclamation containing the names of the members of the 
Commission must be published and the Commission is then fully established very shortly after the 
30-day issuance of the 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1477 

proclamation from the Clerk upon receipt of the census return. There is provision for a deputy chairman. 
 
A quorum consists of two members of the Commission with a second vote to the chairman in the event 
of an equal vote. Any vacancy in the Commission must be filled within 30 days after it arises and under 
Section (9) no MLA or Senator is qualified for appointment to the Commission. We argue that this is 
advantageous because we want to avoid the possibility of a narrow partisan political viewpoint injecting 
itself into the deliberations of the Commission lest there be an accusation from the public at large that 
the member so appointed carries a political stripe and may thereby color the deliberations of the 
Commission. That’s the establishment and composition of the Commission. 
 
I should now like to move into the fifth point and the question of division of the province. We propose 
that this Bill will divide the province basically into two areas or divisions. This is in effect I suppose the 
only area of policy that involves this Government. We hope the Members opposite will agree. The 
northern area is one area which will comprise all that portion of the province lying north of a line that 
has been specifically described in Section 14 of the Bill. Roughly speaking although I haven’t checked it 
out personally I’m informed that this parallels the line in the northern administration district area with 
some changes. I think at present that area included part of Meadow Lake, Shellbrook, and Prince Albert 
East constituency and a small part of Nipawin in the northeastern corner which would go to the general 
northern area. It is proposed that this northern area will be represented by two members and the law 
therefore says that the Commission must draw two constituencies there. The Commission will determine 
the boundary between the two constituencies based on a quotient to be established by the Commission. 
 
Now since the official census figures are not yet available to me for careful perusal what I ay here may 
now be somewhat hypothetical. I stress to Members it is not to be interpreted as being any Government 
statement of fact. To give Members some idea we can assume perhaps the total population of the 
province to be about 900,000. The Commission will, from the information made available to it, estimate 
the population of the two northern ridings and then establish the quotient on that estimated population 
for each of the two northern ridings and then determine the location of the boundary line between them. 
The boundary line can run north and south or east and west however the Commission should determine. 
So then say, for example, the population of the northern area is estimated to be approximately 20,000. 
Then each of the constituencies, because the law says there must be two of them, would be quite 
naturally divided on the basis of 10,000 population each or as close as possible to that. Then the 
Commission would take into account where the settlements are and hopefully draw a line accordingly. 
 
The population of all of the area south of that line would be the second are of the province. So in this 
area if we use my example again of approximately 950,000 people and we deduct from that 20,000 for 
the North we would have roughly about 930,000 for the so-called southern area. The Bill provides that 
the Electoral Boundaries Commission shall divide this south areas into not more than 63 ridings. Now 
you will note here that unlike the North where we say there shall be two for the 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1478 

southern area we want to give the Commission as much freedom and latitude as possible. So we say that 
you can appoint up to 63 but you have the freedom to go below 63 if it is in the interest of true 
representation. This is the maximum number of constituencies that may be established for the south 
portion. And as I stress again the Commission may choose any number because we think that the 
Commission will be best qualified after hearings and taking into account population figures, will be best 
able to determine what in fact the proper representation needs are of the province. The Bill requires that 
each constituency shall have as nearly as possible the same population. If the Commission decides to 
establish the maximum number of constituencies say 63 for the south, then taking that figure 930,000 
population, the Commission would divide 63 into 930,000. It would be roughly over 14,000 per 
constituency, not voters but population. At the present time Saskatoon is represented by six Members, 
Regina by seven Members, Moose Jaw by two Members. I’m not including seats which represent parts 
of cities but go into the country. Take for example Prince Albert East or, as I understand it, Prince Albert 
West, as well as an example. Or take Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw more or less is in the city, in fact, all of it I 
believe is in the city. At any rate that is the way it is at present, six for Saskatoon and seven for Regina. 
Now if we have a quotient figure of something over 14,000 then one could estimate roughly that on 
Regina’s estimated population of about 155,000, I don’t swear to the accuracy of those figures, the 
Premier objects to that as being high, but these are the figures that are being used by my . . . 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t object. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — He doesn’t object he draws a reservation. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — It slipped a little . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It could very well be, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, because the province is making 
tremendous strides of recovery especially since June of 1971 but I agree the Premier is still tending to 
think prior to June 23 because of the terrific job to clean up the mess that has been left behind in the 
economic environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — At any rate I come back to say that using the figures to just illustrate the point, the 
Commission will determine what it is in fact. But if it is estimating at 155,000 for Regina, then using 
that quotient figure you would divide 14,000 into that figure and you would have Regina being entitled 
to approximately ten Members or an increase. Saskatoon, if it has got 135,000, that might be high as 
well, you could come up to about nine Members, I say could because I will explain a variable later on 
that the Commission might very well adopt, likely will adopt. Moose Jaw would be entitled clearly to 
two seats at any rate. If the Commission uses the maximum 63 and the quotient figures and again this all 
depends on the figures and, therefore, one ought not to stress this too much, there could be 21 Members 
for the cities leaving 44 Members in the other areas, total of 65 if the maximum is used. Two for the 
North would leave 42 for the South and 21 for the cities and two for the North, a total of 65 conceivably. 
But you can play your own combination 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1479 

depending upon what the figures are and what the Commission ultimately decides, it may decide to stick 
with 60, two northern, 58 south. We don’t know what they will do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I come to the sixth principle or point of this Bill and that is variation between 
constituencies. Although the first principle of adjustment of constituency boundaries is to be made on 
population basis as nearly as possible equal among ridings, the Bill does empower the Independent 
Commission to vary the quotient for a constituency either upwards or downwards by no more than 15 
per cent of that quotient, 15 per cent of 14,000 or whatever the figure is. The factors that may be taken 
into account by the Commission to vary the quotient upwards or downwards could be sparsity, density 
or relative growth of population in any area or areas, special geographic interests, community or 
diversity of interest of inhabitants in various regions, physical features and other relevant factors that the 
Commission considers desirable. These rules apply to the two northern constituencies as well, so that 
there is a degree of flexibility built in. The 15 per cent is a good variation and will give them 
considerable leverage power as is necessary. 
 
Now finally, Mr. Speaker, a few details as to how this Bill is finally reported and how the hearings are 
actually held. The Bill says that each member of the Commission has the power of a commissioner 
appointed under The Public Enquiries Act. The Commission may employ technical staff and advisors 
including a secretary subject to approval of the Cabinet as to remuneration and expenses. The 
Commission may make its rules regulating its procedure and one commissioner may, if the Commission 
decides, hold a part of a hearing on behalf of the Commission and report to it, although I don’t see this 
as happening. The Commission is required to hold public hearings at places in the province that it 
considers desirable and I would hope that these would be fairly numerous so that our population and our 
people can have a chance to express their views to the Commission. Notice must be published of the 
public hearings. Publication shall include maps or drawings of proposed constituencies and indicating 
the population of each of them and the name to be given to each of them. Within nine months after the 
receipt by the Commission of the census report the Commission is required to prepare and file with the 
Clerk of the Cabinet its interim report and publish notice of its filing of that interim report. Then after 
that further hearings will be held at Regina and at Saskatoon wherein public submissions can be made 
by the public as to the merits of the interim report. This is to allow situations that could arise where the 
Commission draws a line when it is not fully conversant with the particular trading pattern of an area 
and the local community says, look, we should belong to this particular constituency. This was done I 
understand in the Federal redistribution and I think it is a good extra safety valve to give people a kick at 
the cat in terms of changing the report if necessary before the final report is in. We limit it to Regina and 
Saskatoon because, keep in mind the first nine months will involve fairly extensive hearings and in the 
second report hearings it will be only to consider the interim report. There will be more or less a 
document upon which to work and the areas of concern will be isolated. A copy of the interim report is 
to be supplied to each MLA and each candidate in the last general election. I hope that MLAs will take 
the opportunity to express their points of view to the Independent Commission when the public hearings 
are held. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1480 

Some Members might raise the question as to whether or not there should be MLA representation on the 
Commission. I think that is a valid point to be considered by the House. The basic reasoning of the 
Government in not so putting it was basically the fear that with MLAs on this Commission we might on 
occasion give the opportunity for partisan political debate to arise. Furthermore, there is a question of 
whether or not a Chief Justice in that type of situation would take on the chairmanship. I think it is 
important that we avoid as much as possible any accusations of partisanship with respect to this 
particular matter. We say furthermore that MLAs will have an opportunity to get their points of view 
across by simply coming forward as other citizens do and presenting their views. 
 
Now the final report of the Commission after the interim report and after the hearings must be 
completed within one year from the time that the chairman of the Commission receives from the Clerk 
the census report for Saskatchewan. 
 
If we pass this Bill sometime say by the end of May at the completion date of this House, and if we can 
get everything mechanically set up by June or so, conceivably we could have a final report by June of 
1973 or fall of 1973 depending on how soon we start it. The final report must be filed with the Speaker 
of the House who is required by law to table it, if the Legislature is then in session, immediately, and if 
not then within five days after the opening of the next ensuing session, so the report is in the House and 
all the Members of the House can look at it. The Legislature is not bound by the report of the 
Commission the way the Bill is worded but the report is brought back before the House for 
consideration on resolution to adopt it by the Member who for the time being administers the Legislative 
Assembly Act, traditionally the Premier. Now the House may amend the report as it sees fit and the 
report as presented or as amended by the Legislature must then be adopted. You can’t change the Bill 
but once the report is adopted then the Bill comes forward to reflect the report. So there is a chance to 
change the report by the House but once the report is passed it goes strictly into law and into the Bill. 
 
Some Members might say why do we give the House in effect a final kick at the cat. Is there any danger 
in this area? To that I say the danger is next to nil in terms of any partisan interference. I think that all 
Members would agree that it would be a brave government that would by any substantial or material 
way alter the reports of a commission having conducted these hearings, having been set up in this 
manner. But we have to have this provision in I think for two basic reasons. As I said I believe this 
House is paramount, not a commission, that there are dangers in delegating these types of powers. 
Traditionally and I think quite rightly so we have always thought ourselves as being the men who decide 
what constituencies we will serve and the boundaries within which we shall serve them. What we are 
doing by this Bill is deciding as Members of the House I hope in an unanimous way to delegate a form 
of that activity to an independent commission. The second reason for retaining this power to vary in 
there is quite obvious. It may very well be that there is a need to reflect a particular point of view that a 
Member has by way of peculiar knowledge by virtue of him being a citizen of that constituency or by 
certain complaints that may arise. 
 
Well, after the resolution is adopted and the report is 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1481 

adopted then the Bill must go and the way that the report is adopted and the Bill is passed it comes into 
force by proclamation in time for the next general provincial election. 
 
There are other provisions with respect to usual costs out of appropriations and the like. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit to the Members of this House that those details and those principles as I 
have outlined are principles which allow me and all Members to say that that is truly an Independent 
Electoral Boundaries Commission which they have set up. And I’m sure that Members of the House will 
agree with me when I said at the beginning that this was a Bill which in effect will be, I think, ultimately 
a corner-stone as far as Saskatchewan democracy is concerned, based on representation by population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — If the people of our province get the idea that there is in fact no equity or fair play in 
the way that we draw up the boundary lines for the constituencies to represent those people, then I think 
the entire institution of parliament comes seriously under attack and is eroded. We must not allow that to 
happen through this Bill and we’ve sought to cover it by introducing it in this way, in this fashion in 
second reading. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this House cannot afford any Bill which would be less than this one because we 
have already seen the ill effects of what happens when a political party by itself, basically for itself, 
chooses to draw up boundaries of constituencies in preparation for an election as was done in 1970 by 
the former administration of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The result is a terrible attack on the Government and questioning by the people of 
this Province. In that regard this Bill is a dramatic Bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s dramatic because of its contrast 
to the gerrymander of 1970 by the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition who was the Deputy Premier at the time, in 1970 introduced the 
amendments to the Legislative Assembly Act and he said this: 
 

Mr. Speaker, in planning the redistribution that is detailed in this Act I had the help of a 
Committee composed of MLAs from all parts of Saskatchewan, including the Hon. Allan Guy, 
Athabasca, the Hon. Cy. MacDonald, Milestone, Mr. McPherson, Regina, Mr. Robert Heggie, 
Hanley. Hon. Members will find that we have taken into consideration population changes and at 
the same time recognize the rural nature of our province and the large areas covered by some 
constituencies. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that was the way it was done before. That’s an eloquent statement but it’s more eloquent in 
what it does not say. What it did not say, of course, was that the Committee may have represented some 
parts of Saskatchewan from a geographic standpoint but it certainly didn’t represent in any impartial 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1482 

or fair way the political interests of Saskatchewan, throughout Saskatchewan, because all the Members 
of the Committee came from the Government front benches or close to the Government front benches. 
And I think that this Bill is an improvement on the former method of drawing up the Boundary Bill. 
 
I also want to say that I hope that we put to rest in this Bill that we’re giving second reading to today, the 
type of rationale which we saw in 1970. The rationale which is explained by a member of the 
Committee, a member who is now defeated, the Member for Hanley, Mr. Robert Heggie. Some of us 
said that he would be defeated if he brought in a Bill like that, but he didn’t accept our advice. He said 
this with respect to the rationale: 
 

Gerrymandering is an old as Democratic Government. Sir John A. MacDonald used an 
expression – ‘Hive the Grits’. Sir John believed that getting all the grits in one hive would assure 
the Conservatives of four or five surrounding seats. That process is not new. 
 

That was the rationale and the justification by a Member of that Committee who drew the constituency 
boundaries. 
 
Now I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill puts an end to gerrymandering in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This morning when I read that remark and I see a Liberal looking to a Conservative 
for guidance, I can think of no more apt illustration of the blind leading the blind, where else would the 
Liberal Party be looking to for guidance but to the Conservatives. And I also hope that in introducing 
this Bill we shall have seen an end to arguments which basically revolve around political fortunes of 
individual candidates. I know that once in a while I’ve done it, Members have done it to me, we do it 
either in jest or for real, but I couldn’t help but be attracted to one comment made by the Member for 
Lakeview who was a member of that Committee as well. He said about this Bill: 
 

Now we look to the North (he was talking about Regina seats) now we look to the North, which 
is Henry Baker’s seat. Henry only won by 432 votes as you all know. It was very close. So the 
Committee thought that we should give Henry a little help and they have. 
 

And he was right, they did, because the Member from Wascana is back in this House. Although he 
didn’t, I’m sure mean it at the time, because I heard his words. He did not actually mean that he wanted 
to welcome him back. Then the Member said: 
 

Then we move on to the portion of Mr. Whelan’s seat. Now Mr. Whelan needed a little help 
there so we enlarged his seat. Then we came to the new Leader of the Opposition who is gaining 
strength every day, Allan Blakeney. 
 

To that I also agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1483 

Mr. Romanow: — The problem with the forecast was that the Hon. Member didn’t know how fast the 
Leader of the Opposition was gaining strength. He said: 
 

We enlarged Allan’s by taking a little of Henry’s and this will make Allan safe there. 
 

And you see again the method by which the Committee computed the boundaries. A very scientific 
method that said we will take a little bit of Allan’s, we’ll take a little bit off Henry’s, we’ll add a little bit 
on to Ed Whelan’s seat and everybody will somehow be happy and we’ll have Regina seats. 
 
Now I want this Bill to be debated on a high political plane and I would not accuse the Members of the 
Liberal Party opposite of seeking to draw boundaries for political advantage. No I wouldn’t. But I would 
say that quotations that I’ve read to the Members, and the method in which it was used to draft the Bill 
by a committee composed of Government Members only, certainly could lead one to be suspicious. And 
we ought to avoid that type of suspicion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I conclude by saying this to the Members of the House. We want to see an end to that type 
of action by all governments. We want to see this House unite behind what I think is basically a good 
Bill. I think that all Members, even those opposite who at that time thought that they were acting in the 
best interests, will support this Bill in second reading. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Attorney General 
introducing this Bill, this very important Bill, with a great deal of interest. And for the first, I suppose, 
20 minutes of his speech I admired the speech and I liked it. Now you can sneer if you want. He 
destroyed in the last ten minutes everything that he attempted to set up in the first 15 or 20 minutes. 
 
Let’s talk about bringing in a non-partisan and an Independent Electoral Boundaries Commission and by 
bringing in such a Bill we will really have something that both sides of the House will support. 
 
Well, you were sitting thee, Mr. Member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) for at least one redistribution 
that your Government brought in. The Speaker was a Member of this House for many years. If we want 
to go back and drag up redistributions that came in the past and talk about gerrymandering, we can go 
back to the one brought in by Clarence Fines. As great a gerrymander as ever pulled off in the history of 
this Province by Liberals or Conservatives. When they divided . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — When was this? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I’ll remind you when it was. When they divided the city of Regina had they not divided 
the city of Regina and he 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1484 

said it in his speech, they would have lost every one of the Members, five or six Members in Regina, so 
they lumped them all together, or no – they divided the constituencies. But when it came to Saskatoon 
they didn’t divide Saskatoon. Everybody in Saskatoon got five votes because they said Saskatoon (and 
this was the very cynical reason that was given in this House), the city of Saskatoon didn’t lend itself to 
a division as does the city of Regina. 
 
I can go back and point out gerrymanders that were brought into this House by our Government, by the 
NDP-CCF Government, and by many Members who are still Members of this House, by the 
Conservatives when they were the government. Make no mistake. When the Attorney General said at 
the beginning – ‘Okay, we’re going to make history. We’re going to bring in a Bill that we hope both 
sides of the House can support. We’re going to bring in a Bill that is truly non-partisan, that is truly 
independent.’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — All right, we can look at this Bill in that vein and that’s the way I intend to look at it. 
 
What did the Attorney General, and I presume many of the other NDP Members who follow in this 
debate say, he set the tone, look it up, I think he spent 10 or 15 or 30 minutes pointing out the 
redistributions that we introduced and that I introduced in this House and going on to point out the 
inequities and the unfairness and calling it a gerrymander. That’s fine. It will make great fun and a great 
debate. We can join in the same way and we can go back and dig up the old speeches of Clarence Fines, 
Mr. Brockelbank Senior when he sat here and point out some of the deals, some of the gerrymanders 
they pulled off which were equal or worse than we did, if that was a gerrymander we pulled off. Just as 
raw, just as one sided, just as partisan. 
 
Let’s look at the Bill in that tone, the same tone that the Attorney General looked at the Bill at the end. 
Let’s look at it. He gets up very sanctimoniously and says this will be an independent commission and 
that’s the key to this Bill. That’s the key to the redistribution, the Committee that carries out the 
redistribution. Well, what have we got in the Bill if we look at it from the point of view the Attorney 
General did in the last five minutes of his speech. He’s the one who introduced it at the very beginning 
of this debate. I’d hoped this would be a non-partisan debate, that we would take a look at this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why should you mind? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — No, I don’t mind. I don’t mind at all this kind of a debate. All right, let’s look at it that 
way. You’ll get the Chief Justice to appoint the judge. Okay, he’ll be independent. Then who will the 
other two members be, if we want to take a look at it from a suspicious point of view? They will be 
representatives of the Government. The Clerk – you can hire him and you can fire him. Now I say this 
Clerk is independent, fine. And the next Clerk might be independent, but make no mistake, if you want 
to look at it from the point of view that the Attorney General just talked about, the Clerk of this 
Assembly is hired and can be fired and removed any day by the Government. 
 
Now, they say the Speaker will appoint somebody after 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1485 

consultation with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition. After consultation! Well, it can be 
consultation and I hope it will be. Or it can be a consultation where I would be invited to a meeting and 
say we’re now consulting you, we’re going to appoint, Mr. Brockelbank, Sr., or we’re going to appoint 
George Bothwell, or we’re going to appoint some very fiercely independent person like that. I don’t 
think they’ll do that. All I’m pointing out, Mr. Attorney General, is you couldn’t resist at the end of your 
speech bringing in a little cheap politics. And then you ended up saying, ‘And I hope all Members, the 
Members on both sides of the House support this Bill’. 
 
Well, let me say this, that I’m sorry you took that tone. I’m sorry you made the last five minutes of your 
speech, because I think you would have been a larger man, a bigger man, if you had left that out. And I 
think the Members opposite on the Government side would agree with me. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — You . . . 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I didn’t start it. You missed his speech evidently, Mr. Minister of Labour. He made an 
excellent speech for 20 minutes and then the last five minutes he couldn’t resist saying, “But look at that 
gerrymander, they did this”, and so on. Okay, that’s all I want to say about that because we are going to 
look at this Bill fairly if you allow us to. Just make no mistake, if you want to get this down into the mud 
of partisan politics we’ll join you there. If you want to keep it up here we’ll join you there. Now I look at 
that Bill . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re an expert? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Sure I’m an expert and I don’t make any bones about it. Of course I’m an expert. 
 
Now if we want to look at this Bill from a non-partisan point of view, I shall give the speech I intended 
to give before I heard the last five minutes of the Attorney General’s speech. 
 
Let me say to the Members on that side of the House, I hope you take the same attitude if you intend this 
to be a non-partisan look at redistribution, then have the decency and have the political bigness to do 
exactly that. If you want to go back into past history, rehash every unfairness that was ever committed 
by any government including your own, okay, fine, we can have that kind of a political debate too. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the Bill. Welcome it maybe from another point of view. Manitoba did 
bring in an Independent Boundaries Commission so did the Government of Alberta and they were 
subsequently defeated at the pools, so we welcome it from that point of view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — But seriously, we do welcome the idea that you will bring in a non-partisan and an 
Independent Boundaries Commission and they will, we’re confident, bring in an independent report that 
will set up boundaries in a fair and reasonable manner. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1486 

The key to it, of course, is the Commission. If the Commission is fair and reasonable then the resulting 
report will be fair and reasonable and I presume in fact I’m sure that the legislation that follows it will be 
fair and reasonable. And it can be a new step, and it can be a watershed as the Attorney General said in 
the politics in this Province. 
 
Population as a basis, I think is a sound basis, with some considerations and under certain conditions. I 
am confident, as I said earlier, that the Chief Justice will face the responsibility and will choose someone 
from his Court or from the Queen’s Bench Court and that individual, whoever he may be, will not put 
his stamp on anything that is not fair and equitable. And again I come back and I say that the Clerk of 
this Legislative Assembly, the former Clerks of this Legislative Assembly were fair and reasonable men 
and we would have confidence in them. And if, in fact, the Speaker does consult with the Premier and 
the Leader of the Opposition about some individual who will be the third man or woman on the 
Commission, then again I think that we can come to a reasonable conclusion and will put someone on 
who will give a fair and just consideration and bring some practical common sense which is necessary to 
the developing and the setting of the boundaries. 
 
I want to say one or two things about the Commission. We are not going to prejudge the Commission. 
As I aid, if we wanted to look at this from a narrow and suspicious point of view there will be in fact, the 
way it’s set up, two Government appointees. But again, if we are consulted then those appointees can be 
and there are lots of people in the Province of Saskatchewan who can bring a fair point of view although 
I don’t think there are very many independent people in this Province. I think most people in the 
province who are worth their salt have some political viewpoint. I am sure we can find people who will 
rise above their particular viewpoint to make fair and reasonable decisions in regard to setting the 
boundaries. 
 
I should like the Government to consider, to think about those three people they have talked about and to 
give consideration, and we’re going to make a big point of this, to putting one Member from the 
Government side of the House and one MLA from the Opposition side. I say this for this reason. I quite 
sincerely don’t think we should confuse partisan politics and politics. One of the things that we are wont 
to say, even as politicians, is that we must take this or that out of politics. My question very often is: 
why? If politicians are sometimes held in contempt, if politicians are sometimes held in suspicion then I 
think you and I as practising politicians have to take some of the blame because we often use this phrase 
as if anything that is dealt with in politics must be bad or must be partisan, and anything that is dealt 
with above politics or outside of politics is necessarily sensible, practical and much better. I don’t 
believe this. I think we should give consideration to have an MLA from that side and an MLA from this 
side for this reason, that it is very possible to have a redistribution that looks very fair and equitable, in 
other words there would be an almost equal number of people in each seat and a great many other things 
would be taken into consideration. If you looked at it from one point of view you could say that is a very 
fair distribution. For example, I think the lat Federal redistribution would have been maybe a little bit 
better or a bit more practical if it would have had a working politician 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1487 

or two on it. For example, take the city of Regina, I just think it was not practical to divide the city of 
Regina and Saskatoon, you have four seats, not of which are rural, none of which are urban. But that is 
just an observation, we are not going to make a big point of this. I agree if we put an MLA from that 
side and an MLA from this side we will be open to the question that the Attorney General raised of 
whether in fact a judge may feel that there might be a great deal of controversy from the two MLAs on 
the Committee and he may not feel that he wants to act. It may be that the public would think, well this 
really isn’t removing it from the sphere of partisan politics. We’re not making a big point of it, I just ask 
the Government before they bring this Bill into Committee or as they bring it into Committee to think 
about this. 
 
I should like to point out the method that was carried out in Manitoba. In Manitoba they had I think the 
Chief Justice choosing someone, the president of the University of Manitoba was a member, I think the 
Chief Justice was a member or he chose someone and the Clerk of the Assembly, who is also evidently 
their Chief Electoral Officer, was a member. This is a permanent committee, I am told, that sits regularly 
and I think they each had a 10-year term or they sit every 10 years or they bring in a redistribution every 
10 years. This is another point that might be considered, I don’t ay that it is necessary that we follow that 
practice. This is the way they did it in Manitoba. Our informant happened to be a Conservative MLA 
and he said it was so independent and so non-political that they were swept out of office right after they 
brought it in, so no one could accuse them of being very partisan. Again we’re not laboring this point, I 
just put it up for the Government’s consideration. 
 
When you look at the Bill and you consider what they are doing in the North, again I am sure Mr. Guy 
will have a point to say about this, Mr. Feschuk, Mr. Coupland and other Members who represent 
northern Saskatchewan. I think the idea that we will guarantee so many seats for the far North is sound. I 
had difficulty attempting to trace the proposed boundaries on the map I suppose because the map that I 
had wasn’t all that accurate or it didn’t have all the divisions that were outlined in the Bill. However, it 
seems to me that this new area will take in part of Prince Albert East Cumberland, take in all of 
Athabasca, some of Shellbrook and a good portion of what is now Meadow Lake, and it could take in a 
piece of Nipawin. So we shall have two representatives from an area that did have at least in part five or 
six representatives. Again I realize the suggestion is that you would drop the very heavily populated area 
in Meadow Lake and there may not be any more people, but again I just put this forward for 
consideration. Is that enough representation for that very large area? This will be discussed later on and I 
am not making a big issue of it now. 
 
I should like to put forward one more point in considering the southern part or what is called the 
southern part of the province where there may be 63 seats, and that is the question of fairness to our 
rural areas. The Attorney General touched on it and he said that there could be 10 seats in Regina and 
there could be about 10 seats in Saskatoon, certainly two in Moose Jaw and I believe there would be two 
in Prince Albert. I think by the time you take it the population of Prince Albert will be around 29,000 – 
thus there could be 24 seats in the four largest cities. This brings me to the point I want to try and make 
here that if we go by population our farmers could suffer. I realize 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1488 

that in the Bill they are allowed some pretty wide latitude about 30 per cent, but there is no mention that 
I can find in the Bill where the rural fact of life in Saskatchewan is taken into consideration. I just want 
to point out two things; one, if we go strictly by population, if we divide the province strictly by 
population having regard for the two seats in the North we will in fact be doing a serious disservice to 
rural Saskatchewan. While it can be said it is fair and reasonable, it is one man, one vote, still with the 
large area that the Members from rural Saskatchewan will have to cover and the fact that agriculture is 
still and will remain for a long, long time the economic backbone of this Province, I would ask the 
Government to give serious consideration that in the criteria they develop for this 15 per cent one way or 
the other could be as much as 30 per cent which I think is reasonable, that the instructions go to the 
Committee that they do consider the rural fact of life in Saskatchewan. They may be able to do it, I don’t 
say they won’t be able to do it under the criteria as laid down in the Bill but I should like to see it spelled 
out a little more clearly in the Bill so that they know this is part of their terms of reference. 
 
There is another point that I think should be taken into consideration and that is that when you divide the 
province strictly by population, I think you will find that there is a heavier concentration of young 
people in the cities, than there is in rural Saskatchewan, so it may end up taking a great many more votes 
in rural Saskatchewan to equal the number of voters in the urban part of Saskatchewan, cities, towns, 
etc. This again would work against proper and necessary representation by rural Saskatchewan. This can 
be taken into consideration and this can be solved by the committee and they may have the criteria in the 
Bill as it is presented, again I would hope that there may be a little more direct spelling out of the rural 
fact of life in the Bill or in instructions that go to the Commission before it is set up. Let me say that I 
think hearings are a good thing. The hearings themselves may bring to the attention of the Committee 
before they finalize the Bill such things as I have mentioned, such things as trading patterns, growth 
areas, rural distribution, and so on, that the Committee could in fact take these things into consideration 
and weigh them properly. 
 
I also agree with the Attorney General that the House should have the final say. In the final analysis if it 
is the Government’s decision to make a truly independent and non-partisan redistribution then they will 
do it, because you have the power. I don’t say this in a critical sense, I say it as a fact of life, you have 
45 Members, we have 15 and it wouldn’t matter if you had 32 and we had 31. You have the power to do 
it, just as we had the power to do it, just as former governments had the power to do it. So in the final 
analysis whether we get an independent, fair and equitable redistribution will depend on whether you 
mean what you ay. I take it for granted and I say it again at this stage that I do believe you mean what 
you say. You have said it, you have promised it in your election campaign, you campaigned on it, you 
criticized our redistribution and I think you certainly got some votes, I think the public certainly 
responded to that. We all knew that some day in Saskatchewan just as it has happened in other provinces 
and in the Federal Government there would be an independent redistribution. You said you were going 
to bring it in and I think you have the vehicle here to bring it in. Again I hope 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1489 

that we don’t get this Bill and this committee on the wrong foot by getting partisan. You can have some 
fun with us if you want and I am sure you can if you wish, but I think the public and the Press will judge 
you a little more kindly if you don’t take that attitude and believe me I am not pleading with you not to 
have some fun and games with us. I can join in the give and take and so can the Members on this side 
just as well as you can. 
 
I do think that it is sound that the Legislative Assembly does have the final say, because it is in fact the 
redistribution of the Legislative Assembly, not of any committee. I can’t see anything wrong, in fact I 
can see some merit in the manner that was outlined by the Attorney General and contained in the Bill 
that the report would come in and if the House wishes to amend the report, once they have amended it 
and then that report would become the basis for the redistribution Act itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is all I have to say, certainly we will support the Bill. I hope the Government will take 
into consideration in Committee some of the things I have pointed out. On the rural question I have 
strong feelings that we do take into consideration the rural fact of life. On the make-up of the Committee 
I don’t have any strong feelings. I think that there should be some value in considering an MLA from 
each side, but the disadvantages may outweigh the practical advantages. Again I say this that we will 
support the Bill and we will look forward to making our representations to this Commission when it is 
set up. If the Government brings the Bill in, in the spirit of the first 20 minutes of the Attorney General’s 
speech, and we are given through myself or through my office the opportunity to consult with the 
Speaker and with the Premier on the third member of the Commission, I can tell the Premier and the 
Speaker, that I will enter this in the spirit of co-operation and I will do my best to put forward names, 
not partisan names but names of some people that I think would do a fair and reasonable job. If the 
Premier and the Speaker put forward the same kind of people, I am sure we can agree on the individual. 
There are lots of people in Saskatchewan while they will not be politically independent, I don’t think 
there are very many political eunuchs in the province, but still there are people in this Province who 
though they may have a political bias one way or another, would feel very proud and be prepared to set 
aside that political bias and face a challenge like this and face their responsibility and do a good and 
reasonable job. Again, I congratulate the Government, Mr. Speaker, in bringing in this Bill. I think it can 
be the basis for a very fair and equitable redistribution. We will support it and we welcome it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might just be permitted one quick indulgence in light of 
the Leader of the Opposition’s remarks. That is the reference in the last five minutes of my speech. I 
repeat again to the Members and perhaps as far as I am concerned that’s the only comment that I make 
that I used the quoted defence of the Bill in 1970 to be a principle upon which I do not believe in as 
shown by the second reading of this Bill. I quote that and I say it and I put it in second reading on that 
basis. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1490 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased to have listened to the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition expounding his views on the setting up of a proposed Independent Boundaries 
Commission to draw constituency boundaries in the Province of Saskatchewan. I was not aware until 
this morning that this Bill would come for second reading. My constituency was one of the rural 
constituencies that had several redistributions or changes in boundaries during the time when the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition and the gentlemen opposite were the government. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will 
for the first time give an opportunity for Members to have representation by population with a 15 per 
cent tolerance as was indicated by our House Leader. Removing the drawing of boundaries from the 
hands of politicians is a very good thing. I think it is timely, as other neighboring provinces have done it. 
Similar procedure was employed by the Federal Government. Federal constituencies in the Province of 
Saskatchewan were set up by an Independent Boundaries Commission. Of course, the Commission may 
be criticized no doubt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when our Independent Boundaries Commission is set up there may be areas where some of 
our constituency boundaries may be contentious. I am happy that there will be no politicians on this 
Commission, Mr. Speaker. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition suggested that a politician, say a retired 
MLA of this Legislature, should be on this Commission. I personally, Mr. Speaker, see no reason for a 
politician to be on this independent electoral commission except for political reasons. It is about time, 
Mr. Speaker, that we remove the task of setting up constituency boundaries from the hands of 
politicians. Saskatchewan only recently, Mr. Speaker, has undergone this experience. This is one of the 
main reasons why you gentlemen are sitting opposite because of the way you gerrymandered. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Come on, here he goes. 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, these little pocket and rotten boroughs left some constituencies 
24 miles wide and 100 miles long. If we look at Last Mountain constituency represented by the Hon. 
Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) you can hardly see it due to its reduced size. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Where . . . 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Well I know where you are going to be Hon. Member for Athabasca. I know where 
you will be after May 4th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have stated that my constituency has had two political redistributions. After listening to 
what the Hon. Leader of the Opposition has said this afternoon I should like to add more on second 
reading. Therefore, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1491 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman that 
Bill No. 70 – An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Department Act, 1969 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — We have had until just a few minutes ago when the Member for 
Redberry started his tirade a fairly peaceful afternoon so I suppose now that the peace has been broken it 
might as well be continued. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, although this Bill is a very short one, only two or three lines, it is one that the 
Opposition takes great exception to and we have no intention of supporting the abolition of the Indian 
and Metis Department, because we don’t believe that it is in the best interest of people of Indian 
ancestry. I think it shows clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP Government is returning to the do-nothing 
policies for Indian people that they followed for 20 years prior to 1964. You know for 20 years they 
ignored the plight of the Indian and Metis people of this Province. Their record, and you can go back 
through their legislative records for the 20 years they were the Government, is a disgrace. It’s a disgrace 
that we find in no other Legislature in the Dominion of Canada. They did two things for the Indian 
people wile they were in the Government, they provided them with the vote and they provided them 
with liquor and many times they used the two of them together. There is no question that the vote was 
deserved but I am sure it would have been appreciated much more by our people of Indian ancestry if 
there had been some programs with it to make the people feel that they were a part of the Saskatchewan 
community and on equal terms with other Saskatchewan citizens when they went to cast their ballots. 
 
Liquor created problems due to the lack of consultation with The Federal Indian Affairs Department at 
the time, although it was available to them they were unable to take it onto their own reserves. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that abolishing the Department of Indian and Metis Affairs is not the answer to 
the problem of the Indian and Metis people but it is merely a shirking of responsibility by our friends 
opposite. They are trying to blame the Indian people for the Government’s irresponsible attitude by 
claiming that the Indian leaders wanted this Department abolished. What they should have done, 
because this is what the Indian people also said, was to restructure the Department if necessary and they 
had the opportunity to do this. They should have tried it. If the Department was so wrong and if they’re 
not satisfied with the way we established and operated the Department, surely they had the responsibility 
to sit down with the Indian and Metis and bring about the changes that they thought were necessary 
rather than, without consultation, to go out and abolish the Department. There is no solution to problems 
by putting your head in the sand and saying all the Indian problems are gong to go away now that we 
have abolished the Provincial Indian and Metis Department. That is what they are trying to do. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1492 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that Members opposite had made up their minds prior to 1969 what they were 
going to do with the Indian and Metis Department. They made up their minds when the Bill was in front 
of the House that they were going to oppose it. They opposed it in the Legislature and they opposed it on 
the hustings. They created political sabotage at every opportunity before the Department ever had a 
chance to develop. They were taking opposition to it purely on a political basis. The Minister, the 
present Minister of the Department (Mr. Bowerman), the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer), 
the Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault), the Member from Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk), the Member 
from Cut Knife (Mr. Kwasnica), the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes), they all talked against the 
Bill in 1969 but they all voted for it because at that time they didn’t dare vote against it. We called a 
recorded vote on second reading of the Bill when it was established and the vote was 53 to 0 in favor of 
going ahead with this Department. Now it is going to be interesting how those same Members vote 
today. 
 
But the ink wasn’t dry on the Bill before they started trying to undermine the success of the Department 
at every opportunity. They distorted the objectives of the program and they downgraded the personnel 
who were trying to put the program into operation. They went from one end of the province to the other 
separating the Indians from the Metis, separating the people from the North and from the South and 
from the East and from the West. They did everything in their power to pick out little events that 
occurred in the setting up and will occur in the setting up of any department and used them to try and 
break down any support that the Department had. 
 
They opposed the Bill from the point of view of lack of consultation. The Member from Cut Knife – and 
I am sorry that he is not in his seat today – made a great speech when he said and I quote from the 
Debates and Proceedings of that year in Hansard: 
 

Mr. Barrie said there was consultation with leaders in SGI and other Indian organizations. Good, 
but the type of consultation that really bears fruit I feel is right down at the reservation level with 
each Chief and his Council . . . Did the Government Members go to reservations to meet 
personally with each one? 
 

Well, I guess, Mr. Speaker, that as the Opposition today we can say the same thing to the Government 
Members. Did you go to each reservation and talk to the individual Indian before you made up your 
mind to abolish the Department? Of course, the answer is No. The Minister of the Indian and Metis 
Department has made it quite clear since last June that he has met only with the executive of the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and the Metis Department, and they asked to have it abolished, 
therefore, they are getting their wish. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We campaigned . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — I know, you campaigned long before it was ever established. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But that’s . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, I don’t care whether 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1493 

they did or whether they didn’t. All I am saying is, if it is right that the individual Indians on the 
individual reserves should be consulted when the Department was established isn’t it right then that they 
should be consulted when it is being abolished. And the Minister has made it quite clear that the 
individual has not been consulted when it comes to the abolishment of this Department. 
 
The Premier has resigned, he left his seat. You can’t creep up to the front that way, you’ve got to get 
elected again before you get into the second row. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Makes you jealous. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Get into the back seat where you belong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know the establishment of the Indian and Metis Department in Saskatchewan was the 
first concrete step not only in this Province but in any province of Canada to provide our people of 
Indian ancestry with the same opportunity and services available to other citizens of this Province. But 
by abolishing the Department the Government says we were wrong in setting it up. We admit, and I 
mentioned this in an earlier debate, that we didn’t have all the answers. We made mistakes but we did 
provide the opportunity for them to participate as equal citizens in the mainstream of Saskatchewan life. 
But you know the present Government have not made any attempt to find a new approach, if that was 
required, they have made no attempt to provide alternative answers or correct mistakes. They believe 
everything can be solved by abolishing the Department and I suggest that this is a most negative attitude. 
 
We believed in 1969 and we still believe today that involvement of the whole community is needed to 
solve the problems of our Indian people. The Task Force did a terrific job of bringing the awareness of 
the problems of the people to the non-Indian society. Today by this Bill the Government is saying that 
the Indian must solve his own problems and the non-Indian community should stay out of it. We do not 
agree with this approach. The present Government says we forced the Indian to accept programs without 
proper consultation but I have made it clear on many occasions that perhaps we did move too fast 
because we were tired of listening to people saying, something must be done, and then doing nothing. 
We were determined to do something and we moved in that direction. But there was no force involved. 
We said all along that the Indian and Metis Department was to provide a framework for policies, 
legislation, and the financial assistance to provide education and training programs, employment, job 
opportunities, housing, electricity, telephones, roads and other services that are available to other parts 
of our society. Above all we provided the opportunity to participate in and contribute to our province on 
an equal basis and anyone else if they desired to do so. Many of the programs were asked for by Indian 
people, many were obviously needed and many appeared desirable to carry out the aims of the 
Department. None affected the treaty rights or the relationships of the Indians with other jurisdictions. 
The basic principle was and I state it again that programs and services must be made available to every 
person of Indian ancestry in this Province and this we followed, or at least we tried to. 
 
By abolishing the Department the Government is saying, we 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1494 

shouldn’t have provided several thousand jobs with our Indian and Metis people; we shouldn’t have 
provided thousands of training programs and related training courses; we shouldn’t have brought 
electricity to every reserve; we shouldn’t have starting bringing telephones and housing assistance; we 
shouldn’t have encouraged the Indian people by providing grants for establishing their own economic 
enterprises. They are saying that this was all wrong when they take the attitude that abolishing the 
Department that provided all these services is the answer to the problems today. But I hope that before 
too long they will stop and ask the individuals who were assisted, who did find jobs, who did take the 
training courses, who had houses provided, who had employment opportunities and grants for industry 
and for business, if they think the Indian and Metis Department was a waste of time. 
 
Since the election in June the steady downgrading in the Department has taken place from day to day. It 
was obvious they wanted to destroy it. Instead of showing imagination and initiative to correct the 
weaknesses and the shortcomings that existed and to make it into a Department that would carry out the 
requests and need of the Indian people, the Minister and the Government put their heads in the sand and 
believed that by abolishing the Department all problems of the Indian people would disappear. They 
fired the Deputy Minister and the Director of Placement, they cut back on the budget that we had 
provided with the result that even in the few months they have been the Government more than 250 
people less were employed. We had a tremendous record of providing jobs and training programs within 
the Civil Service, within the Crown corporations for people of Indian ancestry. The short time that they 
have been the Government there has been a reduction of 450 jobs in that area. Training courses and a 
number of students involved have been reduced, returns are coming in almost every day showing that 
the work of the Indian Department was downgraded last year. The activities finally have ground to a 
halt. 
 
1972-73 doesn’t look any better for our people of Indian ancestry. The Minister claims that the new 
Human Resources, another agency, will take up the slack and fill in and carry on the same program. 
This, of course, is nonsense because there is no guarantee that there will be one dollar in this coming 
year for Indian and Metis people. There is no guarantee that the money won’t be spent for some other 
segment of our society. The Budget shows that it is costing the Indian and Metis people of this Province 
$2.8 million to abolish the Department. The FSI and the Metis Society may think that it is worth $2.8 
million to abolish the Department but it will be they along with the Government who will have to 
explain to all the other Indian and Metis people why there are no job opportunities this year, why there 
are no education programs, why there are no grants for housing and other services provided. More than 
half a million has been cut from the Government Supernumery employment program. It is obvious that 
none of the 783 new people hired in the Budget will be people of Indian ancestry. A reduction of $1.2 
million in special training programs shows the attitude of Members opposite and makes us believe we 
are right when we say that there will be no incentives, and no initiative shown by Members opposite to 
provide employment in the private sector. 
 
We have heard a great deal about consultation, in fact the Minister opposite has made that the main 
argument of his speeches for three departments, the setting up of the Northern Department, 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1495 

the setting up of the Human Rights Agency and the abolishing of this one. I would say that all the 
consultation in the world is no good if you are not prepared to put the financial resources where your 
mouth is to provide programs and assistance after you carry out this consultation. The Liberal 
Government proved that they were prepared to back up their promises with hard cash to accomplish the 
objectives of the Indian people. 
 
I am going to give you a couple of examples and I could give you many more of what the Government 
opposite mean by consultation. I would suggest that if this is their approach to consultation that what we 
have said regarding the assistance, support and help for Indian people will be practically nil. I want to 
refer to an event that took place last fall under the name of so-called consultation. September 25th, less 
than three months after taking office and after promising the FSI and the Metis Society, they carried out 
what they called consultation. And this was the headline: “Metis March on Premier.” 
 

Seventy Metis representatives demanded to see Premier Blakeney Friday afternoon after 
marching to his office to claim about the bad deal they were getting. When they received word 
that Premier Blakeney and his Ministers would not attend the meeting they decided to march to 
the Legislature Building. Mr. Bowerman arrived a half hour late at the meeting. 
 

This is the type of consultation that Members opposite are talking about. These people who had taken 
the time to come to meet the Members of the Government and who believed the promise that was made 
last year before the election that there would be consultation, did they present the brief to the Minister? 
No. The Press clipping went on to say: 
 

In a brief presented to Mr. Blakeney’s secretary . . . 
 

Mr. Blakeney’s secretary accepted the brief on behalf of these people who had come for hundreds of 
miles to meet this so-called new Government with a New Deal for Indian People. Is this what they call 
consultation with our Indian and Metis friends? The Minister-in-Charge is late, the Premier and the other 
Members of his Cabinet won’t meet them at all and then the Premier’s secretary accepts the brief on 
behalf of the Government. After it was all over and after presenting the brief to Mr. Blakeney’s secretary 
the group was taken on a tour of the building by an official guide. That was going to be the sop for not 
meeting the Cabinet, they were taken on a tour of the Legislative Building. And this, Mr. Speaker, is 
what our friends opposite tell us is consultation with our Indian and Metis friends. This is the type of 
promises made at election time and then within three months this is the way they act. 
 
I want to refer to one other situation which I think shows very clearly what is meant by consultation as 
far as our friends opposite are concerned. And this is in relationship to the Cutbank project. 
 
We all recognize that the Cutbank project had many difficulties to overcome due to location, due to 
being a new program, starting in at a time when the election was called and was on. Also because of 
Federal responsibility and the Federal desire to give the buildings over to the province as quickly as 
possible that some use had to be made of them at a rather early date. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1496 

However, a program was drawn up, was started, that could have been successful if Members opposite 
had just followed the practice of the former Government of consulting with the Indian people when it 
was possible to do after the program had become established. The Member for Shellbrook (Mr. 
Bowerman) is nodding his head. Well I will have him nodding is head a little more before I finish the 
sordid story and the sordid attitude that he took as a new Minister-in-Charge. 
 
We heard on September 1st, this again was only a couple of months after they became the Government, 
that the Government plans to include proposals to give Indian and Metis participants in the program at 
Cutbank a voice in decision-making and to involve the people more at the management level. And if 
they had carried this out I am sure that today we wouldn’t be talking the way we are about the attitude of 
our friends opposite. 
 
Even the assistant to Mr. Bowerman, Art Lloyd, who was an unsuccessful candidate in the June 23rd 
election, talked with the participants and the staff at the site at Cutbank and told them they were going to 
take a first hand look at the problems. Jim Sinclair, Indian and Metis Department Deputy Minister, said 
26 families and 15 single trainees went through the program the first year. So it was off to not a bad 
start, but again, we are not suggesting that changes were not necessary. 
 
Mr. Cody: — Are you running out of . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — No, I just want to get my facts straight. 
 
Ken Mackay, President of the Local Metis Society Branch at Cutbank said that there had been some 
major problems because of the number of Government agencies involved. This, of course, was true. It 
couldn’t be avoided but there was no reason that consultation and co-operation between these various 
agencies and governments could not have been solved. But he did say that this site could really be 
something Indians and Metis could be proud of in the future if the Government would let the people get 
involved. 
 
So you see we have the two situations now, Mr. Speaker. We have the Government promising that the 
Indian people would be involved, and the President of the Local Indian and Metis Society saying, “It 
could be a success if we are involved.” So the two ingredients are there. You would expect that the two 
would be brought together and this whole situation would end in one great happy story. 
 
But let’s see if this is the case. But I want you to remember theses two basic ingredients – the promise 
made by the Minister that there would be involved. Nothing would be done without consultation with 
the local people. Then the Metis Society president saying that if this involvement takes place it could be 
a place that the Indian and Metis people could be proud of. They made several requests for additional 
courses and they said that the agricultural program had been reasonably successful so there was – and 
the point that I am trying to make here is that there was no suggestion at that time that they weren’t 
prepared to carry on the program, to participate and see it grow. 
 
So that was the situation on September 1st. Now let’s 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1497 

move on to November 25th, this is two months later. Let’s see if this involvement is taking place and to 
the satisfaction of the Metis Society and is still as good as it was on the 1st of September when the 
promise was made. 
 
We find out on November 25th that they are talking about closure, but the possibility of closure of the 
year old Indian and Metis Centre at Cutbank was apparently staved off Wednesday as the Metis Society 
of Saskatchewan and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians were asked to submit a report on how they 
fell the project should be run. So in the two months the Government was talking about closing it down 
and the Indian and Metis had to call another meeting with the Government in order to stave off this 
closure. This was the result of the involvement and the co-operation that this Government had promised 
two months before. Closure was one alternative for the centre raised by Indian and Metis Minister, Mr. 
Bowerman. 
 
You know it is significant, he has a one-track mind. The answer to solving the problems at Cutbank was 
closing it down. The answer to solving the problems of the Indian and Metis people was closing down 
the Indian and Metis Department. That is the only solution that he has to any of the problems that have 
arisen since he became the Minister. You know, Mr. Speaker, I hesitate really to know what I should call 
the Hon. Member for Shellbrook. He was Minister of Mineral Resources but they took that away from 
him. I can’t call him that anymore. He can’t be called the Minister of Northern Development because 
that Department hasn’t gone through the Legislature and now we can’t call him the Minister of the 
Indian and Metis Department because there isn’t such a department any more. It is being abolished. So it 
is rather difficult to know what title we should give the Hon. Member. I think we can give him the title 
of the Minister of Closure which would probably be as apt as any. 
 
A meeting was held on Wednesday afternoon at Cutbank involving Provincial and Federal Officials and 
the President of the Cutbank Local of the Metis Society, Ken Mackay – and I want you to get this – he 
said that this meeting was one of the best we have ever had. Mr. Mackay said that Mr. Bowerman 
indicated that the Government had no intention – now I want you to get that – had no intentions of 
closing the centre at present. Mr. Mackay said that Mr. Bowerman just about committed himself to 
administration of the centre by a Board of Directors composed of native people. 
 
So here we have another meeting, another great promise of involvement, another promise, another 
commitment that it was going to be run by native people and the President of the Local Metis Society 
said, “This is the greatest thing that has ever happened. The nicest meeting that we have ever had with 
the gentleman from Shellbrook.” 
 
It certainly looks again that the idea of closure has gone completely out of the mind of the Minister. 
There is no longer any suggestion that it is going to be run just be white people. We got the commitment 
that it is going to be run by the Indian and Metis. We have the commitment that it is going to be kept 
open. This, Mr. Speaker, was on November 23rd. 
 
Then Mr. Mackay went on and made it quite clear that his people were upset by possibilities of closure. 
Both the 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1498 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and the Metis Society said the future of the project was in keeping 
it open. However, the Minister had still not made up his mind about keeping it open because an 
enrolment and teacher hiring freeze had been in effect at the Centre since November. Officials were 
called in to study the school. 
 
So on one hand he is telling them Yes, we are going to keep it open. Don’t worry. We have given you a 
commitment, but with the other hand, deviously beneath the surface, e is trying to find some excuse to 
close down the program. 
 
This is one of the reasons why the Minister said that it wasn’t very successful even though there were as 
many as 43 enrolled at one time. The Minister said that the Centre, as it stood, provided an unreal sort of 
operation in that it was so isolated. He said that it was unreasonable to bring northern Indian and Metis 
residents and to place them in the middle of the prairie environment for training. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Member from Shellbrook in that regard. It is difficult to 
bring northern people into this. But I want to remind you that the people who had come to Cutbank had 
come of their own free will and volition. But what was the alternative to bringing them from the North 
to the South and putting them at Cutbank? Well, a member of the Press asked Mr. Bowerman, “Well, 
what would you do then? Where would you put them?” Asked about what alternatives would be open to 
Cutbank residents should the Centre close, he said it would be more logical – get this, Mr. Speaker – it 
wasn’t logical to put them in Cutbank in the middle of the prairie, but it would be more logical to place 
them in technical institutions in Saskatoon and build another one for them in Regina. 
 
It is not logical to bring in Indians from the North to the South and put them at Outlook and Cutbank, 
but it is entirely logical to put them in Saskatoon or bring them further south and put them in Regina. So 
I suggest that it is not surprising that the events took place later shows a confusion in the mind of the 
Minister when he makes statements like that. 
 
Mr. Mackay said that he expected the study – and this is important in view of what happened later – by 
the FSI and Metis Society which will cover such aspects of curriculum and the needs of the native 
people would be started soon. This was November 23rd. So here we have another meeting with the 
Government, the commitment that it would be kept open and the commitment that it would be staffed 
and managed by Indian and Metis people. And a commitment that a student would be carried out and 
nothing done until that study was completed. 
 
Now let’s look at December 23rd, one month later, one month after the promises and the commitments 
and the consultation of our friends opposite had taken place. It was reported by the Minister that the tiny 
community of Cutbank, comprised of a school farm complex and 40 houses is to become a virtual ghost 
town December 31st as the Cabinet decision to close the native training program takes effect. After the 
promises, after the commitments, after the pledges, and after a study which was being paid for partially 
by the Government, had been started they couldn’t wait to get their sticky fingers in there and close it 
down. Less than one month after this great consultation had taken place, Mr. Bowerman said: 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1499 

It has become completely impractical and exceedingly expensive to continue training programs 
at Cutbank and courses will cease before Christmas. 
 

A great Christmas present for our Indian and Metis friends! Would you believe it, money before people! 
 
Then he goes on and this is sort of interesting. I mentioned earlier that the study was going to be carried 
out. That the Provincial Government was going to assist in financing the study. Do you know where 
they were going to get the finances to assist in the study? They are going to close down Cutbank in order 
to save the money to pay for the study as it whether they keep it open. 
 
Now this is the way our friends opposite operate. This is what the Minister said. The manager at 
Cutbank received a letter from the Minister stating that closure will help offset the $28,400 cost of the 
Metis Society education study being financed by the province. They close it down and use the money 
saved to finance a study for something which now has become entirely obsolete. 
 
Originally it had been thought by Mr. Mackay and other Metis Society members that closure of the 
program would not come at least until their study was completed. And they had every reason to believe 
that. The Minister had made the promise, he had made the commitment that the study would be carried 
out and that the Cutbank project would be kept open and in operation. 
 
Mr. Mackay went on to say that he had been optimistic after a meeting late in November, which Mr. 
Bowerman produced plans for the study and it said at that time: 
 

The possibility of closure has been staved off. Mr. Bowerman said that the money would be 
forwarded shortly for the study and that delays were unavoidable. 
 

You just don’t turn out approval just like that. However, we recall that Saskatoon Aid grant that came 
within four days and yet they couldn’t do it for our Indian and Metis friends. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we hear comments from our Government opposite regarding consultation these 
are only two examples of what the consultation process means to them. It means, in both cases, the 
breaking of their word, the breaking of their promises and the failure to keep the commitments that they 
make to the Indian and Metis people. It is no wonder that the Indian people today are becoming 
disenchanted and fed up with the Government opposite. 
 
The Government has failed to come up with an approach that is more positive than shrugging off their 
responsibility by abolishing the Indian and Metis Department. Since this is no answer to solving the 
problems of our Indian and Metis people there is no way that we can support this in second reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, would the Hon. Member permit a question. Has the Hon. Member ever 
visited the Cutbank project? 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1500 

Mr. Guy: — Yes, I have been there long before you ever saw the place. 
 
Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support this Bill in second 
reading I can at least agree with the speaker who has jut taken his seat, that Bill No. 70 in and of itself, 
does not constitute adequate government policy with respect to native problems. 
 
I think, however, that even the Hon. Member opposite was not really expecting that Bill No. 70 was the 
entirety of the approach of this Government to the problems of native affairs. And he might allow that 
Bill No. 69 which deals with a creation of a Human Resources Agency in Saskatchewan and Bill No. 67 
dealing with the Department of Northern Affairs, had some marginal connection with the problems of 
native people. Maybe this satire is too much for the Members opposite, but I think that we are all willing 
to allow the abolition of one departmental agency does not suffice. 
 
However, I think another point is well taken that he made, that in the 20 years of CCF government from 
1944 to 1964 we didn’t pay adequate attention to the problems of native people. We intend, during this 
period, to make redress for that imbalance. It would be very easy now to start quoting statistics about 
native poverty, about the incidence of disease, about the average life expectancy of native people 
relative to whites, etc., etc. It would be very easy to imply great liberal virtues of which we are all proud. 
 
However, liberals virtues of compassion and tolerance and sympathy for the plight of native people are 
certainly not going to suffice. And the most important reason they do not suffice is a very simple one 
and a very hard one to face – there exists racism in our society. Racism is quite simply the formation of 
attitudes about individuals on the basis of alleged racial characteristics. The alleged racial characteristics 
of Indians are drunkenness, laziness and on the other hand the alleged racial characteristics of white 
which native people may hold of being hypocritical, or being greedy, etc. Racism does exist in our 
society, in the sense that I have defined it. And we have to live with the ugly reality among us and we 
are not going to get rid of it by pretending it doesn’t exist. In some sense there is a similarity between 
where we are in Saskatchewan in 1972 with where the United States was, in certain southern states with 
respect to their racial problems in 1962, even in 1952. The organizations of native people in 
Saskatchewan bear remarkable parallels to some of the more moderate early organizations of black 
people in the United States such as the NAACP, the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People and the Urban League. 
 
And the next logical question to ask, Mr. Speaker, is whether we are going to be able to avoid the ugly 
progress of racial intolerance in America. Are we going to be able to avoid the dynamics of violence 
which has struck every large American city which has struck into the heart of American society? The ten 
per cent of our population of Saskatchewan which is of Indian or Metis background is not dissimilar in 
proportion to the proportion of blacks in the United States but unlike the blacks in the United States in 
the last decade the native 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1501 

population in our country has been relatively submerged, has been unseen, unheard. Let us not talk 
about violence as if it is something which is an alien word to raise. All that happens now is that violence 
is turned primarily inwards and it’s a question of native person against native person. The question is 
whether it is going to be turned outwards and whether it is going to affect the entirety of our society. I 
speak with some personal experience having lived on the edge of a ghetto of a large American city and 
experienced a triple murder three blocks away. Friends move out of an apartment with a murder in that 
apartment. Friends move out with an arson in the building next door. It is not pleasurable to contemplate 
the extent to which racial tensions can escalate if they are not solved. They are not going to be solved as 
I said at the beginning merely by liberal virtues of tolerance, compassion and the quoting of statistics 
about poverty. 
 
It is an unfortunate reality of political life that “politicians in general react, they don’t act.” There I am 
paraphrasing a statement made by a senator of the United States with respect to another issue, the issue 
of the Vietnam war. But it is going to be a challenge to us to see whether we can as new Democratic 
party Government, as a socialist Government act in some other way than by reacting to pressures 
generated by each successive crisis. But given the truth of the aphorism that politicians in general react 
they don’t act there is going to be a lot of confrontation, there is going to be a lot of tension in the next 
decade as native people organize in attempt to redress the injustices and the imbalances. It is going to 
require a superhuman amount of tolerance on the part of us as white people in power, in governments, 
whether it be as Members of the Legislature or actually on the treasury benches as Cabinet Ministers, to 
be able to respond constructively to that confrontation and not destructively. Now we have before us the 
disastrous experiences of racial conflict in the United States which at all costs we must avoid. 
 
In conclusion I wish the native people of Saskatchewan well in their struggles. It must be they who lead 
but we have a role to play in laying out the path before them and in making the situation to be as 
amenable as possible to peaceful change. We must put our hearts, our moneys, and our minds, to the 
task. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say just a few words on this particular Bill. 
The purpose of the Bill is very simple. The Act is certainly one of the shortest ones we shall be dealing 
with in this Session, because it will repeal the present Indian and Metis Department. I want to support 
some of the arguments put forth by my colleague from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and I am sure after 
listening to the Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) support some of the points he was 
making. The Minister who brought this Bill in, Mr. Speaker, did so because of a personal vendetta 
against this Indian and Metis Department. Obviously the Government opposite has no fear of new or 
additional departments because we are setting up, I believe, four or five new ones at this Session. But it 
is quite evident from the Minister’s statements throughout the last few years both in the House and 
outside the House, in the course of the campaign, and the course of introducing the Bill that he has 
intended from day one to sabotage this department. And I can 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1502 

certainly say too that it is quite evident that the Government, Saskatchewan, from Bill 69, the 
Department of Human Resources that they are establishing and from Bill 70 (the umbrella department if 
we might call it that for northern Saskatchewan) that they obviously do propose to attempt at least to 
carry out the same functions with a few name changes, perhaps a different approach and some 
legislative foot work in essence to try and do the same job that this department was set up for. I think, 
Mr. Speaker, that no discussion on this particular Bill, to repeal the Indian and Metis Department can be 
complete without some reference to the former Premier of this Province, the late Ross Thatcher. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — The Indian and Metis Department was established by the former administration, the 
Liberal administration and in particular by the former Premier, the late Ross Thatcher, the Member for 
Morse. As a matter of fact the very points that were raised and the very concerns expressed by the 
Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) were often expressed by the Premier in the course of 
discussion on this Department in introducing the Bill. He made those very same remarks time and again. 
Because certainly he did recognize the need both now and the possible danger if nothing was done to try 
and remedy the problem of the native people, if you want to call it problem and it certainly is. The 
former Premier was determined to do all in his power to try and avoid that kind of situation developing 
as my Hon. friend opposite has referred to the situation in the United States, the racial picture down 
there. 
 
Certainly there may have been some opposition from time to time to this Department, Mr. Speaker, from 
certain of the leaders of the various native groups. There certainly was opposition from the party 
opposite at almost every step of the way, but let me say this, Mr. Speaker, there was no opposition from 
the rank and file Indian and Metis of the province. Because they knew it to be a sincere effort to help 
them. It was the first piece of legislation of its kind in Canada, Mr. Speaker. It represented a new attempt 
to help the native Canadian people, it was a meaningful effort and one that produced results, Mr. 
Speaker, and a successful effort. It was backed with dollars, it was backed with effort and as I say it 
emphasized not only the plight of the native people but the indifference or the disinterest if you like, or 
the misinformation of Canadian white society with respect to that particular problem. It was open 
recognition of one of the major social problems in Canada today and the former Premier, Ross Thatcher, 
made it his business to get on practically every reserve in this Province. He saw their problems first hand 
to an extent that no Canadian political leader ever did before, or since. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — He saw too that Federal policies were inadequate and that the real problems of Indian 
and Metis in Canada were not being solved by welfareism and by more bureaucracy. He recognized and 
the former Liberal Government recognized that our native people needed not only encouragement, but 
they needed financial help and they needed new and different approaches to upgrading their living 
standards and their education standards. We 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1503 

went ahead also with the establishment of the Indian and Metis Task Force which went along with the 
Department, in our effort in this regard and that Task Force brought together people from industry, from 
the various Government agencies and from the various churches, unions and other groups in our society 
whom we felt at that time must share some of this responsibility in correcting the problem. As the 
Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) pointed out, life on the reserves in Saskatchewan was helped by many 
measures. Grid roads and other roads were built, electricity was brought to hundreds of homes and the 
homes themselves were improved, new and otherwise, the living standard in general upgraded and 
upgraded considerably, during the lifetime of this Department we now propose to abolish. 
 
The very bread and butter type of improvements if you like, Mr. Speaker, that the former CCF 
Government spoke of in such pious platitudes only to turn around, and as the Member for Athabasca 
pointed out, never really get off the ground in implementing or doing. 
 
I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Indian and Metis Department that was established by the late 
Premier of this Province represents the most significant piece of human rights legislation that ever was 
introduced into this House, up to this point in time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — The most meaningful piece of legislation of its type we have seen. 
 
Members opposite like to talk and the Member from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) is no exception. They 
like to talk about human rights and so on but so often the hot air evaporates before any action ever 
materializes. And this Bill that we are repealing, I want to point out again, was a most sincere and a 
most successful effort to help our native people. And there were programs there and they were backed 
up with millions of provincial dollars. Once again, I am sure that the Hon. Minister from Shellbrook can 
recall the former Premier was no great spender when it came to spending money. He did put every 
dollars that we could into this one but there was always a point and he would always say this was one 
problem of Government that could not be solved by more and more dollars and called for a good deal 
more than money. While money would solve most problems that any Government faced, this certainly 
wasn’t one of these problems. I think of the programs in educational upgrading, not all of them 
Federally supported, the Cutbank one was an example of one that was, and there were others of course 
that were largely Federally supported. But I think of the adult five to ten program that was brought in 
with respect to upgrading, that program is used almost all across Canada and in the other States in the 
United States today, it’s used by Federal Manpower and this came about largely as a result of efforts 
under the Indian and Metis Department. 
 
Trade training programs such as the heavy duty equipment operators’ course, Mr. Speaker, the placing 
of these people into jobs with hospitals, Crown corporations, Civil Service and the establishment of 
native people on farms, on decent sized farms, was accomplished under this new Department that we are 
setting out to abolish. I’m sure some of the Members opposite will 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1504 

recall the 40-acre plot, the NDP plan for Green Lake, I’m sure the Member for Meadow Lake and there 
are other Members over there, are well aware of that plan, typically socialist, completely unrealistic and 
consequently a complete failure, but we did implement agricultural policy and platform with respect to 
establishing Indian and native people on farms on the reserve and off the reserve. It has been a success. 
It has been a slow process but certainly, Mr. Speaker, advances have been made in this regard. 
 
Now the native people, just for the record, Mr. Speaker, themselves, were very definitely involved in the 
development and the implementation of these various policies. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that they will 
be in the future, involved in the development of these policies. And I also hope that sociologists and 
other social experts aren’t allowed to dominate the new agencies and the new efforts that the Minister is 
going to put forth. Because sometimes they get caught up in rhetoric of planning and forget the purposes 
for which they really are there for. I want to wish him well in his efforts to continue the work that was 
begun so well under this Department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this Bill before us, I really had no 
intention of speaking until the Hon. Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) got up to speak. I will only 
speak for a very few moments. I do want to remark on a couple of the remarks by Hon. friend from 
Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) made. I want to say that if you check the records of the House I believe you will 
find that when this Bill was brought in that most Members in the Opposition supported it. I know that I 
did and I remember exactly what I said. I supported it with reservations. I thought it was a worthwhile 
effort to try it out. I would agree with the Hon. Member that I believe the Government was sincere at the 
time but I really have to disagree with him that it was successful. I again say that I voted for it with 
reservations. 
 
The next three years I spent much of my time talking to the native people of my constituency and at no 
time at that time, the early part, did I say that it wasn’t going to work. The reason I rose mainly was the 
fact that the Hon. Member for Athabasca, I am sorry he is not in his seat, said that the native people 
were not consulted. Well, I want to ay this, that during the campaign itself, 1971 in June, I visited every 
home on the five reserves in my constituency and in every home I left this card which was the New Deal 
for the Indian and Metis program. 
 
The first item on that program was a promise, if desired, to completely overhaul, or if desired by the 
Indian and Metis organization, abolish the Indian and Metis Department. And if the Department was 
retained it was to be staffed and operated largely by Indian and Metis. 
 
I might say that when I look at the returns of the election in Touchwood, when I look at the returns of 
the different reserves, I feel that the action that I am taking in supporting doing away with this 
Department and the bringing in of a program in another department, which will I believe help the Indian 
and Metis people better, it was overwhelming the support I got. This may sound like boasting, on one 
reserve I got a 6 to 1 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1505 

vote, another one I got 3 to 1, 2½ to 1, 4 to 1, and about 3 to 1½. So I just want to say that I do feel that 
the native people of my constituency and I believe all the constituencies, were consulted in the election. 
I know for a fact that the Minister since the election has continued to consult with the organizations. 
 
One other remarks before I sit down because I said I was only going to speak for a minute or two. I want 
to react to a statement from the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) when he said the Government prior 
to 1964 had done nothing. I will admit we never did as much as should have like to have done, but I can 
remember the Minister of Municipal Affairs and myself meeting with the Indian Affairs Department in 
Ottawa a number of times hoping to come up with some kind of an agreement such as was done later. 
I’m not trying to take all the credit for it but I believe that much of the work that was done by the 
Government prior to 1964 and continued by the Government of my Hon. friend when they were in 
power. It was the back work of coming to an agreement for the two governments being able to work 
together. 
 
I have no hesitation in supporting the doing away with the Indian and Metis Department. As far as I am 
concerned I feel I have had the go ahead signals by the support that I have had from the native people 
both at the election time and after. 
 
I think the other charges, Mr. Speaker, can be best answered by the Minister himself but I did have to 
make this statement clear that as far as I am concerned, I have consulted with my native people in the 
three years after the Department was formed and the election campaign, their verdict, their support of 
myself in those polls, as far as I am concerned gave me the authority and the right to come in here and 
support the actions of this Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to say very much on 
this particular Bill but there are a few things that a few people may not know about the whole picture of 
the treatment of native people in this Province. I have been around this Province for a while, a bit longer 
than the boxstall physician from Spud Island who just sat down and he hasn’t learned much since he 
came here either judging by the tirade and the noise that was made and the amount of wisdom that he 
brought forth. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if these people would like to go back and look at the treatment of 
native people in this Province. Let us remember that the native people, the real native people, always 
have been and still are under the jurisdiction of a Liberal Government most of the time with a few little 
breaks for Tories, the Government at Ottawa, that’s where the responsibility lies mainly for welfare of 
the native people. We have the responsibility for the Metis. And I say that over the years, until a very 
few years ago that that Government at Ottawa failed miserably in their handling of the native people. All 
that the Indian reservations in their opinion were a catch pit for defunct politicians to be Indian agents. 
That’s the story. That’s the story of the Liberal policies of the former Liberal Governments in this 
Province. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1506 

I will give credit for an honest attempt and I think possibly as the Member for Touchwood said, and that 
Members across the floor said, that some honest attempts were made but the whole thing was that it 
started off on the wrong foot. I said this at the time, that the name, the Indian and Metis Department, was 
a segregation in itself. That was the first thing. That is segregation and it would continue to be 
segregation as long as we left that apartheid name on it, because you do segregate and they did 
segregate, actually, when they set up that Department. That is the main reason that I am supporting this 
Bill. Let us not forget that history shows that in 1944 when the CCF Government came into power that 
the natives in the northern part of this Province were dying faster than they were being born after having 
been exploited by the Hudson Bay Company traders and the whiskey traders and all those people who 
would filch their livelihood. They were dying faster than they were being born, Mr. Speaker, from every 
disease that the white man could bring them, from every invasion that was made by the whiskey 
peddlers and the traders, leaving nothing behind but poverty. To take what little fur and what little fish 
the native produced. The only time the native was noticed by the people that exploited them was during 
the fishing season and they’d bring the nets put them out on the lakes and they would offer them a dime 
a pound for the first pull. By the time they got off the lake, once they got them fishing they were lucky 
to get a couple of cents a pound. And then as soon as the fish market was glutted, off they went again 
leaving the natives with nothing but a headache because when they got through buying their fish they 
peddled the liquor to them so that they could get the money back. That’s the story. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — What did you do? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — What did we do? I’ll tell you what we did, I’m just coming to that. Immediately . . . 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Did you . . . tell us . . . 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Yes, I’m telling you. Sit there and listen. You just sit back on your bale of hay, Mr. 
Member from Wilkie, and I’ll tell you. 
 
Immediately we brought health care into the North. Hospitals into the North. We brought nursing care to 
the North. We brought food to the northern people. This is all again a matter of history. In that 20 years, 
and here’s the proof and even you should be able to understand this, Mr. Member from Wilkie, that 
instead of the population of the North dying faster than it was being born, it became in those 20 years 
the fastest growing population with the exception of five areas in the world. I am going to tell you . . . 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Did you pay for . . . 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Did we pay for their hospitalization? We did a whole lot more than was ever done 
before. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — The Federal Government . . . 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1507 

Mr. Kramer: — The Federal Government, very well. Mr. Speaker, those treaties were disregarded in 
those days until there was some action by Saskatchewan on behalf of the Metis people and the Liberals 
were shamed into it by the former CCF Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, history shows and here are the facts, and anybody that has any sense in their heads at all 
and wants to listen, knows that you do not, Mr. Speaker, have a fast-growing population unless that 
population is reasonably well fed and healthy. The only mistake that was made was the fact that when 
they received some education, when they improved the health standards, the people of that day thought 
like a white man thinks, that all of a sudden they were going to move out into society and that they were 
going to take advantage of the outside world. Which they didn’t and which they won’t, time has proven 
this. We were well on the way and I am sure that when the Minister gets up to close this debate he will 
enlarge on this because he knows more about the North than I do. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind this House that that was where we were at in about 18 or 19 years 
after going from absolute desolation and poverty to a situation where we had a problem to know what 
we were going to do with the fast-growing native population. That wasn’t the situation in 1944 and 
that’s the point I want to make. If we had left the situation as it was under Liberal administrations at 
Ottawa and Saskatchewan we wouldn’t have a problem in the North now, the native people would have 
all been dead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to speak in support of this Bill to 
abolish the Department because the matter of the Cutbank program has been raised and the Cutbank 
project is contained within the Arm River constituency. It has been said by the Member from Wilkie 
(Mr. McIsaac) that from time to time there was opposition to the Indian and Metis Department. Well if 
from time to time is another way of saying all the time then that is true. He says that the native people 
were involved in the development of policies. Well let’s look at the Cutbank project. I’ve spoken to the 
leaders of the FSI concerning their consultation in regard to the Cutbank project and they said there was 
none. I spoke to the Metis Association leaders in regard to their consultation and they said there was 
none. I spoke to the native people who were at the Cutbank project about what they had to say about the 
establishment of the project, that answer is there was none. Previously I asked the Member from 
Athabasca (Mr. Guy) whether he had ever visited the Cutbank project and I asked him for the very 
reason that the native people at that project told me that they had never met the Minister-in-Charge of 
that project prior to meeting Mr. Bowerman. I think it is a very important fact that in this last election 
that when the people at that Cutbank project, in a separate poll, had the opportunity to express whether 
they were for the New Deal for People program for themselves, which involved a complete relooking at 
that project and at the Indian and Metis Department, they voted 2 to 1 for the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to support this Bill. I believe that removing this piece of legislation will 
remove a piece of legislation that in fact had ingrained in the law books 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1508 

of Saskatchewan, racial distinctions that I don’t like to see in this Province. I will support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but get up after that pile of “guff” that 
we listened to from the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer), talking about northern 
Saskatchewan and all they did for the Indians. You tell me of one five cent piece that the NDP 
Government spent in 20 years on the Indian population in the North. It was a Federal responsibility and 
you know it. You never built a house for the Indians, you never built a single street. You go up to the 
Indian homes in the North and the deprivation and the degradation and the poverty in 1964 was the same 
as it ever was. You never contributed a cent, you never did a thing for the native people, you never 
assumed any responsibility whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say one word about this Bill, this is more of the window dressing that we have 
been talking about ever since the present Government came to power. If you will look at the Estimate 
book it is going to give you an indication of the change of directions that the socialists are going to turn 
this new Department of Human Resources. You know there is one thing about Ross Thatcher, he was 
willing to put his cash where his mouth was. Mr. Speaker, a few years ago the Indian people and Metis 
people in this Province were getting nothing. Last year in the Budget the then Premier brought the 
Indian and Metis Department up to $2,418,000. This year do you know what is being spent on the 
Department of Human Resources which is supposed to have expanded responsibilities, $2,401,000. 
 
But the thing that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier Ross Thatcher had one idea and 
one concept, he said the way to help those people is to give them equal job opportunities, give them a 
little dignity and a little self responsibility and a little self respect, and so he started a placement service 
where he would assist these Indian and Metis people in Saskatchewan to find jobs. Not only, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Government and the Civil Service but also in private industry. Do you know what they 
have done this year? The new Human Resources has been cut by over 100 per cent the number of 
placement officers. Is it any wonder that this Government is spending an additional $16 million in 
welfare in this Province? They are not interested in finding jobs for the Indian people, they are interested 
in more handouts and a bunch of window dressing. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, means absolutely nothing to 
the native people of Saskatchewan in dollars and cents and in programs, except window dressing and 
nothing, as I say, nothing but window dressing. Not a single new program, not a single new dollar, not a 
single new effort. It’s a new name and that’s all. I think if the New Minister of Northern Affairs and the 
Minister of Human Resources (Mr. Bowerman) wants to demonstrate some interest for the native people 
he’ll talk the Provincial Treasurer into giving them a little money, he’ll talk the Provincial Treasurer into 
giving him a few people to find them some jobs. It’s going to be very interesting. 
 
I hope the Minister gets up when he closes debate and tells us how many people of native extraction are 
working for the Government of Saskatchewan eight months after they have been in office, because we 
are certainly going to be asking them when 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1509 

we get into Estimates. We haven’t heard anything about any effort anymore to find jobs for native 
people but I hope they are continuing. What efforts are you making to find jobs for native people in 
industry and private concerns, because if there is one thing we need for the native people it isn’t more 
welfare, it isn’t more handouts, it’s jobs and effort and people. That’s something that this new Bill 
doesn’t offer. It doesn’t offer a single thing to the native people. You can get up and have all your pious 
platitudes and all your high-sounding phrases and all the nonsense that the Minister of Natural 
Resources talks about but until you are willing to put your dollars where your mouth is, this Bill doesn’t 
mean a thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. P.P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say a few words on this Bill. Now 
the reason for that is in my constituency I have a small reserve, called the Moosewoods Reserve and it is 
sitting around Dundurn. No doubt you have heard about it. In dry weather very often they put on a rain 
dance and there is no doubt that it has been effective at times. Now prior to the election, Mr. Speaker, I 
visited the Moosewoods Reserve out at Dundurn and I found conditions deplorable. I don’t think I have 
to say that because I think everyone would agree that this is common throughout the province. But one 
thing that I wanted to tell you is that when I went out there and did a little bit of electioneering, it was 
minor, they were simply amazed because I didn’t offer any promises at all. They couldn’t believe this at 
all. Now I must admit that promises had been offered to them for years and years and years right through 
the reigns of various different governments. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . $1 a vote. 
 
Mr. Mostoway: — I don’t know, apparently it didn’t work there anyway. I think it came out about half 
and half. But I do want to say that there appears to be a little bit of inconsistency on the part of the last 
speaker, he says put your money where your mouth is. Well, first of all he condemns us for not 
expending vast sums of money for these native people and in the same breath he says, well, what we 
should really be doing is creating jobs for them. Well, I don’t think I have to remind him that we can’t 
really create jobs, we can try and induce people to hire other people, but this is sometimes a very 
difficult task. I think the Opposition Members are well aware of that. There is no politics involved there, 
but how do you get employers to hire them. That’s a horse of a different color. I am quite sure that this 
Government and previous Governments have tried to do that. 
 
One thing I would like to say is that the old Indian and Metis Department apparently wasn’t working and 
I am willing to support any kind of a change. I quote the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) who insofar 
as industry is concerned said, well, at least we didn’t stand idly by, we went out and tried something. So 
it is on those grounds that I would say that I would support the Bill. It’s an attempt to try and make some 
changes. I would just say, just hold up a little while, and give us a few years, and see how it operates, 
and just reserve your criticism for a little while, and see how it operates. It is on that basis that I support 
the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1510 

Mr. H.E. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to rise and say a few words in this 
debate. I don’t think too many Members in the House have more people who were directly involved in 
this Department than the Member for Meadow Lake. I see already they have taken off half my seat and 
they are mostly people who will be involved in this Department. I am very, very sorry, Mr. Speaker, to 
see this Department being abolished. Needless to say I will oppose this Bill. I can’t understand, as some 
of them have already mentioned here, for the former Premier of the Government who first had the 
intestinal fortitude to actually go out and set up a Department and try to do something for native people 
in this Province and then to have the Members opposite when they were in Opposition going around the 
province and running down the Department at every opportunity they could. I don’t see why when they 
were so concerned with these people that they couldn’t have just done a little reforming in this 
Department if they wanted to change the way it was operating and put a sincere effort into doing what 
the Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) said, instead of trying to throw out this 
Department. The only reason for doing so that I can see if that it seemed an easy way of getting rid of a 
lot of civil servants that they didn’t want. 
 
The Minister mentions that he has consulted with the Metis Society and the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Indians. I wonder how much consultation he has had with the other 80 per cent of the natives in the 
province. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that those two groups don’t speak for not even half the native 
people in the province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we have heard some of them say that the Indian and Metis Branch wasn’t 
working. Well I have here, Mr. Speaker, a copy of a petition that was sent to the Minister when they did 
get rid of a civil servant who was working for the Indian and Metis Department. This petition is signed 
by over 250 natives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — They are in essence saying that they want the Indian and Metis Branch and it was 
doing a good job for them in their area. This is what it says, read it, it says they want . . . 
 
Mr. Bowerman: — It doesn’t say that. 
 
Mr. Coupland: — It does, it says they want him to stay there. All right I’ll read it. 
 

We the undersigned residents of the Buffalo Narrows area request that the transfer of Alex 
Shatilla be cancelled and this man continue working in the Buffalo Narrows area. We have found 
him to be very co-operative and very sincere in any dealings that we have had with him. 
 

This is the man who was working and operating the programs of the Indian and Metis Department in 
that area. I want to say that this petition was not instigated by anybody but a group of natives who went 
out on their own and got names from Dillon, Patuanak, Turner Lake, LaLoche, Buffalo Narrows. This is 
the 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1511 

best indication that the native people want to keep the Indian and Metis Branch. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be opposing this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Minister of Indian and Metis): — Mr. Speaker, I want to express my 
appreciation to those of my colleagues who have spoken, as well as some Members from the other side 
who have given this matter their consideration. I most of all appreciate the comments that were made by 
my colleague from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards). I think he applied what might be considered 
the broader point of view which all too frequently is lost in the nuts and bolts of debate and in the 
political interchange which goes on in this particular place. 
 
I want, before I say anything of myself, to read into the record of this House what the representatives of 
the Indian people in Saskatchewan have said with respect to this Department which we are debating here 
today or this Bill which will repeal the Department. This was taken from the Leader-Post dated 
December 27th, I quote: 
 

Native leaders are pleased the Indian and Metis Department portfolio may be eliminated early in 
1972. David Ahenakew, chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians said Thursday, 
dissolution of the Department should have happened a long time ago. 
 
Jim Sinclair, president of the Metis Society of Saskatchewan is not quite as enthusiastic, but said 
he was generally in favor of closure. 
 
Chief Ahenakew told the Leader-Post that elimination of the Department would be a positive 
approach. Programs benefitting native people should be handled by the various other 
departments. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is really the emphasis which we want to leave with the House this afternoon in the 
closing of this debate. 
 
These officials speaking on behalf of the people who elect them, representative of the two respective 
Indian Associations in this Province have very clearly and decisively stated that the Saskatchewan 
Indian and Metis Department was not doing to job which it was intended to do, that being to provide for 
the assistance and the upgrading of people in the Indian and Metis communities. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I say that all of the discussion that would go on here is irrelevant to that point, that it does not 
indicate that which the Indian people have said themselves with respect to the repeal of this Department. 
 
So I say that the opposition which has been voiced this afternoon is again an indication of the same kind 
of opposition which was voiced by us when we sat in Opposition and was suggested to the Government 
at that time that if they had consultation with the people of Indian ancestry and if in fact these people 
were requesting that this Department be established then indeed we would be in favor of it. We find that 
this was not the case. There was considerable amount of discussion about the consultation with Indian 
people. I want to refer the 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1512 

Members in the Opposition to the year 1964 shortly after they became government in this Province. 
They held a rather large meeting of Indian people in Saskatoon. The minutes of that meeting I have on 
previous occasions read into the records of this Legislature. The records that are recorded there indicated 
to the Government of that day that the Indian people wished them to go very slowly and they would not 
proceed on any programs affecting the lives of Indian people in this Province until they were consulted, 
and consulted about the matters which would affect them. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Members 
of the Opposition, and to all Members of this House, that subsequent to that first meeting in 1964 there 
was not another meeting held, there was not another meeting held with the Indian people in this 
Province. They did indicate to the Government that they wanted to go slow and they wanted the 
Government to consult with them and they did not want the Government to proceed unless they had 
indicated their wishes to proceed in such a way. I suggest to you that the statement which I have quoted 
to you coming from the chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and coming as well from the 
president of the Metis Society for Saskatchewan, is a voice which represents the Indian people of this 
Province. May I say to the Members again in the Opposition and to the Members of the House that it is 
the policy of this Government that we will recognize the representative associations of Indian people, 
that we will not segregate or we will not break down or we will not diffuse the efforts which they are 
putting in to establishing on a firm basis representative organization among their people. I say that the 
representative organization to this date in the province is the Metis Society of Saskatchewan and is the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. We will support those representative voices and we will provide to 
those representative organizations grants and funds in order that they might speak on behalf of the 
people of this Province, so that they might be representative, that those associations might be 
representative of their people in the province. 
 
One needs only to ask the Indian people of this Province whether they wish to be placed in jobs in the 
manner in which they were placed in jobs under the former administration. I say to you that one of the 
things which people, any one of us would want to be recognized for, is our ability to do the job, our 
ability, our skill, whatever qualities that we might have that would qualify us for the position. I say that 
the position that Indian and Metis people were in in the job placement program under the previous 
administration did not consider that to be a prime requisite among Indian people. The matter of placing 
Indian people in this Province in jobs was on the basis of the percentage that they represent in the 
population. In other words, the attitude and the impression was left that here is a person of Indian 
ancestry, he is able to do a job, we bring him to an industry and we say to industry you must hire him, 
you most move the people aside and here you must hire one Indian person for every seven whites that 
you have in this industry. It left the kind of injustice in the minds of these people which has been in their 
mind and which in fact has been the way that our society, our Canadian society has established itself 
with respect to Indian people since the foundation of the country itself. If a person is qualified, if a 
person has the desire to fit into a job he will then if the opportunity is provided him, fit into that position, 
feeling much more secure and feeling much more as if he has qualified for the job than under the 
arrangements which were provided 



 
April 5, 1972 

 

 
1513 

under the Indian and Metis Department previously. 
 
I want to say again that the comments with respect to consultation with Indian people in the province, I 
believe to have been more than outstanding with respect to this Government’s approach. I say that we 
have provided a grant of $28,400 to the people at Cutbank for a proposal which they made, a proposal 
which they put together, a proposal which asked for that amount of money in order that they might 
consult with their people in the Province of Saskatchewan, in order that they might undertake a survey 
of their own people with respect to education and training requirements of Indian people in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. I say that that program is progressing very well. They themselves are doing this 
survey, they themselves are doing the study. There are very few strings attached so far as the 
Government is concerned in placing that money in their hands other than the accounting responsibility 
which we all have. Therefore, I say to you that I don’t know how better we can consult with the native 
peoples of this Province, better than to provide them with the funds whereby they might undertake the 
study, whereby they may be employed in searching out some of the difficulties which they know and 
recognize are difficulties not only among their own society and among their own people, but are 
difficulties that must be resolved by them and by us in a co-operative approach in the road ahead. 
 
In addition to that we have provided as I said in the House the other day, we have provided additional 
grants to the Metis Society, to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and to other persons who have 
been appointed, to undertake consultation programs with people of Indian ancestry. This has met with 
their approval and with their satisfaction to this point. 
 
The Members referred to Cutbank and I only want to deal with it briefly because of some of the 
comments that were made by the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). He was not in his seat when the 
MLA for the constituency representing that area indicated that the people of Cutbank told me as well as 
the Member representing them that they had not seen any Cabinet Minister of the former Government in 
Cutbank since they had been there, including the Member from Athabasca although he said he had been 
there. The Member from Athabasca read the quotation from the Press very, very carefully in order to be 
able to present his own position, and of course that we can understand. I want to say that some of the 
costs involved in the training of one student at Cutbank, was in the neighborhood of $20,000 to $25,000. 
When the people at Cutbank were given this advice and indicated that this was the cost that was 
involved they of their own choice decided that there may be a better way out, that they may be able to 
use the money to a much better advantage than to sit in Cutbank, a place established wherein they had 
no consultation, had no voice in the way of setting up of Cutbank, they were placed there and yes they 
took advantage of the opportunity to be there in order that they might raise their aspirations, their hopes 
and their skills in some kind of educational process. I want to say that it came to my attention that we 
had instructors driving from Moose Jaw to Cutbank who would spend the day at Cutbank to teach one 
student in a welding course, and had them driving back to Moose Jaw the same day. We felt, and do did 
the residents of Cutbank, that this was very unwise and certainly not justified. In addition when they 
were made aware of this, they chose to go the other way, they chose to study the matter and to advise the 
Government the way in which they 



 
April 5, 1972 
 

 
1514 

thought we should go. 
 
The Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) referred to the programs of the former Department and I want 
to commend those programs that were useful in the other Departments. The repeal of this Department 
and the setting up of the Human Resources Development Agency will continue to utilize those 
programs, but those programs themselves will be transferred to the program departments. The placement 
and training which was carried on under this particular department will be carried on under the 
Department of Education and the Department of Social Welfare and other departments relative thereto. 
Therefore, the expenditures of funds which he refers as not appearing in the Estimates will appear as 
having been going to the other program departments and there they will find their place. I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that this approach is in conjunction with the Chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians 
had to say in the quotation which I read to you earlier which he made to the Press. It is also in keeping 
with the recommendations of the Metis Society, although they have been less willing to suggest that 
there has been sufficient consultation between myself and themselves in the development of this 
program, and I lay that before you honestly. But, I say to you that when the president of the Metis 
Society was questioned he said there must be a change that in fact the Department as it presently existed 
could not and would not satisfy the needs of Indian people in this Province. Mr. Speaker, I therefore am 
pleased to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS – 41 
Messieurs 

Blakeney Dyck Meakes 
Wood Romanow Messer 
Snyder Bowerman Kramer 
Thibault Larson Baker 
Brockelbank MacMurchy Pepper 
Michayluk Byers Thorson 
Whelan Kwasnica Carlson 
Engel Tchorzewski Richards 
Owens Robbins Matsalla 
Cowley Taylor Faris 
Cody Gross Mostoway 
Comer Rolfes Lange 
Hanson Oliver Feschuk 
Kaeding Flasch  
 

NAYS – 15 
Messieurs 

Steuart Coupland Loken 
Guy Grant Boldt 
MacDonald (Milestone) McIsaac Gardner 
Weatherald MacLeod McPherson 
Lane MacDonald (Moose Jaw N) Wiebe 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


