


































































Hansard: April 13, 1972


 

1714 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

35th Day 
 

Thursday April 13, 1972 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. F. MEAKES (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the House a 
group of 54 Grade Seven, Eight and Nine students from the Quinton School. Some of these students, Sir, 
are from your constituency and I am sure that you would want me to welcome them on your behalf. 
They are led by their principal, Sister Philomena, their assistant principal, Mr. Hubelete and teacher, Mr. 
Powaschuk. Their bus driver is Michael Desjarlais. I am sure that all Members will want to wish them 
an educational afternoon and a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.R. KOWALCHUK (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a privilege to welcome to our midst 
this afternoon some 25 students from the Qu’Appelle Indian Residential School at Lebret. Now this 
school, begun by the Oblate Fathers some 90 years ago, approximately in 1883, has a distinguished 
record for producing some of the finest citizens of this country. Many of these former students are 
constituents of mine while many others have scattered far and wide throughout this country. Today that 
school serves Indian students up to Division Three, the Division Four students attend school at Fort 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
These Grade Eight students are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Isabelle Mayer and another Grade 
Eight and Nine teacher assisting, Mrs. Bolding. The good bus driver is another assistant teacher, Brother 
Aubrey. I am sure that all of the Members of this House wish them well, that their trip here be of some 
personal benefit and that they have a safe trip back home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the Members of this Assembly some 80 elementary 
school students seated in the east gallery from Brevoort Park School, Saskatoon, in Nutana Centre 
constituency. These students are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. McPherson, Mrs. Peterson and Mr. 
Halberg. I am sure that all the Members of this Assembly sincerely hope that they will enjoy their stay in 
the Assembly and that it will be educational and useful to them. We also wish them a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.L. COWLEY (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to 
this House a group of some 20 high school students from the Sonningdale High School. They are 
accompanied by their 



 
April 13, 1972 

 

 
1715 

teachers, Mr. Klassen and Mr. Bonneau and their bus driver, Mr. Schultz. This is the first school group 
which has visited this Legislature from my constituency this year. They drove in this morning and they 
are staying overnight and are going to see some of Regina this evening and tomorrow before they head 
for home. I hope they find their stay here informative and we wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to the 
Members of the Legislature 60 students in the west gallery from Buena Vista School in the city of 
Saskatoon in my riding. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Tetrault and Mr. Hunter. Buena 
Vista I should tell Members of the House is one of the oldest and I think finest schools in the city of 
Saskatoon. We used to beat it regularly in hockey when I went to Westmount School in Saskatoon, 
although I shouldn’t say that now with future constituents in the gallery. I hope that the students enjoy 
their visit to the Legislature to see democracy in progress. I welcome them and hope that they have a 
safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BOY SCOUTS 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to 
all Members of the Legislature a group of Boy Scouts sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery from Weyburn. 
They are the 3rd Weyburn Troup and are accompanied by their Scout Masters, Paul Martin and Bob 
Romanacko. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, it is the wish of this Assembly that their visit with us proves 
educational to them and that their entire afternoon is enjoyable. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF MLA FROM WINNIPEG 
 
HON. K. THORSON (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — I want to take this opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce to the Assembly Mr. Bud Boyce from Manitoba, MLA for Winnipeg Centre, 
seated behind the rail. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THORSON: — Mr. Boyce is the Legislative Assistant to the Hon. Len Evans, Minister of Industry 
and Commerce in the Government of Manitoba. Mr. Boyce’s visit with us today coincides with the 
arrival of these canned goods which are on every Member’s desk, Mr. Speaker. They come from a 
processing plant in Morden, Manitoba, owned and operated by Morden Fine Foods Limited, which is a 
wholly owned subsidiary of the Manitoba Development Corporation. The manager of the operation 
along with Mr. Boyce are concerned to do what they can to promote the use and sale of prairie produced 
products and that is the reason for his visit to Saskatchewan and to Regina today. We have said many 
times that we are concerned about the prairie basin market. We have no producers of such canned goods 
in Saskatchewan. We are very 



 
April 13, 1972 
 

 
1716 

happy to see that our sister Province of Manitoba is able to process these prairie agricultural products 
and for prairie consumers. We hope to reciprocate by sending goods to them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

COMMUNITY CLINICS – SASKATOON, REGINA, PRINCE ALBERT 
 
MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 
like to direct a question to the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). I wonder if he would tell us whether 
any of the Community Clinics in Saskatoon, Regina or Prince Albert and/or the physicians working in 
those Clinics are presently submitting medical accounts to the MCIC Commission for payment on a 
fee-for-service basis? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I gather when I was absent 
yesterday there was some discussion in the House as to what arrangements that have been made in 
Prince Albert an allegation was made that I tried to misinform the House the day before. Mr. Speaker, 
we have reached agreement with the Community Clinics in Prince Albert, Saskatoon and Regina for a 
global budget of payment to the Community Clinics. I advised the House of this the day before 
yesterday. The Hon. Member has asked the question whether any of these physicians that are working in 
the Community Clinics are still submitting accounts on a fee-for-service basis. I can’t answer that 
question directly because the global budget went into effect as of last month. Now whether any accounts 
have been received billing MCIC on a fee-for-service basis during this month or last month I would 
have to check. I would be glad to check with the Medical Care Insurance Commission and give the 
House the information. 
 
MR. GRANT: — A supplementary question, I would appreciate if he would bring that information in 
tomorrow. When he makes his remarks tomorrow he might also comment on the legality of the global 
type agreement that was entered into with these three Community Clinics. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — I’ll be glad to do it. 
 

CANNED GOODS FROM MANITOBA 
 
HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a word 
of two about the item that was placed on our desk earlier today which the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce (Mr. Thorson) had something to say about. As the Minister-in-Charge of the Purchasing 
Agency I note that the quality of the product is “Canada Fancy” and as a consequence I think I can 
safely say that the Purchasing Agency will be giving that product every chance to tender on orders that 
may come before the Purchasing Agency. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
April 13, 1972 

 

 
1717 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, you will have heard no doubt that the 
Manitoba Legislature this week decided to allow Members to drink coffee in the Legislature. This may 
be an insidious move to have us eat our meals in the Legislature too. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

HUMBOLDT HOCKEY TEAM WIN CENTENNIAL CUP PLAYOFFS 
 
MR. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I should like through you to ask the 
Members to join with me in congratulating the Humboldt Broncos Junior Hockey team in their winning 
the Centennial Cup playoffs over the Dauphin Kings of Manitoba last night. The Humboldt team swept 
the first three games of the series by scores of 8-4, 4-2 and 6-4, they lost the next two to a very excellent 
Manitoba representative but they took the sixth game by a score of 8-3. They will now proceed to play 
the winners of a series between Alberta and British Columbia to determine the Western Canada 
representative. I know that all Members of this House will join with me in congratulating the players and 
the management and wishing them the best of luck in their next series. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SCHOOL TEXTBOOK GRANT 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 
direct a question to the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). Tell me if the School Textbook Grant 
that was paid last year by separate check by the Department of Education is now being included in the 
global figure for school grants this year and if this is included as part of the increase in grants? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Education): — The School Textbook Grant is included in the 
global operation grant formula this year. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Is he in reality saying that the $1 
million or the $1.5 million that is included in that global figure is then in reality not an increase? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I have the actual operating grants for 1971-72 and they are, 
according to my figures here, $76,670 millions. That’s the total operating grants to schools. The figure 
this year, according to what I have in front of me, will be $90,063 millions. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister mind tabling for the Members of the House 
the breakdown of that $90 million? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — That will come in his Estimates, or can be got in the Estimates at that time when 
the Estimates are before the 



 
April 13, 1972 
 

 
1718 

House. I think Members should then get the breakdown to their satisfaction at that time. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

ADDITIONAL HOUSE SITTINGS 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by the 
Hon. Premier (Mr. Blakeney): 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, commencing Friday, April 14, 1972, 
meet at 10:00 o’clock each sitting day, and that there shall be a recess from 12:30 o’clock 
p.m. until 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


