



















































Hansard: March 09, 1972


452 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

11th Day 

 

March 9, 1972 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. B.M. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say how pleased I am this afternoon to 

introduce, through you, to this Assembly the students of Wilson Elementary School from Saskatoon. I 

understand that they are sitting in the west gallery. They are accompanied this afternoon by two 

teachers, Mr. Lamb and Mr. White. I hope that they have an interesting and informative afternoon and I 

trust that they will have a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C.F. Loken (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to introduce to 

you and to this Assembly a group of 60 Grade Eight students from Rosetown. They are located in the 

east gallery. They are accompanied by their Principal, Mr. MacIntosh and their teacher, Mr. Wiebe. Also 

drivers of the other vehicles, Mr. and Mrs. Ken Kohovick, Mrs. Brown, Mr. McIvor and Mr. Cole. I 

know the Assembly will join with me in extending to them a hearty welcome and hope they enjoy a 

pleasant stay while in Regina with a trouble-free and safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Members of this 

Legislature I should like to extend a very warm welcome to a group of students from Haultain School in 

Saskatoon. I believe there are 42 of them seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are accompanied by their 

teachers Mrs. MacKenzie and Mrs. Hogg. I hope they will find their afternoon in the Legislature 

educational and informative and I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, Mr. Whelan, the Member for 

Regina North West, who is away in Britain on the business of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association, I should like to take this opportunity to welcome through you, Mr. Speaker, a group of 

students from the Regina North West constituency from the St. Francis Elementary School. They are 

seated in the east and in the west galleries. They are here with their teacher, Mr. Nadon. I hope that we 

all wish them a pleasant visit with us and, hopefully, an instructive one. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

453 

QUESTIONS 
 

MAILING OF NEWS RELEASES 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could direct a question to the 

Hon. Premier. I am directing it to him in his capacity of Provincial Treasurer because I know that 

Provincial Treasurers are always very conscious of cost and I should like him to express his opinion on 

something which has come to my attention, namely the mailing of numerous news releases to one office 

in this building with a postage charge on each one of eight cents and worst of all the news releases are 

arriving a day late. They arrive a day after the date of release and they are from various Members on the 

other side, including Cabinet Ministers. It seemed to me, Mr. Speaker, that it might be well for him to 

review it and I should like to have his comments on it. I am prepared to table the documents. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, as the Hon. Member will know there are many thousands of bits of mail 

mailed from this Legislative area every day. It is entirely possible that there could be some duplications. 

I certainly join with the Hon. Member in hoping that we could weed out this duplications. I know we are 

all familiar in getting in the mail two bits of mail from the same sender, Macleans magazine or whatever 

it may be. I know the same problem overcomes Governments. We should like to find the places where 

there is duplication and weed them out. I would invite the Hon. Member either to supply me with the 

information privately or to table it if he wishes so that we can pursue this and certainly save any money 

that can be saved in that way. 

 

ARTICLE IN LEADER-POST 
 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a 

question to direct to the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow). I refer him to a headline on the 

Women’s page of the Leader-Post of yesterdays date. The headline is “Promises of Larger Bust Lines 

Fraud”. It refers to a number of advertisements promising bigger, firmer bosoms and greater beauty in 

that area. It refers to them as the “Fraudulent advertisements for breast fertilizers and cultivators”. I had 

thought maybe that should go to the Minister of Agricultural (Mr. Messer) but I wonder if the Attorney 

General is considering some investigation. I invite him to investigate the bust line fraud. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that the Hon. Member couldn’t have picked on a more 

ill informed Member in that regard but I am certainly going to have my officials look into it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It couldn’t be in better hands. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

454 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health): — moved second reading of Bill No. 33 – An Act to amend 

The South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is well known that changing one word in a phrase can entirely alter the meaning 

of a sentence. The short amendment to The South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act which allows the 

South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre to consist of two or more hospitals having such names assigned to 

them as the Board may determine, may have a substantial impact on hospital services and in health 

education in the city of Regina. Adding these few words to the Act offers the possibility of achieving a 

degree of integration and rationalization of hospital services and health education of hospital services 

and health education in Regina which previously has not been obtained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that co-ordination of hospital services is very difficult and will cause a period of 

anxiety and concern for those who are affected but in our view there is no alternative to hospital 

co-ordination and rationalization. For example, Mr. Speaker, if hospital costs continue to grow at their 

present rate the estimated operation costs for 1981 for the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon 

hospitals alone will cost close to $120 millions. This is almost 250 per cent greater than the cost in the 

present year. Hospital costs in other parts of the province are increasing at almost the same rate. 

Furthermore, hospitals consume by far the largest proportion of the health dollar. We must save money 

in the provincial hospital budget so that these savings can be re-channelled to meet other important new 

health programs. The greatest amount of saving is likely to be found by co-ordinating the services in the 

13 largest hospitals in the Province of Saskatchewan. These 13 hospitals spend 74 per cent of the 

provincial hospital budget. This does not mean that we shall overlook the opportunity to obtain economy 

in the smaller 118 hospitals. 

 

What bothers me Mr. Speaker, is that the large amount spent on medical and hospital treatment is 

indicative of our failure to provide a balanced health service. Adequate emphasis on preventive of 

escalation of health services were to continue it seems to me that our health failures may lead us to 

serious financial difficulties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members of the Opposition seem surprised at our Government’s concern about rising 

health prices. The Liberal Members would like the public to believe that we did not have an interest in 

rising health costs when we were sitting on the opposite side of the House. This is nonsense and the 

public is not going to be misled by this kind of attack. If the Hon. Members opposite would like to take 

the time to check the past record of this House they would find resolutions and other documents in 

which I have expressed my concern for rising health costs and my concern for the ways that the former 

Liberal Government attempted to control costs. Mr. Speaker, so that the Members are fully aware I 

again draw their attention to our program New Deal for People under the health section, and I am sure 

they have copies of it. Under the health section we as a political party in our program expressed concern 

over the rising health costs. So when they attempt to try and mislead the public 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

455 

that we did not have any concern prior to the election about rising health costs I believe our record as 

Members of the Opposition is clearly stated. For example, in Hansard of March 11, 1969 speaking to the 

Resolution to establish a committee to examine health programs I had this to say: 

 

We in the New Democratic Party have a very serious and genuine concern about the rising costs of 

public health services. 

 

I went on to say that: 

 

We are equally concerned about the rising costs of health services which at the present time are not 

publicly financed and administered such as the cost of drug care, the cost of dental care and all those 

other health services our citizens need and have to pay for directly. Mr. Speaker, Members of our 

caucus have considered this problem on many occasions. 

 

Speaking to the same Resolution I said this: 

 

We also differ very strongly with the Government’s methods of controlling health costs. 

 

On April 3 of 1970 I was speaking to the Health Department Estimates and at that time I acknowledged 

that, “Rising health care costs is, I believe, a crucial question’. At that time I submitted nine pages of 

suggestions of how the problem of rising health costs could be handled. My suggested alternatives were 

distributed to every Member of the House and it is silly to suggest that I have not in the past been aware 

and concerned about the costs of health care in this Province and throughout Canada. 

 

Another reason, Mr. Speaker, for the urgent need to rationalize and co-ordinate hospital services is the 

rapid development of the very expensive and sophisticated medical techniques, equipment and 

manpower. The cost of these services limits the number of centres in which the services can reasonably 

be provided. Rational distribution of these services is not easily achieved within the present hospital 

structure. We have now arrived at a most difficult juncture, Mr. Speaker. All across Canada provinces 

have found that their limited resources prevent them from meeting the increasing demands for the highly 

specialized and expensive health services. At the same time more basic health services are demanded 

throughout the province. This places governments and health administrators in a position of having to 

choose between providing expensive services for a few needy people as opposed to providing less 

expensive services for many people. The problem remains, from the point of view of the individual who 

expects the full capability of medical science to be available to him in his time of need. This conflict of 

individual expectation and the difficulty for the Government was highlighted in the introduction of the 

report of the Task Force on the Cost of Health Services in Canada in 1969. The Take Force report stated: 

 

At some point in a health system there is a need for those concerned to arrive at a philosophical 

balance between highly expensive services of limited general application and facilities which can be 

used by greater numbers of people. 

 

The example given was, “Heart transplantation in a major city 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

456 

versus the lack of any doctor at all in a rural town”. It might equally well have been dialysis programs or 

intensive care units, or screening programs for cancer of the cervix, which while used by large numbers 

of people may not benefit very many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not claim to have the answers to the perplexity of the dilemma. We are, however, 

determined to provide a number of mechanisms through which the people of Saskatchewan may 

participate in resolving these conflicting health demands. We’re not going to avoid our responsibility or 

evade it. As a Government these are some very difficult decisions for us to make. I should be 

irresponsible and it would be irresponsible of the Government to mislead the people that this problem 

does not exist or to leave the consequences of not dealing with it to another generation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may wonder what the few words in the amendment to The South Saskatchewan 

Hospital Centre Act may mean in day to day terms. It means that there is a legislative vehicle through 

which a common administration for more than one hospital may choose to do things like the following: 

 

1. Centralize laboratory services in one facility enabling efficient utilization of expensive laboratory 

equipment. 

 

2. Allow certain facilities to develop specialized medical units avoiding duplication. For example one 

hospital may specialize in paediatrics and obstetrics and another may concentrate on other medical 

services. 

 

3. Certain support services may be centralized for all hospitals thereby achieving the economies of scale. 

For example such services as laundry services are now centralized. Dietary facilities may be considered. 

Some pharmacy services and administration supportive services. 

 

4. Acquire where desirable a number of different types of health facilities thereby stimulating patient 

flow and the continuity of health care. For example, hostel units, extended care units, rehabilitation 

services, acute general care services and a variety of emergency and outpatient services could be 

integrated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while rationalization and co-ordination of hospital services are necessary there are many 

ways to achieve these goals. Existing Saskatchewan Statutes allow for some ways. The amendment that 

is before us provides another means. Efforts to rationalize hospital services in Regina have included the 

establishment of the Regina Area Planning Council which was subsequently dissolved. On other 

occasions special task forces involving representatives of the Regina hospitals and the Department of 

Public Health tried to resolve these questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the former Minister of Health for making some of these efforts and 

proposing some ideas. The failure of these attempts to achieve improvement in the Regina area led our 

Government to accept the offer of the Grey Nuns’ Sisters to sell the Regina Grey Nuns’ Hospital. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

457 

The acquisition of this hospital may facilitate the process of hospital rationalization and co-ordination in 

Regina City. Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that the Government purchase of the Grey Nuns’ 

Hospital is not to be interpreted as a move by the Government to get involved in the long-term operation 

of hospitals. We believe that in certain circumstances the Government may play an expanded role to 

assist in the rationalization of hospital services. We have no intention of becoming immersed in the 

day-to-day operations of hospital administration. We have singled out the South Saskatchewan Hospital 

Centre to accept a leadership role in the provision of health services in southern Saskatchewan. The 

South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre is already designed to use services available in other Regina 

hospitals rather than to duplicate these services. Being a new institution it may play a more neutral role 

in the rationalization and co-ordination process since it has no traditions as yet to protect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre will play a key role in the health education in our 

province. Our Government places a high priority on health education programs. We fully realize that the 

potential for maintaining and improving the quality of health services depends on the competency and 

the training of the people providing the service. Education is expensive in terms of facilities and 

manpower. These amendments may make possible the integration and co-ordination of several existing 

health facilities so that they can each contribute in a most effective way to the educational programs 

which support our health services. 

 

The training program for health workers must equip the health manpower to work in the types of 

facilities we have in the Province of Saskatchewan. Confining education programs to large specialized 

institutions or hospitals is not good enough, Mr. Speaker. Through the South –Saskatchewan Hospital 

Centre we can bring health science education to Regina. With the amendment to the South 

Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act we can further disperse the educational opportunity to other facilities 

and programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am particularly concerned about the education of Saskatchewan physicians. Of all the 

physicians participating in Saskatchewan only 13 per cent receive their education in the Province. This 

has resulted despite the fact that we are training enough physicians in our university to meet the needs of 

the Province. We expect to improve the retention of our own graduates so that we shall no longer have 

to be dependent on recruiting physicians trained in other countries. Mr. Speaker, I have talked with the 

educators and students of the University in Saskatoon of a partnership for health between the 

Government and the University. I have expressed my concern that our medical education program does 

not allow its students to develop an appreciation of our sensitivity to rural practice and to the health 

problems of the socially handicapped. I have asked them to become more active partners in the 

evaluation of the quality of service provided by the health professions. I have given encouragement to 

the health science disciplines to experiment with the roles and functions of the health manpower. I have 

given substantial support to the inclusion of public and consumer representation on such evaluation 

committees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we enter a period of expansion of our health education services into the southern part of 

the Province 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

458 

I want to be assured that these principles are incorporated in our training program. I am hopeful that this 

amendment to The South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act will be used to full advantage by the Board 

of The South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre. If the additional opportunities and responsibilities offered 

to the hospital centre through this amendment are fully development the people of southern 

Saskatchewan and in particular the people of Regina will enjoy the benefits of a better health program. 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 33, an Act to amend The South Saskatchewan Centre 

Act. 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — I am indeed sorry that the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. 

Smishek) spoiled an otherwise good commentary on the amendment to this Act. I refer to his suggestion 

that when we were in the Government and they were in the Opposition we misled the public of this 

Province in stating that the Members of the then Opposition, the NDP, did not fully appreciate the 

problems of rising health costs. Mr. Speaker, this is not a statement of fact, I think that they equally 

appreciated the problems of increasing health costs to the concern expressed by the Liberal Government 

and the concern expressed by every responsible citizen in this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — No taxpayer could be unresponsive to this concern because it is one of the most serious 

things we have and it is not restricted to Saskatchewan. Every province in Canada and the Hon. John 

Munro and the federal Department are equally concerned. If he hadn’t dwelt on that point I would have 

endorsed everything he said, because I agree wholeheartedly with the aim of the Bill but I am wondering 

why we are worried so much about getting the explanation of the Bill because it took four lines to 

explain it and it took him 20 minutes to expound on their plans. Let me make it clear that this has been 

going on for some time and I appreciate the Hon. Minister making mention of my efforts as Minister of 

Health. It is a very difficult thing to integrate hospital services and one of the earlier starts was when we 

tried to get the Regina General and the Grey Nuns’ Hospital to integrate under The Integrated hospital 

Act which was brought in a year or so ago. I still think this was a step in the right direction. I knew there 

were problems I had hoped that we could possibly reconcile and bring these two hospitals together to 

integrate their services but this proved to be a futile effort. We considered including the South 

Saskatchewan Hospital in that Act but purposely left it out at the time because we felt it would detract 

from the hoped for solution of getting the Regina General and the Grey Nuns integrated. Now that the 

Government has seen fit to buy the Grey Nuns’ Hospital and I think this was the only alternative since 

everything else had failed. I would hope that they would invite the Sisters of the Order running that 

hospital to continue on because they have operated a good hospital for 60 odd years in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — . . . and I am sure they can continue to contribute to the health and welfare of the people 

of southern Saskatchewan. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

459 

I should like to bring to the attention of this House, Mr. Speaker, that we did move strongly forward in 

many of the directions expressed by the Minister. I refer to one of the earlier moves that we took when 

we brought the so-called Wascana Hospital under the South Saskatchewan Hospital. I think that 

Wascana Hospital or the Geriatric Centre as it used to be called was possibly one of the poorest large 

hospitals in Saskatchewan and I am sure that the hon. Premier will agree with that because it was in 

pretty sad shape back in those earlier days. Now this is a rehabilitation hospital and there are a lot of 

people processed through that hospital, put back into the stream of life and it is no longer an end of the 

road hospital for geriatric type cases except to a limited degree. 

 

The integration of laundries mentioned by the Hon. Minister was certainly a move undertaken during 

our regime and I think this is a type of integration that is necessary and one that I believe is proving 

successful. 

 

We had hoped that the integration of the Regina General and the Grey Nuns would result in a Union 

Hospital district type of administration in this area and I would assume that some thought is still being 

given to that and I welcome the expression that the Government of the day has no intention of becoming 

immersed in the day to day operation of the hospitals. If the Government had any ideas of such 

participation I am sure the Minister of Health would soon dispel them because I doubt whether anybody 

wants to be Minister of Health the day that the Government takes over the day to day operation of all the 

hospitals. I agree wholeheartedly with the present Minister and I hope he continues that attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those remarks, I’ll indicate that this side of the House will certainly support this Act, 

and wish the Minister and his Government every success in integrating these services in Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. Blakeney. 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — moved second reading of Bill No. 1 – An Act to 

establish the Department of Continuing Education. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to establish the Department of 

Continuing Education. 

 

The Department of Continuing Education is a new division of Government which will have 

responsibility for establishing a community college system in Saskatchewan. The new Department will 

also have responsibility for university affairs and for the technical institutes. It is being established for 

one central purpose, to co-ordinate our work in post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, that area of 

education outside of the Grade One to Twelve school system is going to be more and more important in 

the next few years. Of the various aspects of education the field of continuing education is going to be a 

major growth area. We are already involved in re-education, heavily involved in upgrading and 

extension programs, in counselling, in work training and so on. A great deal of public funds are devoted 

to this area. It is urgent that we anticipate 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

460 

developments in education instead of merely reacting to them. We are establishing a new Department of 

continuing Education for this purpose, to co-ordinate, to plan, to plan to meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

people in this rapidly expanding and important area. 

 

I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, why our Government believes we must give some priority to continuing 

education. The next question that obviously comes up is: why are we doing this through a new 

department? Why not just include this responsibility in the present Department of Education? The 

answer to this question has two parts. One of them is administrative. In our present Department of 

Education we have already a large and complex operation. The larger an organization becomes the more 

difficult it is to manage, the more likely it is to become bureaucratic. I have said on many, many 

occasions that education is by definition, a personal thing, something that simply does not flourish in 

large bureaucratic situations. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we wish to decentralize and operate on a smaller 

scale with authority dispersed as widely as it is possible. 

 

The existing Department of Education structure is one in which we hope to implement many changes. It 

is a structure whose purposes and whose goals need to be re-defined. The re-organization is going to be 

a very demanding task, a task that will occupy our staff quite fully without the addition of more 

responsibilities. In light of these considerations we believe that the addition of heavy new duties to the 

work of our department would simply be inadvisable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second reason for establishing this department separately involves its experimental 

nature. We shall be or at least, we hope to be breaking new ground in education with a community 

college system. There will be a great deal of new work done in our relationship with the university, as 

well we are seeking ways of giving added stature to our technical education. Because of the nature of the 

work to be done by the new department it will have an orientation different from that of the Department 

of Education which administers an already established system. In order to accommodate this difference 

we felt a new structure would be most suitable. 

 

To sum up, then, Mr. Speaker, we have two basic reasons for creating the Department of Continuing 

Education. One reason is that we do not wish to overload the present department at a time when it is 

itself undergoing major changes. We want to avoid the possibility of a massive bureaucracy developing. 

Secondly, we believe the new department must have leeway to adapt to its work, most of which is new. 

The separate structure should meet these two objectives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that we are providing for the possibility that at some future date it may be 

very desirable to combine the two departments. We are providing for the sharing of several basic 

services. We are providing for co-ordinated planning, harmony between the two operations is essential 

and every possibility is being taken to build this into the new system. The Department of Continuing 

Education will have responsibility in three areas: university, technical education, community colleges. I 

should like to deal with each one of these very briefly. 

 

In university affairs, Mr. Speaker, our purpose is to 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

461 

bring together in one place all those aspects of government that deal with the university. At present the 

university reports directly to Cabinet on certain matters such as operating budgets and capital budget; to 

the Treasury Department on other questions; to the Department of Education on yet another aspects and 

to the Department of Public Works in still others. Additionally, the university has relationships with 

most other agencies of Government in a variety of ways. One of the results of this multiplicity of 

connections is confusion and red tape. Things can be delayed, are delayed and even lost in this maze. By 

placing overall responsibility for the university in the hands of a single agency we hope to clear up at 

least some of these problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, several other provinces have faced this very same problem. Saskatchewan is the fourth 

province to set up a single separate agency for post secondary education. Ontario, Manitoba and Alberta 

have already taken this route in the last two years. 

 

In developing our new department we shall be able to learn from mistakes made there. We shall be able 

to learn from experiences gained in these other provinces. In considering the university affairs aspects I 

should note that some other provinces have set up what they call university grants commissions, often in 

addition to their post secondary departments. We have, Mr. Speaker, given this idea some thought. 

 

There are some advantages to be had in a grants commission. For instance, it can provide a buffer zone 

between university and Government should disagreements arise. On the other hand, the idea has 

disadvantages too. It creates another agency dealing with essentially the same thing. It can insulate the 

government and the university from each other. It can cause delays. Mr. Speaker, we have weighed the 

pros and the cons and come to the conclusion that the grants commission would not provide enough 

advantage to outweigh the negative aspects. Neither of us should want to hide from the other behind the 

intervening agency. If our purpose is to develop a clear and more workable relationship, the new 

department will fill the need adequately and should not be given a handicap right from the outset. 

 

Community college development, Mr. Speaker, constitutes the major new role to be filled in the 

Continuing Education Department. The college program is entirely new. It is not the same program left 

to us by the old Liberal Government. We scrapped that proposal since it was of little value in the rural 

areas and, in fact, didn’t amount to anything more than some new technical schools. Our community 

college work emphasizes meeting educational needs in our rural communities and it emphasizes 

education as a means of community development. We believe it will break new ground in Canada. 

Community colleges under our Government will live up to their name. They will contain a strong 

element of local control. They will be experimental. They will attempt to generate a wide involvement 

of the people whom they serve. Decentralization of the power to make decisions to carry them out is at 

the centre of this idea. The college idea is to co-ordinate educational services. The college idea is to help 

people help themselves in determining what new programs may be useful. We do not plan to build a 

whole new series of buildings and other expensive items. Instead, the colleges will utilize existing 

facilities and they 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

462 

will initiate programs as the needs arise using people in the area as teachers, using people in the area to 

administer them. Community development staff will be co-ordinated by the new department but to a 

very significant extent the educational decisions will be made locally or regionally. In short, the 

community college aspect will constitute an experiment in local decision-making education. The idea 

itself isn’t new but the actual practice of it is. 

 

Community colleges will play a key role in generating reform throughout or educational system. Mr. 

Speaker, the initial step to be taken is transferring the advisory group on community colleges to the new 

department. Following public hearings and conclusion of the committee’s work, the new department 

will assume direct responsibility for developing the colleges’ program. 

 

I could continue in a general way, Mr. Speaker. However, specific details are not available because this 

project is still in the early stages. Community colleges will demand very careful attention to ensure that 

local autonomy objectives are given every opportunity to be met. They are the basic experimental 

ingredient in the new department, a very important ingredient both there and in the total education 

operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third area of responsibility of the new department is technical education. The technical 

institutes in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and Regina will move from the Department of Education to the 

Department of Continuing Education. In large part, technical institutes are post-secondary institutions 

and they fall logically under the new department. The transfer is being made for that reason but also to 

move toward the recognition of the importance of technical training. We want to give more stature to 

technical education and to administer it in co-ordination with other advanced programs. 

 

In conclusion, I shall restate what the new department is intended to achieve. The overall objective is to 

co-ordinate our programs in education that extend beyond the regular school system. We believe it is 

highly important to established early a consistent pattern in continuing education. We believe it is highly 

important to plan for the demands that are going to be made for education in this area. The particular 

objectives relate to the three basic areas of responsibility. We need to develop a consistent and organized 

relationship with the university. Secondly, the development of community-oriented education 

throughout the province requires innovation. It requires experimentation. This is the community college 

area. Third, technical education must be recognize as an area of increasing importance and be geared 

with the total advanced education picture. Mr. Speaker, the Department of Continuing Education will 

permit us to prepare for the future needs for on-going education throughout life. It will break new 

ground in decentralized, community oriented education in the community college program. It will 

provide a much higher quality of educational services to adults in our rural area. It will accord greater 

recognition to technical training. We hope, Mr. Speaker, the new emphasis it will place on education as 

an on-going process as an integral part of community life will be valuable in reforming our schools. For 

these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Act to establish a Department 

of Continuing Education. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

463 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us to established a second Department of 

Education is one of the Bills that was certainly indicated to us in the Throne Speech which we debated 

earlier this week. And of course, as Members will be aware, it is one of five new Government 

departments that has been proposed by the Throne Speech and by the Members of the Government 

opposite. 

 

Initially, Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with the three definite fields of endeavour that the Minister 

proposes to put under the new department. I do have some questions and some concern as to whether or 

not that second department will do the very things that the Minister hopes for. Now, what is the purpose 

and what is the reason and why do we need a second department, Mr. Speaker? The Minister went on to 

give us some reasons and one he mentioned, the massive bureaucracy that now exists in the Department 

of Education. I don’t see, Mr. Speaker, how another Bill establishing another department is going to do 

anything but add to that government bureaucracy which we now have which is unavoidable to some 

extent, the bureaucracy part of it. By establishing a new department, we are going to appoint a new 

deputy minister, new executive assistants, new clerks, stenos, new staff all the way through. 

 

Now, what is the picture in education in Saskatchewan today in a general way? There are perhaps 18 or 

20 statutes dealing with education from Grade One to Twelve and these, for years, have been 

administered by the Department of Education. At the other end of the scale, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

University of Saskatchewan. And that has been operating in this province for 50 odd years under the one 

piece of legislation, The University Act which has been revised from time to time and the last time, I 

believe, was two or three years ago. The University, as everyone is aware, is set up and is largely 

autonomous. We’ll only need two or three people in the new department to deal with the university 

because unless that University Act is changed and changed considerably, we shall not need more civil 

servants to deal with them from the Provincial Government. We only have one university albeit two 

different campuses, one in Regina and one in Minister, and as I say, the new department will really not 

have that much to do with the university in its present form. 

 

The Minister mentioned that Ontario, Manitoba and Alberta have established a department similar to the 

one he proposes and this, of course, I am well aware of. But let us look at the situation in Ontario, Mr. 

Speaker. Something over five million people as opposed to our one million people, I believe 18 or 19 

universities, if memory serves me correctly as opposed again, Sir, to our one university and one board of 

governors. The province of Manitoba, five universities over there in that department. Alberta, four or 

five universities as such where they also have a department of university affairs or continuing education. 

Incidentally, in those other provinces in practically all cases to date, there may be a change today, I 

don’t know, but oddly enough, having established the two departments, those provinces practically all 

saw fit to leave the one minister in charge of both departments. Unless there has been a very recent 

change, in all conferences that I have attended there has been one minister representing both 

departments. 

 

That leaves us with the other aspects of education that the Minister spoke of. You have the university 

and the Grade One to Twelve at both ends and that whole area that has been called 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

464 

‘middle range education’ to quote an old phrase, trades training, technical vocational training, job 

training, the farm management short courses that are going on in the country today and many, many 

others that could be mentioned. There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that this middle range area of 

education is a growing and an important one and one that needs more emphasis and in this we will 

certainly concur with the Government. But here again, I would beg to differ with the manner in which 

the Minister is going about it. There are certainly many problems in education today, problems of 

priority and how to arrive at decisions. The Minister himself has et up various committees in this regard. 

May I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the answer doesn’t lie in looking at each and all of these things in a 

piece-meal fashion. And I am satisfied that by setting up a second department he is going to add to the 

complexity and the bureaucracy and the confusion that I realize he is concerned about. By setting up two 

departments it is going to be that much more difficult to get the kind of co-ordination and continuity that 

I am sure he is concerned about. There is no way you can divorce the school system and the schools in 

the province and the university from all of these other aspects of education and neither we should. And 

to have them under one department, I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, will result in a much better kind of 

evolution of the middle range or continuing employment program that the Minister is concerned about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more to say on this particular Bill later on and I will, at this time, beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — moved second reading of Bill No. 2 – An Act to 

amend The Teacher Salary Agreements Act, 1968. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of the Bill to amend The Teacher Salary 

Agreements Act. This Bill proposes four changes to the Act. Two of them deal with boards of arbitration 

and their operation. Another deals with compulsory arbitration. The fourth deals with procedures used to 

define certain terms in salary agreements. 

 

The most important of the four amendments concerns the repeal of section 14A. Under this section the 

Minister is empowered to impose compulsory arbitration on trustees and teachers. This power is to be 

abolished. Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party is committed to the principle of free collective 

bargaining. As a Government we intend to make this commitment into a fact of life in Saskatchewan. 

Section 14A contains provisions which are not consistent with free collective bargaining. That is why it 

is being removed. No doubt there are all sorts of arguments that could be made on the pros and cons of 

collective bargaining and I think we’ve heard most of them in the last seven years. Certainly this system 

of arriving at agreements has its faults and it can be very difficult. At the same time, however, it remains 

the best short run means, the best long run means we have for getting the job done without trampling on 

the rights of those concerned. Compulsory arbitration as provided by Section 14A constitutes an 

intrusion into the bargaining process by an outside party. It stands as a threat to free bargaining as long 

as it remains on the statute books. For collective bargaining to develop, for collective 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

465 

bargaining to work, we must place our confidence in it, we must demonstrate this confidence publicly. 

Those who are parties to the bargaining will find no reason to take their work at the negotiating table 

seriously if there are still a variety of other outs provided by legislation. Mr. Speaker, our Government is 

prepared to place its trust, to place its confidence in collective bargaining. 

 

We may have to take some lumps for this at certain times but as I stated, we believe the long-term 

results will justify the move and more than compensate for any difficulties. So that there is no mistake 

about it, Mr. Speaker, I should note that collective bargaining can be very productive, collective 

bargaining can get results rapidly. And I would refer Members of this House to the teachers’ salary 

settlement which was reached two weeks ago in Area 13. This settlement was negotiated by officials of 

the Department of Education and the Northern School Board with the teachers of the northern area. 

Negotiations in this area demonstrate that collective bargaining can get results. Results that are 

satisfactory to both parties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — In the case of Area 13, it is estimated that the total increased cost to the northern 

board will be 7.72 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the teachers, the northern board, my department are satisfied 

that this is a reasonable and a fair agreement. It is solid evidence that we can place our confidence in 

free collective bargaining. 

 

In concluding my comments on this portion of the Bill it is worthwhile noting that provision remains in 

the Act for arbitration of disputes on a voluntary basis. Arbitration may still be used if both sides agree 

to it. Clause 3 of the Bill provides that where the parties have agreed to voluntary arbitration and have 

nominated their representatives, but cannot agree on a chairman, the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan shall 

nominate the chairman. At present, Mr. Speaker, this power to nominate a chairman, lies in the hands of 

the Minister of Education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, transfer of the power to appoint a chairman from the Minister to the Chief Justice should 

eliminate any possibility of interference by the Government. It should eliminate any possibility of 

allegations of interference which in itself is harmful to free collective bargaining. 

 

I would hope that in nearly all cases that voluntarily go to arbitration the parties could agree on a 

chairman. However, where this is not the case we deem it preferable to shift responsibility for selection 

of a chairman to a person whose impartiality simply cannot be questioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both the Saskatchewan Teachers Federation and the Saskatchewan School Trustee 

Association support this transfer. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the determination of a settlement in 

cases where all three members of a voluntary arbitration board disagree. Such a case will be very rare. 

Nevertheless, should it arise this clause provides for solution of the question at the initiative of the party 

most likely to be impartial. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

466 

Clause 5 is a housekeeping amendment. It will simply clear away the red tape involved in defining terms 

in collective agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill puts into force a principle upon which the NDP was built, a principle upon which 

the New Democratic Party was elected. It proposes changes to introduce impartiality into salary talks. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, it is a worthwhile measure. I commend it to the Members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of a Bill to amend The Teacher Salary Agreements 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 2 which the Minister has just moved second reading of, 

is a rather interesting one. It does contain one major amendment and several very minor ones. 

 

It certainly isn’t the Bill I expected he would be bringing forth in the House Mr. Speaker. After all of the 

noise that we heard from him and from others opposite prior to the election about what a terrible piece 

of legislation this was, here he comes into the House today and amends the Bill and indeed gets up and 

tells us how well it has worked a few weeks ago in the northern areas. I’m completely surprised that the 

Minister is accepting and making minor changes in a Bill that he condemned so often in the past. 

 

Now I submit that the amendments he has brought forward here – three of them are certainly of a minor 

and inconsequential nature. 

 

This particular agreements Act, The Salary Agreements Act of 1968 was put on the statute books by the 

former Government, is happy that this legislation is working so well. The agreement that he referred to 

provided a grid increase of 2.74 per cent to the teachers of the northern school board. That’s the lowest 

of any increase that’s been negotiated under this Bill, and the Minister proudly spoke of the 

accomplishments of this particular Bill. 

 

I should have expected the Minister to repeal the Bill. But since he didn’t I shall discuss the amendments 

the amendments that he has put forward here. The provision that he is repealing, Mr. Speaker, is one 

providing for the Minister to establish a board of arbitration and that provision was put there last year for 

the very good reason that there could well be situations develop where either side, or both sides could 

become embittered in the course of a dispute that’s become prolonged, become quite extensive, and for 

one reason or another get their backs up and they get in a corner and don’t agree jointly to apply for 

arbitration as the Bill now, of course, provides for. 

 

The former Government believed, Mr. Speaker, that there should be some machinery to resolve disputes 

such as the situation that I referred to that could well arise under the present legislation. 

 

In any tug-o’-war, Mr. Speaker, the more evenly matched the teams, of course, the more difficult to 

arrive at a conclusion or a winner. And there is no question but I certainly 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

467 

subscribe to the free collective bargaining principle as far as arriving at salaries is concerned. There is no 

question about it and this side entirely subscribes to that theory and those principles. I can say, also, that 

we do subscribe as well to having some machinery there to arrive at a settlement of a dispute where not 

only the people involved in the dispute are affected as in the case of teachers and trustees in this 

instance, but where possibly a quarter million school children in this Province could well be involved by 

prolonged and major disputes and settlements. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more to say on this particular Bill later on. At this time I beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — moved second reading of Bill No. 12 – An Act 

respecting the Protection of Animals. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in many ways the Animal Protection Act is a most significant Bill to be 

introduced at this Session. 

 

The criticism and the comments that the Members give to this Bill will show whether or not they care 

for all the creatures that we have in this Province that are not able to care for themselves. 

 

This Bill is intended to ensure humane treatment for animals both pet and livestock, birds and fish that 

are in distress. These creatures are ill equipped to copy with injury, sickness, abuse, pain, suffering and 

hardship, privation and neglect. Where an owner or person in charge of an animal does not relieve its 

distress or cannot be located a Peace Officer may take custody of the animal, care for it or deliver it to 

an approved Humane Society. Some attempt must be made to notify the owner if he is not present. 

 

The Bill provides authority for a Peace Officer to enter vehicles or premises, other than a dwelling place, 

with a minimum of force and after attempting to locate the owner, to search for and to care for or to take 

custody of an animal in distress. The Peace Officer must have reasonable and probable grounds for 

relieving an animal that is in fact in distress. 

 

The conditions under which an animal can be destroyed are set out. An approved Humane Society may 

recover certain costs related to care or transport of the animal or resell or give the animal away, or 

destroy that animal. 

 

Part 2 of this Bill provides for the killing of vicious dogs, except on the owner’s enclosed land. The 

Justice of the Peace may hear complaints and may order the killing of a dog or other wild animal, or 

may in fact, impose a fine. The owner of the animals that were injured may take action to recover 

damages even where the owner of the dog believed the dog may not have been vicious. 

 

The Bill also provides for some penalties. That is a quick review of the Animal Protection Act. 

 

I turn, Mr. Speaker, to some of the very serious aspects of the Bill. I should mention first of all the 

important 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

468 

contribution that the Humane Society has made in the formulation and drafting of this Bill. 

 

The Members of the Society have had a very useful dialogue with the officials of my Department. All of 

us, I think, recognize the Society and its members as a capable group of people who put compassion 

ahead of self-interest and whose concerns for all the members of the animal kingdom are sincere and 

deeply felt. 

 

I want to pay tribute to the work that has been done in our Province by that Humane Society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — I want to acknowledge with gratitude the encouragement and assistance of the 

preparation of this Bill given to us by the Humane Society. The ways in which the Society will become 

involved under the operation of The Animal Protection Act will be made clear as I proceed with the Act. 

 

I think we all recognize that of all creatures, man is particularly blessed with the capability to consider 

the moral quality of his actions, not only in respect of his relationships with other men, but also in terms 

of his responsibilities and relationships to the other creatures that inhabit this world. I hope that the 

Members on both sides will feel, as I feel, that The Animal Protection Act is a joint declaration of our 

concern for the well being and the humane treatment of animals, birds and fish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all of us know the joy that we, and especially our children, derive from having 

family pets. But in our Province animals have served more utilitarian purposes than merely as pets. The 

early pioneers relied on animals for work as well as income as we now do in this Province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that it’s very important that we, who are adults in our society, should set a good 

example for our children by enacting a piece of legislation like this Protection of Animals Act, to ensure 

the humane treatment of animals. 

 

It has been my experience that children who learn through the care and feeding of pets, are kind to these 

dumb creatures, who in later years accept the responsibility to be generous, straightforward, kind and 

cheerful in their relationships with their fellow-man. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe we are all familiar with the number of instances in which the various creatures 

have suffered pain, hunger and loneliness. In most cases the distress and hardship experienced by the 

animal was the result of some accident. But there are cases where pain, suffering and privation of the 

animal was a result of a lack of care and concern on the part of the owner or the person responsibility for 

that animal. The lack of care and attention on the part of the person responsibility may have resulted 

from some temporary disability or problem faced by the owner. The mere fact that the owner, himself, 

was experiencing difficulty or hardship through sickness or injury, or in a few cases through 

derangement, is not any reason that the animal in his care or custody should suffer at the same time. 

Whether the domestic animal has an owner that is capable or willing to 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

469 

care for it is not relevant to the needs of the suffering of the distressed animal. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, in a number of cases the animals that may be protected through this Protection 

of Animals Act may well be wild animals. 

 

The Act provides that the Peace Officer, subject to certain conditions, may take the action which he 

considers necessary to relieve the distress of a suffering animal. The Peace Officer who finds an animal 

in distress may take custody of the animal and arrange for any necessary food, shelter, care and medical 

treatment for this distressed animal. He may arrange any necessary transportation and deliver the animal 

into the custody of the Humane Society if that appears to him to be necessary or desirable. The Peace 

Officer will be under an obligation to take reasonable steps to find the owner or person in charge of the 

said animal. If the owner or person in charge is in fact found the Peace Officer is obliged to try to obtain 

the person’s co-operation in relieving the distress of that animal. If, however, the owner of the animal is 

not nearby or cannot be found quickly and told of the animal’s distress then the Peace Officer or a 

Humane Society representative may take the animal in custody and will be required to take reasonable 

steps to find the owner at a later date. When the owner is found the Peace Officer or Society will inform 

the owner of the action that was taken to provide care, food, shelter and, or, medicine and transportation 

for this distressed animal. I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that the term ‘Peace Officer’ as it is used in 

the Bill is not restricted to a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or a member of a municipal 

police force. A police officer may be appointed by the Minister for the purposes of caring for distressed 

animals as set out in the Bill. 

 

Without this legislation persons who are inclined to relieve the distress of suffering animals would be 

very reluctant to do so because of the fact that even though they really assist the animal in a kind and 

humane way, they might none the less face a civil court action initiated by an ungrateful or 

unappreciative animal owner. The Animal Protection Act will provide protection to Peace Officers and 

Humane Societies and to the personnel of the Humane Society by preventing any action against those 

persons when they themselves act in good faith and under the provisions of The Animal Protection Act. 

 

The definition of the term ‘Humane Society’ will be subject to the regulations under the Act. The 

Minister may approve as a Humane Society for the purposes of the Act, any organization having as its 

principal object that prevention of cruelty to animals. The Minister may designate a Humane Society and 

naturally, Mr. Speaker, he is also empowered to suspend or revoke the approval that he may have given. 

 

If we are to be realistic I think we must recognize that there are circumstances in which the humane 

course of action is to destroy an animal. I would, however, emphasize that the Act contains some very 

specific provisions to ensure that the animal destroyed is only destroyed after it cannot be relieved of its 

distress in any other way. In the event that an animal is provided shelter and care by a society, this 

society may, after some specified period of time, offer the animal for sale or give it away or in some 

circumstances destroy the animal. Special consideration will be taken where the animal appears, 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

470 

by reason of brand or a tag or a licence to be a valuable purebred animal, then the Society will be 

obliged to wait ten days before selling or giving away that animal. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have an obligation to make the lives of animals comfortable and 

satisfactory. And I hope that when the vote is taken on this Bill that all Members of the House will 

remember that obligation and will vote in favour of that Bill. 

 

I therefore move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to start out by stating that I 

enthusiastically support this Bill, The Protection of Animals Act. 

 

I have had a very close relationship with the Humane Societies for many years as a result of the nature 

of my profession. I must say that this relationship has always been mutually beneficial. 

 

During this period, I have given substantial consideration to this type of Bill. I have consulted with 

various members of Humane Societies as to the different aspects of this legislation. As a matter of fact, 

Mr. Speaker, I took the liberty of writing to the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) early this past 

summer urging that this legislation be presented at this Session. 

 

I should like to say that I am sincerely thankful to the Minister for introducing this Bill at this time. I am 

also very happy that he acknowledged the contribution that the Humane Society made in formulating 

this Bill. They did a magnificent job – I agree. 

 

I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I support this Bill because it gives certain powers to the Humane 

Societies which will not be guaranteed by law. I support this Bill because it grants certain rights to the 

Humane Societies. I support this Bill because it enables official approval of organizations as Humane 

Societies for the purpose of this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support this Bill because I feel that this Act will unofficially recognize the value and 

function of Humane Societies to the public. This is a very important purpose in this Bill. There is a 

certain segment of the public, that in the past has viewed organizations such as Humane Societies with a 

rather jaundiced eye. There has been a feeling by some that such organizations often have misdirected 

objectives and energies and that they operate in too emotional a manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these feelings are unfounded and this Bill, will in part, officially recognize the 

contributions being made by Humane Societies by the public. It should be remembered that Humane 

Societies have a voluntary membership and largely carry out their objectives without the aid of tax 

dollars. They do this by use of enthusiastic volunteer services and by many local money-raising projects. 

It should be realized by the public that the services provided to the same public are indispensable. And if 

these services were not provided by Humane Societies then some form of government would become 

responsible. In my opinion no type of government agency, local or provincial, 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

471 

could duplicate either in quality or efficiency the type of service provided by these voluntary 

organizations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — There are a couple of minor amendments that I am prepared to make in Committee 

of the Whole. They certainly won’t change at all the intent of this Bill, but I want to assure this House 

that this side of the House supports the principle of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — moved second reading of Bill No. 22 – An Act to amend The 

Conservation and Development Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise to speak in favor of the Act to amend The 

Conservation and Development Act. 

 

The Conservation and Development Act authorizes the establishment of local government bodies known 

as Conservation and Development areas. Their principal activity has been to undertake water control 

programs designed to relieve flooding problems on agricultural lands. It is often necessary to cross 

railroad company lines with canals and ditches to carry surplus water to satisfactory and safe outlets. 

 

Crossing a railway with a ditch or canal can be, and in many instances is, an expensive undertaking. 

Naturally enough such works must meet designed standards approved by railway and Canadian 

Transport Commission engineers. 

 

Section 273 of The Railway Act states that the railway is subject to the same drainage laws of a province 

as are other lands in the province. And that when such a crossing is necessary the company has the 

option of constructing the necessary work. However, if the company does not exercise its option within 

a reasonable time, the work may be constructed or completed as in the case of the rest of the project and 

according to the laws of the province. 

 

The section goes on to say that the cost to be borne by the railway company in all such cases will be 

based on the increased cost of the work due to the construction and operation of the railway. The 

Drainage Act of Ontario carries a section complementary to Section 273 of The Railway Act. However, 

the Conservation and Development Act of Saskatchewan has not us until this time, contained such a 

provision. As a result whenever a ditch or canal crossed a railway the entire cost of the structures and 

excavation necessary was borne by the province, and/or the conservation area authority. 

 

The Bill No. 22 is presented in view of putting a conservation area in position to assess the increased 

costs of carrying out a ditch or canal through a railway bed against the company. These new sections of 

the Bill added to The Conservation and Development Act will impose a greater responsibility on 

pipelines, gas transmission lines, on telephone lines, as well as railway lines. They will relive 

conservation areas and the farm 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

472 

lands contained in them of the added costs that are incurred when it is necessary to cross such 

installations with canals and/or ditches. 

 

It is, therefore, with great pleasure that I move second reading. 

 

Hon. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make what I think are a considerable 

number of substantial suggestions on this particular Act. 

 

I don’t want to go into any great detail this afternoon as I have not had the opportunity to make a 

complete study of this Act. I do want to say that I should want to suggest to the Minister some very 

major changes in this Act as far as his Department ins concerned. 

 

The first one, Mr. Speaker, which I find to be totally outdated is the provision under the Act and in the 

Department of Agriculture of paying 75 per cent of the cost through the taxpayers of the province on 

many projects concerning both conservation and development and improvement of land that are now 

currently being paid by the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we find increasingly through conservation groups and people that are interested in the 

environment that very frequently the province is paying a 75 per cent portion of the cost of developing a 

project, a project which many individuals benefit from in their own right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is as yet no provision for the public making their views known on the subject in a 

manner which would be satisfactory to them and often they are finding a contribution from the taxpayer 

in our province being made to the drainage of a large marsh or to the clearing of land which they object 

to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in the development of many of the conservation areas which we have and which are 

legally developed so that they may receive a grant from the Province, we also find the voting procedures 

to be very irregular in a number of ways. I could bring to your attention at least one case that I am 

familiar with where the vote was actually taken, Mr. Speaker, and the part of the land which would 

normally rate one vote, was allowed a number of votes up to about four, simply because that particular 

quarter section was in an estate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is easy to see then that the vote would carry particularly when that group had about four 

— I think even up to five votes — on one-quarter section. 

 

The voting procedure, I think requires something in the neighbourhood of a 60 per cent vote. I am not 

100 per cent clear on the total number of votes required. In that particular instance and in others like it 

where the land is a part of an estate and a multiple number of votes are allowed on the portion of land it 

becomes very unfair to those who are opposing the project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a drastic need for thorough overhauling of this Act. When it comes to Committee 

of the Whole we will be proposing a number of amendments which we hope the Minister will give close 

consideration to. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

473 

I don’t think there is much of a political nature to the changes that we would advocate, but I think that 

those changes we do advocate are desirable at the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the complexity of this Act and the changes which we should like to advocate 

now that it is before the House, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — moved second reading of Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The 

Live Stock Loans Guarantee Act, 1970. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendment to The Live Stock Loans Guarantee Act extends the Act to the 

31st day of August 1973. 

 

The Loans Guarantee Act has assisted the growth of our livestock industry. The Loans Act was one 

single step taken by the previous Government. But that Government made no other significant effort to 

encourage the growth and diversification of the livestock industry in a meaningful way in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The entire farm sector needs expanded credit and this is certainly true of the Livestock industry which 

this Province and this Government will be assisting to expand and to further diversify. The Loans 

Guarantee Program will, therefore, be continued and made part of a carefully considered will developed 

and well executed strategy for an ever-increasing livestock industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The potential for livestock production in our Province is great. We have the land, the 

grass, the feed grains and good and efficient cattlemen. What was lacking was leadership by the former 

Government, but now we intend to provide that leadership with a new emphasis on quality products in 

market development. 

 

The cattle population in Saskatchewan reached a total of 2,282,000 in December of last year, an increase 

of the previous year of an excess of 7 per cent. We are looking forward to further expansion of our 

provincial cattle herd and I can confidently predict that we will have an all time record high cattle 

population in the June survey of 1972. Our cattle industry has been one of the bright spots in our 

agricultural economy. The evident liking of consumers for beef, the increasing population of Canada and 

the United States, leads us to believe that the long-term future of the industry is indeed a bright one. The 

producer of beef cattle is rated by economists generally as a sector of our agricultural industry that can 

and should be further expanded. 

 

Members of this House will note a number of programs to be introduced this year in support of this 

industry. I would only mention now, improved veterinary services, stockyard inspection, the penalty on 

horned cattle and the projected meat mission to the western United States. We are currently examining 

the programs of the Department and we will be proposing in the future further activities and policies in 

support of this most 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

474 

important industry. We will continue to look for ways to assist the industry in quality improvement 

practices and in health services. A major thrust will be in terms of market development, through added 

staff and through direct encouragement of market exploration. 

 

It is therefore, Mr. Speaker, with great pleasure I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) in presenting this Bill and moving it for second reading. 

 

This one Act alone put in by the previous Government did more for the agricultural industry in this 

Province than 20 years of CCF administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The presentation of this Bill clearly indicates the Minister’s endorsement of the 

progressive agricultural programs and policies of the former Liberal Government and their ability, Mr. 

Speaker, to recognize agricultural problems in this Province and do something about the problems that 

apply to their jurisdiction. 

 

The fact that the Agriculture Minister extended this legislation clearly indicates that it was good 

legislation. It was legislation that enabled Saskatchewan farmers to diversity their operations and in turn 

greatly benefit the livestock industry in this Province. The former Member for Morse worked hard to 

introduce this Bill as he realized the great importance of agricultural diversification to this Province. 

 

The former Liberal Government should be congratulated on their foresight in this regard. It allowed 

farmers to diversify their operations from straight grain production to a mixed farming enterprise that 

helped tide them over the difficult wheat sale periods. In many cases it allowed them to show a large 

increase in farm income. It allowed farmers to diversify farm operations to survive this period with little 

or no hardship. It clearly indicates that even with a high level of wheat sales the necessary for 

diversification in Saskatchewan agriculture is of utmost importance. It reinforces my belief that a 

well-balanced, diversified farming program is very essential in this day and age. 

 

This program, Mr. Speaker, has put the livestock industry in this Province in the forefront of Canadian 

Livestock production, as it enabled farmers and cattlemen to expand or establish livestock enterprises on 

Saskatchewan farms. 

 

This program also, Mr. Speaker, enabled the marginal farmer to establish a better farm operation as well 

as enabled the young farmer to obtain the credit needed to begin or expand their operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with this legislation, however, I must criticize this Bill for lack of content. When 

this Bill was first passed in 1970 interest rates were high and the former Liberal Government put some 

of their money behind this 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

475 

Act in subsidizing the interest rate to 7 per cent. 

 

As the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) knows the prime interest rate is now six per cent and I feel 

this Government should, in turn, give this benefit to the farmers of Saskatchewan and subsidize the 

interest rate at six per cent. I should like to use the Minister of Agriculture’s own words in emphasizing 

this fact and I quote from Debates and Proceedings, 1970: 

 

Taking into consideration that the Government does not underwrite the first seven per cent it still 

does by no means protect the farmer from paying high interest rates when he is seeking capital 

which comes at a high interest rate and is hard to get. 

 

I now ask the Minister of Agriculture to show his concern today as well and give the farmer the benefit 

of the prime interest rate by himself moving that amendment during Committee of the Whole and stating 

that his Government will subsidize the interest rates above six per cent. If the Minister does not present 

such an amendment then I shall move such an amendment during Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t let this Bill pass without remarking how amusing it 

was to listen to the Minister of Agriculture now bragging and taking credit for the tremendous 

development in the livestock industry in this Province over the last several years. It is particularly 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, when one recalls the speeches he was making last spring in the course of the 

June election campaign. I can remember seeing headlines in the Star-Phoenix, and the Leader-Post, 

where the then Member from Kelsey, (Mr. Messer) was condemning the diversification programs 

introduced and implemented and developed by the former government and in particular by the former 

Premier of this Province. So it is mot interesting and gratifying really to see that the Minister has 

changed his thinking in this regard and that he is going to continue good Liberal legislation in this regard 

to help develop and build to an even greater degree the livestock industry in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. As I say, I commend him and I am glad that he is big enough to admit that he was wrong 

last June in the course of the campaign in condemning diversification and that today we see him here 

bringing in an amendment to a piece of legislation that will further help the livestock industry in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) pointed out, Mr. Speaker, it is one piece of legislation they are 

bringing in and there still hasn’t been a single penny of Government money pledged in support of this as 

it was under the former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Despite all the things that the present Government is going to do for agricultural, so 

far we haven’t seen them spend a single penny. The one move and the one measure that the Minister 

brought in the other day will ensure that the cattlemen themselves continue to pay for some of their own 

improvements and so of their own developments. This I don’t really take exception to and I don’t think 

too many cattlemen do but, 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

476 

Mr. Speaker, the interesting part of this Bill is the complete change, about face, of the Minister and I 

congratulate him for it. Also the fact that it is another piece of legislation supposedly in support of 

agricultural in Saskatchewan without a single Provincial Government dollar in it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add one little comment to the remarks 

of my seatmate and make one little recommendation to the Minister of Agriculture. I should like to 

recommend this principle that is endorsed in this Bill in consideration of the Land Bank legislation. In 

this Bill the principle established is that in order to help the farming community in the Province of 

Saskatchewan when interest rates go beyond what is in his capacity to pay that the Government then 

assume some responsibility for the overall good of the industry. And in this Bill it is the Government 

that subsidizes the interest rate. In the Land Bank proposal the Minister says, “Oh, no, we can’t 

subsidize the interest rate, we will subsidize the principal and the administration costs so we get title to 

the land”. In this particular principle here by subsidizing the interest rate instead of the Government 

owning the land or the cattle, the farmer himself owns the cattle, the farmer himself gets the benefit of 

his work and his time and his investment. And I should like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that you consider 

very carefully this principle in the formation of your Land Bank legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned about finding out a little more about the amount of the money 

that will be invested, and a little more about the prime interest rate because we are very concerned that 

the Government doesn’t make this window dressing. Because up until now, from what the Minister has 

said, it is nothing but window dressing, because the interest rate in the legislation is seven per cent and 

all of us know that the Government of Saskatchewan should be able to get money cheaper than seven 

per cent and, therefore, in reality is it doing anything for the farmers? Is it doing anything for the 

livestock growers? As my colleague, the Member for Morse, (Mrs. Wiebe) has pointed out, until we 

investigate that a little more, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — moved second reading of Bill No. 24 – An Act to amend The 

Department of Agriculture Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, these amendments to The Department of Agriculture Act show the continuing 

efforts of the Saskatchewan Government to improve the efficiency of its structure. 

 

The new section 6A remedies a long-standing defect in our law. It confers on the Minister the authority 

to render various services to farmers and to charge a fee for doing so. Now such programs as The Dairy 

Herd Improvement Service, the ROP programs for beef, hogs and sheep and Pullorum testing of poultry 

and turkeys will be conducted under secure authority. 

 

The addition to section 12 will clear up a problem that I 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

477 

understand has existed since 1963, that is, what to do with surpluses or deficits in the Agricultural 

Supplies Advance Account administered by the Plant Industry Division. I am told that the problem had 

mainly to do with who picked up the deficits. I must assume that Provincial Treasurers in the past have 

been having problems interpreting the requirements imposed on them by the Legislature in publishing a 

statement of advance account operations in Public Accounts. 

 

The Bill before you will repeal section 15 and it is replaced with a new section that sets out the 

requirements of the material to be published in Public Accounts more clearly. 

 

While I have perhaps treated these amendments in a light-hearted vein I do, nevertheless, recommend 

this Bill to the Legislature seriously. They will correct some inadequacies and more clearly define the 

authority which the Legislature has conferred on the Minister in the conduct of some important 

long-standing services provided to farmers. They also will spell out more clearly the required procedures 

of handling the Agricultural Supplies Advance Account that they have requested of us in various reports 

by the Provincial Auditor. 

 

It is therefore, Mr. Speaker, with pleasure I move an Act to Amend The Department of Agriculture Act. 

 

Mr. E.P. Gardner (Moosomin): Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had the opportunity yet to peruse the Minister’s 

remarks and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — moved second reading of Bill No. 25 – An Act to amend The 

Noxious Weeds Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, The Noxious Weed Act is administered at the municipal level by rural and urban 

councils through local Weed Inspectors. The principle behind the Act is that of ‘education’ is preferable 

to ‘legislation’, as indicated by section 13, subsection 3 which states that: 

 

If the occupant resides in the municipality, the inspector shall confer with him regarding the 

methods of control to be applied, with a view to the most satisfactory treatment from the 

standpoint of the occupant as well as the community. 

 

He may then sign an agreement with the occupant, or if an agreement cannot be reached, orders for 

destruction may be issued by the inspector. 

 

In the event that the occupant is not at his place of residence on two separate visits by the inspector, the 

inspector may issue an order by registered mail. 

 

The chief administrative officers of the cities of Saskatchewan have requested the proposed amendment 

in the Act to allow an order to be issued for the destruction of noxious weeds after only one visit to the 

occupant’s residence. 

 

In this age of affluence many urban residents have lakeside 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

478 

cottages or take extended holidays during the time when weeds are most likely to be troublesome. Often 

these are the residents whose weed problems are most likely to become troublesome and they are also 

the most difficult to reach personally. In addition, in many urban families both husband and wife are 

working and many residences are vacant during the working hours of the inspector. 

 

In most instances if the first visit is not productive, the second is not likely to be. Duplicate visits often 

add more the administration costs than the cost of the weed control to the individual. 

 

It must be noted that the change affects only urban areas where weed control costs are usually minimal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the chief administrative officers of the cities of Saskatchewan have also requested changes 

in section 15 and section 17 to make allowance for the cost of weed control on parcels of land not 

subdivided into lots. Administrators point out that on occasions it is necessary to destroy weeds three 

times or more each year depending on weather conditions and the maximum cost of control allowable on 

lots is not generally sufficient to cover the cost of control on most parcels which are not subdivided. 

Section 15, subsection 3 of the Act has been revised to account for those parcels of land within an urban 

municipality which are not subdivided into lots. Many urban areas contain tracts of land in this category 

and no maximum has been hitherto placed on expenditures which might be made on them. An 

expenditure in this case cannot be made unless previous notice has been given to the owner in which 

case he may undertake his own week control measures. 

 

In the case of section 17, subsection 2, it has likewise been revised to place a maximum on the 

expenditures which can be made on unoccupied parcels of land which have not been subdivided into 

lots. In such instances, such control must be authority in the Council and the maximum expenses 

allowed are somewhat less than where the owner has had the opportunity to exercise his own control 

measures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are aware that the councils and Administrative Officers of our rural and urban 

municipalities are concerned with the cleanliness and beauty of their municipalities, cities, towns and 

villages. We are convinced that it is imperative that we support them in every way possible. Providing 

them with satisfactory legislation in order that they may adequately control weeds is only one of the 

many ways which we can do so. We are, therefore, pleased to present the changes which have been 

recommended. I am, therefore, pleased to move this Bill. 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is in the nature of housekeeping I believe and 

we understand that the cost of eradication of weeds has certainly been upped by the cost of labour and 

chemicals. We have no opposition certainly to parts of this Act. However, I would like to say to the 

Minister that now that he has some amendments to The Noxious Weed Act perhaps he may look at one 

or two other sections and perhaps bring in house amendments. I am thinking particularly of sections 23, 

24, and 25 which appear to be a bit out of date. They say, in effect, that every person moving a swather 

or combine from one farm to another shall sweep it off and this is fine. This is 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

479 

section 23; 24 says, for example, that: ‘A legible card containing the provisions of subsection 23 shall be 

kept posted in a conspicuous place on all machines used for threshing or cutting and threshing when in 

operation”. In other words that every person who has a thresher or combine has to have this card on it. It 

also says section 25: “The Secretary Treasurer of every RM shall record a list of all thresher men to 

whom cards were issued during the year and shall mail a copy of the list to the director not later than the 

very first day of December in the year to which it refers”. Now I would suggest that perhaps there is 

need for some cleaning up on these sections. I doubt if many people that are moving combines or 

swathers have this card attached at all times to the swather or combine thus putting the farmer in a 

position where he is breaking the law. I doubt if Secretary Treasurers are making this report as faithfully 

as they are supposed to here and perhaps he would take a look at these also. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — moved second reading of Bill No. 21 – An Act to 

amend The Education of Soldiers’ Dependent Children Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 21. Mr. Speaker, this Act will expand 

the scope of the education of soldiers’ dependent children by including a larger number of veterans and 

relaxing the definition of a veteran. 

 

The Act as it now stands, Mr. Speaker, covers only children of veterans of the two World Wars who 

received a pension from The Canada Pension commission. Korean War veterans are not covered and 

those who receive assistance under The War Veterans Allowances Act are excluded. These men are 

often referred to as the ‘burnt-out’ veterans and they are now assisted only by The Canadian Legion. The 

number of children now receiving assistance under the present Act is some 25 to 30. The Legion has had 

its financial problems giving assistance to the children that are excluded under the present Act and 

which it was covering; therefore, we bring forward the amendments. 

 

The amendments proposed will permit the Government to provide assistance to children of veterans of 

both World Wars, provide assistance to children of veterans of the Korean War, whether the veterans are 

deceased, disabled or as I used the term ‘burnt-out’. Also the resident qualification will be changed to 

allow any veteran who lives in Saskatchewan to apply rather than restricting the coverage to men who 

enlisted here only. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the money involved in this Bill is small in terms of the provincial budget but for the 50 to 

60 persons who will now be eligible for aid the difference will be significant. I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, 

to move this Bill, the Bill to amend The Education of Soldiers’ Dependent Children Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

480 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): Mr. Speaker, just a few very brief remarks, I concur almost entirely with 

the remarks of the Minister in this regard. It is a good piece of legislation and it’s one that we would 

wholeheartedly support and I commend him for bringing it before this House. We are supporting this 

Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 20 – An Act respecting 

Assignment of Wages. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move second reading of a new Bill, a Bill respecting 

the Assignment of Wages. As Hon. Members will note this Bill is not an amendment to any existing law 

but is in fact a new statute which relates to the assignment of wages. It is the opinion of the Government 

that many employees have suffered undue hardship because of their assignment of wages for the 

payment of their debts. This Bill is designed to protect the wages of employees against assignments for 

debts. The Bill provides that an assignment of wages given after July 1st of 1972, to secure payment of a 

debt will be invalid. 

 

The rationale behind this Bill is basically along these lines. In our experience, an assignment of wages is 

very often obtained in somewhat dubious circumstances. That perhaps is a bit of a harsh word to 

describe it. Very often though a creditor will come to an employee and say that unless the employee 

agrees to giving an assignment of wages the employer will be notified of the employee’s bad credit or 

whatever the situation happens to be with respect to the file. Very often the employee feels compelled to 

sign an assignment of wages in order to protect his employment. He then agrees to certain terms and 

conditions which turn out to be very onerous, in fact, far more onerous than they would if he just simply 

sat back and waited for a garnishee summons. Very often he is afraid of the garnishee summons because 

the attitude of certain employers is that once a garnishee is filed it may terminate the employment of the 

individual concerned. So the result is, that the employee is caught in what we term to be a very 

unfortunate and very unsatisfactory situation. Therefore, this Bill will, as I have said to the Members of 

the House, provide that an assignment of wages given after July 1, 1972 to secure payment of a debt will 

be invalid and the creditors will have to follow the normal and usual remedies of the law, as all others. 

 

Wages will include, for the purposes of the Act, Mr. Speaker, any pay, commission or compensation for 

personal services whether based on time, piece work or otherwise. The Bill, however, does not prohibit 

an employee from authorizing deductions from his wages for such purposes as pension plans, charities, 

savings plans and trade union dues, nor does the Bill affect an assignment of wages to a credit union 

operated by the employees of the employer to whom the assignment is directed. 

 

You can see the exemptions. There will be an assignment right on the top of your wages to pension 

plans, charities, savings plan, trade union dues and also to those employees who are members of a credit 

union, which is known as an employees credit union. I think a good example is SAGE, Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ credit union. The theory behind the 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

481 

exemption for the employees’ credit union is that there the employee has some control and some say in 

the conduct of the credit union itself. That is to say, if he is encumbered in a debt to the employee credit 

union because he is a member of that credit union, he will have some say as to the nature of the debt and 

in the operation of the credit union. He, therefore, should have concurrently the right to assign a part of 

his wages to the employee credit union as to all the other activities. 

 

Any assignment of wages that has been given, Mr. Speaker, prior to July 1st of 1972 will not be valid 

after July 1st, 1973. that is, if an assignment of wages is given by any employee now until July 1st of 

this year or has been given already, it will be valid for a period of one year. After July 1st of 1973 it is 

no longer valid. The obvious reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is to allow a period of readjustment because 

there are a series of wage assignments that are undoubtedly out now and will have to run their course. 

They were obtained within the provisions of the law but we are giving fair notice. If the House sees fit to 

approve this Bill, the assignment of wages will be invalid, illegal after July 1st of 1973. 

 

The Bill is, as I have said, a fairly short Bill and that is the effect and the sum and substance of it. Before 

I take my chair, Mr. Speaker, let me say that this Bill is another step forward, in addition to the 

consumer legislation, that this Government will seek to build in the years ahead. The ideas in this Bill 

have already been tried in the province of Ontario and have been accepted in that Legislature and are 

working fairly well there. We expect no problems. We say this is a significant step forward for 

consumer protection and employee protection in the Province of Saskatchewan. I think the employers 

and creditors alike can live with it. I urge all Members to vote and support this Bill in second reading in 

principle. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move second reading of an Act 

respecting the Assignment of Wages. 

 

Mr. D. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): Mr. Speaker, at this time hesitate in supporting this Bill. There 

are certainly some questions that I want answered myself. First of all I think that it is agreed that 

employers do not like the assignment of wages. I think that it is an onerous task for them and they will 

appreciate this particular Bill that will stop this practice. I am not sure, however, just exactly how the 

employees will feel about this Bill. I have no doubt that certain assignments are obtained, under as the 

Attorney General says, dubious circumstances and I also think that the assignment of wages may be one 

of the few sources of collateral that some employees have and to take this advantage away from them 

might be discriminating against some of the lower wage earners, so I do hesitate in that respect. 

 

Also, I have some other questions. I notice that it does not prohibit certain things, but I wonder about the 

United Appeal for example, or the Community Chest. I also wonder about the aspect of the credit union 

and as the Attorney General says that the employee would have some control in his own credit union. 

He may have some say in his own credit union but I think that this may often be very little say as the 

credit union becomes larger and larger, so I am not sure that this exemption is necessarily a good one. 

But if it is, then I wonder also about whether or not the exemption should also apply under employee 

profit sharing plans. These are some of the questions. The 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

482 

other one, of course, is that I think that this Assignment of Wages Act will encourage the garnishee 

procedure and this can be very onerous also. At this time I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 11 – An Act to amend 

The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 1967. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill is the Bill amending The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 1967. This Bill is 

a fairly straight forward amendment which I hope the Members opposite could see fit to support and 

perhaps support even today. The Bill is designed to provide a measure of protection to a person who 

purchases goods on credit and whose debt or promise to pay has been signed over to a third party. The 

third party by reason of this amendment will not have the same obligations, liabilities and duties of the 

buyer as the seller of the goods would have in the first instance. Previously a third party who has 

received such an assignment was very often able to enforce payment of the entire debt from the 

purchaser even though the buyer had a legitimate claim against the seller over delivery, performance, 

service, quality, warranties or some other aspect of the sales contract. Under this amendment the lender 

or the finance company, and that is usually the most frequent example of the third party where there is 

the assignment of the note, will, as already stated, be in no better position than the seller to enforce the 

payment of the account. The situation is the same with respect to the seller of services or to the lender of 

money. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may, to give you an example and this may not be a fully accurate example on all 

aspects, but I think it will highlight the point. If, for example, I am one who enters into a contract to buy 

from a merchant, a refrigerator on time and the merchant assigns that note for the purchase of that 

refrigerator over to a third party, very often the assignment documents contain what they refer to as a 

cut-off clause. That cut-off clause had the effect of denying me certain rights and privileges against that 

finance company that I would have had against the seller, the person who sold me the refrigerator. The 

result is that the assignee or the third party is in a stronger position than the person who entered into the 

contract in the first instance with myself or with the purchaser. And I think that all Members would 

agree that in equity and in law that is not a proper approach or a proper position for anyone to be in. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we take the lead in introducing this legislation as a result of the federal 

Government’s action in this area. The federal Government introduced an amendment to the Bills of 

Exchange Act Canada which came into effect November 1st, 1970. It is basically what this 

complementary legislation will do provincially in this area. All that this Bill dos, therefore, is to 

complement the terms of the Canadian Legislation with those effects that I have outlined. I say again, 

Mr. Speaker, although it is a small amendment it is a significant amendment. I think it is advance again 

the area of consumer protection legislation for the people of our province. I am very happy the Province 

of Saskatchewan has stepped into line with what are the developing trends in this areas across Canada. 

Therefore, it gives me great pleasure to 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

483 

move second reading of a Bill to amend The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act 1967. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Attorney General, we certainly welcome this piece 

of legislation. For the information of the Members of the House, for all practical purposes the legislation 

is not really necessary in that the Federal Government’s amendments to the Bills of Exchange Act 

brought this into effect in November of 1970. And I would hope in this particular field that we are 

dealing with in the matter of consumer notes that the Attorney General would have his officers 

investigate the practice of many finance companies or in some cases some banks I understand, which do 

not stamp a consumer purchase promissory note with the words ‘consumer notes’ as is required under 

the Federal bills of Exchange Act. As I have stated, Mr. Speaker, this is a complementary legislation to 

legislation passed in 1970 by the Federal Government. It is far reaching legislation and much needed 

legislation. I think that will proper enforcement the legislation as implemented will mean a great deal of 

protection for the consumer of Saskatchewan and Canada. We heartily support this Bill and I would 

hope the Attorney General would take under advisement the question of enforcement with regard to the 

stamping ‘consumer notes’ on the promissory notes. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 10 – An Act respecting 

the Age of Majority Act, 1972. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce this Bill, The Age of 

Majority Act, 1972. Mr. Speaker, this proposed new Bill, The Age of Majority Act, 1972, is a new 

composite piece of legislation whereby the age of majority in the Province of Saskatchewan will be 

reduced from the present legal age of nineteen to eighteen years in all respects. The Coming of Age Act, 

1970, which was introduced by the former Liberal Government will be replaced in its entirety by the 

operation of this Act. For the purposes of uniformity the proposed Age of Majority Act, 1972 will more 

closely follow the legislation that now exists in Ontario, Alberta and Manitoba. The legislation is 

intended to provide in a more precise way for the alteration of the age of majority. The previous Act was 

quite general in this nature and my law officers feel that in that regard it was deficient. Several specific 

provisions have been inserted in this new legislation. For example, specific provisions are contained in 

section five providing for the change in any Act regulation, rule, order or bylaw or any reference to the 

age of 21 or the age of 19 so that such references shall at law, henceforth, read as a reference to the age 

of 18 years. Similarly, in any Federal Statute adopted by and made applicable to provincial matters and 

within the jurisdiction of this province any reference to the age of 21 years is to be read as a reference to 

the age of 18 years. Court orders and the like made before this Act comes into force and containing 

references to any age between 18 and 21 are to be read as references to the age of 18 years in the 

absence of any contrary intention. 

 

The Act does not prejudice a right of action or a defence based upon the age of one of the parties where 

the right of action, or defence is in existence when the Act comes into force. I think the lawyers 

particularly will know what this section 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

484 

refers to. Under the common law a person is said to reach a particular age on the day before his birthday 

because the law as stated does not take cognisance of the part of the day. The Criminal Code, a Federal 

Statue takes the opposite position and the person attains a particular age on the day after his birthday. It 

is considered that to the general public a person attains a particular age on his birthday and this Act, 

therefore, contains a provision coinciding with this public understanding and clarifying the present legal 

situation. 

 

Now the previous legislation, The Coming of Age Act, was more general in its nature as I have said, Mr. 

Speaker, than this new Bill. Probably most of the specific provisions contained in this legislation were 

adequately covered by those general provisions. However, as our neighbouring provinces have enacted 

statutes of a more specific nature in the areas of wills, deeds, trusts and so forth and it was felt that this 

province should enact a more uniform type of legislation in this field so that more certainty will exist in 

the interpretation of legal provisions with respect to the age of majority. 

 

A good deal of the Bill concerns itself with those mechanical amendments required to alter the many 

specific statutes wherein reference is made to the age of 19 years. These are basically routine and 

housekeeping once the principle of the Bill is accepted by the Members of this House. The Act is to 

come into force on the day to be fixed by proclamation to allow a transitional period and to give those 

persons and businesses affected an opportunity to consider and prepare for the effect of the statute, 

although we don’t expect that very much of a lead time will be necessary in this case because the notice 

that will come to our community by virtue of the introduction of the Bill today and some debate on it 

today. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, thus far I have limited my remarks basically to some detailed explanations of the 

legal provisions of the Bill. I think that this type of a Bill and any explanation can be best handled in 

Committee of the Whole. Members may have questions with respect to the legal effect of a particular 

clause and why the necessary for it. I’ll do my best, with my officials assisting, in Committee of the 

Whole, to answer them. I think it is best here for the Members really to concern themselves about the 

principle of the Bill in second reading, namely whether or not it is in the public interest to lower the age 

of majority in all areas from 19 to 18 years. 

 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that as far as the Government is concerned in this area there will be some on 

this side, and I am sure some on the other side, who will object to the principle of this. As far as the 

Government is concerned this is not a Bill where we are going to apply strictly to the traditional and 

usual practices with respect to the question of a vote on the particular issue. 

 

Some will speak for it and some will speak against it. I personally am for it, obviously, because I 

introduced the Bill. I think very often we tend to highlight a debate of this nature really around the 

provision that relates to drinking at the age of majority. I recall when the first Bill was brought in by the 

Liberal Government, although this is a very valid concern by all Members, I thought it was a bit 

regrettable that all of us tended to relate our remarks about what could be possibly the bad effects when 

a 19 year old person at that time had access to 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

485 

liquor as if he was of full age of majority at that time of 21. I think that’s regrettable, Mr. Speaker, 

because the Bill does far more than simply open the pubs to 18 year olds if it passes this House. I think 

the experience with respect to lowering the age to 19 has been a good experience in Saskatchewan. 

Predictions of young people flooding beer parlours or showing legal and moral irresponsibility, I think, 

are not substantiated by the statistics or the facts. I commended the Government of the day and I do so 

now for taking the courage in lowering the age of majority then to 19. We’re at this juncture, Mr. 

Speaker, now where other provinces have lowered the age to 18, rightly so, because I think 18 is much 

more of a natural break after high school. After high school and 18 years of age you are usually able to 

get employment or continue on to university or some other form of endeavour. But 19, I always felt, was 

a bit of an unnatural age upon which to base the age of majority. 

 

Now I don’t want to make this into a flowery speech about the virtues of youth, Mr. Speaker, but I have 

always felt personally that a person reacts positively to a responsibility if we give that person 

responsibility. If we deny or seek to shelter an individual, with certain physical years of maturity and 

emotional years of maturity from responsibility, then we foster in that individual irresponsibility. 

Today’s 18 year old has the benefit of probably the best educational system that our society has been 

able to produce. Today’s 18 year old in his schooling system has seen three men go to the moon and 

come back and he has seen it on coloured television. This is something that the teacher who was 

lecturing to him about Physics never saw during that teacher’s period of learning. 

 

That 18 year old now has experienced that technical impact, has experienced the overly used phrase of 

living in the global village now. But to state exactly what I mean, with the impact of that global village 

on him I say he is as mature and as responsible as anyone of us in this Assembly. He is given the right to 

vote, he is given other great responsibilities by this country of ours and I say he reacts well to this 

responsibilities. Not such a big step, I suppose, in some people’s minds to lower it from 19 to 18. I hope 

that’s the case. I urge certainly all Members to support the main principle and thrust of the Bill and to 

show confidence and support of the young people of this province and of this country. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move second reading to this Bill. 

 

Mr. G.P. MacDonald (Milestone): Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to make any lengthy remarks at this time 

about this Bill but there are a few comments that I should like to make. I, of course, endorse the 

principle of this Bill. I have always been in favour of the reduction of the age of majority, first of all by 

the Liberal Government from the age of 21 to the age of 19 and I think you will recall, Sir, that the 

Liberal Government in the Province of Saskatchewan led all of Canada in this reform. I should like to 

point out just as the Attorney General did, that what did concern me is the fact that people recognize that 

in this Bill expands the responsibilities of adulthood to a young person at the age of 18. Even though it 

does extend also the privileges of adulthood to a person at the age of 18 it is equally important that we 

recognize the responsibilities that are enhanced in this Bill as well as the privileges, which are usually 

centred around the privileges in relation to licensed premises. I want to point out that this 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

486 

is one of the recommendations of the Legislative Committee on alcohol and that during the course of the 

last few months this particular principle has been recommended by 23 briefs submitted to that 

committee, including the RCMP, City Police, hotel operators, other licensed premises and so forth. The 

interesting part of the briefs and the submissions to the Alcohol Committee were the fact that it indicated 

that young people in Saskatchewan have reacted to the increased responsibility at a younger age in a 

very positive manner. 

 

First of all it had no significant impact on the accident rate of youthful drivers. Also, contrary to what 

many people suspected or feared, that the decorum or standard of conduct, standard of behaviour of 

young people in licensed premises throughout Saskatchewan improved in decorum within those places. 

We found and the police found and the hotel operators found that young people reacted with a great deal 

of responsibility, instead of young people going outside and being forced to go into cars and on the 

highways and byways to consume alcoholic beverages and sometimes to over indulge because of the 

circumstances of the environment. I think that this Bill is a growing recognize of the fact that young 

people do mature at a much younger age in 1972 than they did in the 1950s and the 1940s. Perhaps, as 

the Attorney General has pointed out, all of us can relate it to the instantaneous communication of today 

when a young person can react spontaneously to something that has happened in Peking or 

Czechoslovakia or West Germany or London or wherever it may be, in four or five minutes because of 

television and other media communication. Certainly young people are now growing up much faster, 

they have a great deal more maturity and, therefore, it is equally important that we give them with that 

maturity a greater degree of responsibility. I am very much in favour of this Bill I do hope that the 

majority of Members on this side of the House will support the Bill but I should like to tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, and the other Members of the House that as far as the Opposition Members are concerned this 

will be a free vote. I think in a question that is not of a political nature, as this one certainly is not, it is of 

a social nature, that it demands and requires on behalf of the public interest in Saskatchewan, open and 

free debate. 

 

I would hope that Members on both sides of the House who have an objection would stand on their feet 

and express that objection. I do hope that Members on this side of the House that do feel this way will 

stand on their feet and express this concern and also those that favour the principle, so that the public 

Saskatchewan will know that we have carried out our responsibility in a very wide field and in a very 

free debate and that each Member will vote according to his own conscience. I do recommend that this 

Bill be debated widely in this Assembly. 

 

Hon. J.E. Brockelbank (Minister of Public Works): Mr. Speaker, I’m not necessarily prepared to speak 

on this debate but I do feel that I should say a few words in support of the Bill that is before the House 

now. 

 

I want to say that I support this Bill fully as I supported the Bill before which lowered the age of 

majority from 21 to 19. I was interested in the remarks of the Hon. Member from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) in suggesting that the Liberal Party somehow led Canada in lowering the age of majority to 

19. This, I think, is 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

487 

quite a significant honor for them to take upon themselves but I think it is worth noticing that in Canada 

the CCF party, prior to the Liberal Party taking power in 1964, had lowered the age of voting in the 

Province of Saskatchewan and had led all of Canada in that endeavor. I think that that is equally as 

significant as this move, Mr. Speaker, except that that was truly a pioneering move in Canada at that 

time. 

 

I was a bit concerned with the remarks of the Member from Milestone in that he, at this time, purports to 

reveal the recommendations of the Interim Committee on liquor legislation. That report has not been 

tabled in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — On a Point of Privilege, I in no way indicated what the 

recommendations of the Liquor Committee were. I merely indicated that there were 23 briefs, at least 

according to my calculations, that had recommended this change. I in no way indicated what the Liquor 

Committee would eventually recommend itself. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I will take the Member’s word until such time as he may check the record, Mr. 

Speaker, and you will see when you check the record that the Hon. Member for Milestone said, ‘and that 

is one of the recommendations of the Committee”. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — To the Committee. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — No, ‘of the Committee’, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll stand on that. If the Member for 

Milestone wants to check the record he’ll find that’s what he said because I listened very carefully to 

what he said. I think, possibly, it is not proper that we reveal the recommendation of a committee before 

the report is laid on the table of the House. 

 

Now it is true that a number of recommendations were made to the Committee by interest public bodies 

and by individuals about lowering the age of majority from 19 to 18. there were also some 

recommendations made to the Committee that the age of majority should be raised to 21. I respect those 

people who submitted those types of recommendations to the Special Committee. However, I do not 

agree with them all and I suppose that in due course the recommendations of that Committee will be 

revealed to the House. I think that probably the House at that time will endorse the recommendations. 

 

In conclusion, I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I reiterate my support for this Bill at this time before 

the House. I take the position that the young people, given the responsibility and given the power to act 

in these areas, will be more responsible because of it, not only because the age of majority has been 

lowered, but in the past, as I referred to earlier in my remarks, the age of voting was lowered from 21 to 

18, and the young people of the province accepted the responsibility there. I believe that they because 

more politically attuned because of that opportunity of getting out and voting at the age of 18, rather 

than waiting for the age of 21. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I support the Bill. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

488 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I only have one brief comment which is 

provoked by the statement by the Member from Saskatoon (Mr. Brockelbank) involving a report. This is 

an observation by a person who has nothing to do with the Committee and has no knowledge 

whatsoever of what is in the Committee report, and that observation is simply this: I think the 

Government would be much better advised if they presented the report to the Legislature before we 

received the legislation. We are expected to pass judgment on what the people of Saskatchewan think. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We are expected to pass judgment on what the people of Saskatchewan want in 

this regard and it is one of the purposes for which we had the Committee set up. I’m not on the 

Committee, I’ve no knowledge whatsoever expect what I happened to read in the Press about what the 

Committee is finding. Yet all of us are expected to vote intelligently on this new legislation which 

reduces the drinking age. I might say, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to vote against this legislation but I 

certainly would be remiss if I didn’t say I have a certain number of trepidations as far as it is concerned. 

I know at the time, it was brought that by reducing the drinking age, which is only a small part of the 

Bill, by reducing it to 18 you are certainly opening it wide open for all young people that are attending 

high school. This is something that the previous Government did try to avoid and it was the real reason 

for deciding on the age of 19. I think this will be of concern to some people in the province the fact that 

many young people who are still in Grade 11 and 12 are only 18 years of age and now will have legal 

access under the liquor laws. Now this may or may not desirable but I think that is of concern to quite a 

number of people, and something that didn’t exist to any large extent while the age was 19. 

 

I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that I think the Government would have been much better advised if 

they brought the report to this Legislature and we had the opportunity to read that report, study it and 

make a good judgment upon what that report says and then brought the -legislation it. It appears that 

they have decided to do it in reverse. In my estimation they are not using the proper perspective in 

reference to the report and to this Bill. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, would the Hon. Member permit a question? Was the Hon. Member 

aware that the recommendations that are contained in the Interim Report are unanimous? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — No, I am not aware of anything concerning the report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think the question was out of order because that Report is not before 

the Committee and no Member has any reason to know whether it is unanimous or not. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I accepted the 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

489 

question and if you allowed him to ask it you should allow me to answer it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — But you will realize that I cannot restrict a Member from asking a question if I don’t 

know what the question is. 

 

Mr. D.H. Lange (Assiniboia-Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, as one of the youngest Members in the 

House, I should like to speak in support of the Bill to lower the age of majority. 

 

I am speaking on behalf of the youth and in their defence, assuming of course that the House will 

appreciate my unbiased opinion. 

 

We are in the age of Aquarius and of course, in the age of hair. For today the length of your hair is a 

highly controversial subject. Length of hair is the outward manifestation of life styles and morals of 

opposing generations. It is the vehicle through which young people are expressing their changing 

attitudes and feelings. Clothing styles and colours are another way the young identify themselves and 

this has spread to all ages. How many of us have cast aside the purity of white shirts and have fallen into 

the clutches of sinful red, virile blue and dramatic gold? Monotony is a product of the past. Life was not 

made to be dull. Among the younger generation thee is a disregard for the censorship of society. And 

why should this be? Because the young are finding much in that society to criticize. They refuse to bend 

to a society that they feel is unwise and they refuse to please a society that they find unpleasing to them. 

 

Youth has a new level of awareness which has come as a result of the past 20 years of affluent living. 

We haven’t had to be concerned with making a living since this has been done by technological 

advancements. This advancement has given us the facilities with which to have a higher level of 

awareness. But this awareness is also the product of the contradictions and failures of the business world 

and government. The awareness of youth had its origin with the hippie movement and has spread to the 

universities and schools. It is now suffusing all of the social strata. It is because of this higher level of 

awareness that youth are able to handle decisions at a lower age. I will try to show why the young are 

responsible enough to cope with a lower age of majority. 

 

If you find my comments interesting, I hope you will remember them and that they represent the 

foresight of youth. If you find my comments provocative, I hope that you will think about them and 

remember that they represent the imagination and optimism of youth. But if you find my comments dull 

and boring, I hope you will forget them and remember I am young. 

 

The young have developed a new culture that is alienated from their elders and that is reflected in not 

only their dress and life styles, but in their impatience in seeking solutions to the major issues of war, 

social injustice and university reform. Among the members of this student culture is a growing lack of 

tolerance, growing insistence that their own views must govern and impatience with slow procedures of 

democracy, a growing 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

490 

denial of the humanity and goodwill of those who urge patience and restraint and particularly of those 

whose duty it is to enforce the law. 

 

There are almost an infinite number of ways to differentiate between the old and new generations. The 

old, when forced to choose, tend to give preference to property rights over personal rights, technological 

requirements over human needs, competition over co-operation. The ideas of youth tend to reverse this. 

 

The basic assumption of the older generation is scarcity. Everything in it rests upon the assumption that 

the world does not contain the wherewithal to satisfy the needs of its human inhabitants. From this it 

follows that people must compete for these scarce resources. All scruples are lost in the competition. 

Those who can take the largest share of the scarce resources are said to be successful. The only measure 

of success is materialism. The fact that property takes precedence over human right in the old culture 

also follows logically from scarcity assumptions. If possessions are scarce, relative to people, they come 

to have more value than people. Many possessions on the other hand entitle the owner to a status of 

somewhat more than human. But, as society becomes more affluent, these priorities begin to change. 

Human life increases in value and property decreases. Youth challenges the high value placed on 

property. 

 

The key flaw in the old culture is that scarcity is spurious. It now exists only for the purpose of 

maintaining the system that depends upon it. We continually find ourselves in the position to having to 

kill someone to avoid sharing a meal which turns out to be too large to eat alone. 

 

The philosophy of youth, on the other hand, is based on the assumption that important human needs are 

easily satisfied and that the resources for doing so are plentiful. Competition is unnecessary and the only 

danger to humans is human aggression. There is no reason outside of human perversity for peace not to 

reign and for life not to be spent in the cultivation of joy and beauty. Those who can do this in the face 

of the old culture’s ubiquity, are considered beautiful. 

 

Man is in a way like cattle – he cannot be led, he must be driven. He moves by passion and not by 

reason. In the past, the driving force has been religion of one sort or another which has caused him to 

progress. Patron saints, for instance, have been inspirations for centuries after their deaths. This 

inspiration is the only way man has risen from the depths of squalor. Recently the driving force of man 

has been industrialization and his religion has been materialism. Now production is solved. There is an 

abundance of everything. The problem now is distribution. 

 

Youth has a greater consciousness about this problem than has every before existed. We realize that 

individually man makes himself a slave. Collectively he finds his freedom. We, therefore, despise the 

menial work and seek to put our time and minds to more constructive activity. 

 

It should be stressed that affluence and economic security are not in themselves responsible for the ideas 

of youth. The rich, like the poor, have always been with us to some degree but the new culture has not. 

What is significant in the new culture is not a celebration of economic affluence but a 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

491 

rejection of its foundation. The youth is concerned with rejecting the artificial scarcities upon which 

material abundance is based. Society becomes unhappy and vicious because our preoccupation with 

amassing possessions, obliterates our loneliness. Youth are not merely affluent – we are trying to 

substitute an adequate emotional diet for a crippling addiction. 

 

The culture of youth, is nevertheless a product of the old, not merely a rejection of it. It picks up themes 

latent or dormant or subordinate in the old and magnifies them. The hippie movement, for example, is 

brimming with nostalgia, nostalgia peculiarly American and Canadian. This nostalgia embraces Old 

West, Indian culture, the wilderness, the simple life and the utopian community — all vibrant tradition. 

 

We must remember in our observation that there are as many bad aspects in the new trend of thought as 

there are in the old. Youth, for instance, advocates communal living and co-operation and at the same 

time contradicts itself by saying, “ do your own thing”. We must be able to meet the previous generation 

half way. There must be continuities between the old and the new. 

 

If there is not, there is a good chance that the results of this philosophy of youth will lead to nothing 

more than a perverted and caricatured form of the last generation. It makes no sense for many of the 

brightest and most sensitive young merely to drop out or confront society with hostility. This cannot 

lead to social reconstruction. The complicated and confusing condition of modern times needs 

knowledge and fresh thought and therefore long acquaintance and participation precisely by the young. 

 

It is easy to criticize the now-generation. It is easy to criticize their life styles and consequently their 

hairstyles. But what is being done is basically putting a stifling restriction on their individuality. When 

we cannot express our individuality, we cannot express ourselves. And what is life but a form of 

self-expression. 

 

Today’s youth have no mode of expression except for clothing and hairstyles. They are unable to assert 

their individuality. In bygone days, an example of individuality was heroism or courage in war. At Vimy 

Ridge during the First World War, four divisions of Canadian troops pushed a German battalion (sic) 

back 100 feet (sic) and they have been talking about it for 53 years. But we do not have such examples 

of brash individuality in the Second World War. Few, because the Second World War involved little 

hand to hand combat. It was nothing more than mass murder with machinery. Man’s individuality was 

disappearing. And now how would he fight a war? It would be no more than pushing buttons and 

individuality would be totally lost. 

 

It is becoming increasingly more difficult for young people to be individual. They are competing with 

technology and with a society which is imposing upon them norms which they realize have no intrinsic 

value. Today’s young are completely honest about how they think. They reject the hypocrisy of society 

with its class system, laws for the rich and another set of taxes for the poor, its management by the elite. 

Young people reject materialism as a basis by which to live and a goal for which to strive. 

 

In our society all of our immediate goals are material. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

492 

We strive for new cars, houses and the latest in technological advances. And as long as the economy is 

booming, we sail along with no worries because our immediate goals are being satisfied. But in the 

event of an economic slump our feet are kicked out from under us because we can no longer satisfy our 

individuality with material things. We have no idealism, no faith in anything other than materialism, 

nothing to cling to in a depression. All of this because our society has taught us false premises. This is 

what today’s youth are rebelling against. The utter futility of working for a reward that has no intrinsic 

value. 

 

The older generation should be proud of the fact that they have fostered a generation so aware of the ills 

of society. A generation with a dynamic consciousness which manifests itself in a refreshing honest 

candour. The capability of youth in rationalizing the ills of society, demonstrates that they should be 

allowed self-expression through legal channels as well. This generation should be given recognize by 

lowering the age of majority. 

 

I shall support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak in this debate I think that I agree with the 

Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) in the previous debate which I agreed that to view the reduction of the 

age to 19 was questioned mainly by an emphasis on drinking. 

 

I don’t think there was enough emphasis on the number of responsibilities that the previous legislation 

gave to the young people. I think this was unfortunately ignored. 

 

There is a weakness to the Bill and there is a weakness to the previous Bill that was passed by the 

Liberal Government and that is, of course, trying to place an objective standard on maturity. Young 

people know full well that there are many of their peers who cannot handle the responsibilities or the 

benefits that will be given to them by this legislation. Young people also know full well that there are 

people over the age of 18 and over the age of 19 and over the age of 21 who cannot handle the 

responsibilities or benefits as given to them by society. 

 

I don’t think we should penalize the majority of young people for the actions of a few. I don’t think that 

we should every penalize the majority of adults for the actions of a few. As I say, there are some young 

people who will not be able to handle the benefits or the responsibilities given by this Act but I firmly 

believe that the great majority of them will be able to handle it. 

 

For that reason I am going to support this Bill. As I stated, I agree with the Attorney General and his 

remarks of the previous debate on the emphasis on drinking. Particular provisions I welcome – the 

statement in the Act as to the exact date that this Act will affect the person becoming 18. 

 

I had no intention in my remarks of controversy, Mr. Speaker, however, I must make a comment on the 

remarks made by the Member from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) with regard 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

493 

to his accusation directed to the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) about making the Report of 

the Liquor Committee. I refer to Sections 46 and 47 of the proposed Bill, which deal with amendments 

to The Liquor Act and The Liquor Licensing Act, reducing the age to 18. I would strongly suggest to the 

Hon. Minister that it is the Government opposite that is leaking the provisions of the Liquor Committee 

Report by putting these provisions in the proposed Act. It is not the Member from Milestone. All you 

have to do is to read the proposed Bill to see what probably will be the recommendations of the 

Committee. If the Minister was sincere in his accusation then these provisions should not be in the Bill 

and they should be awaiting the tabling of the Report in this House of the Liquor committee. 

 

As I have stated, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there will be any doubt but that the vast majority of the 

young people in the Province of Saskatchewan — and I should like to see, of course, the Federal 

Government bring in similar legislation so that it applies all across Canada — that they can handle the 

responsibility and they can welcome the benefits of such legislation in a very responsible manner. 

 

I support the Bill. 

 

Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I rise in complete support of Bill No. 10. 

 

As a former Queen’s Scout and a 4H member and 4H leader for some five years I have nothing but 

admiration for people of this age group. But I want to bring to the attention of the Attorney General and 

also to the attention of the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) that I feel there is a great need to 

extend the educational facilities and scope in Saskatchewan when we do provide the matter that was 

brought forward in this Bill so that we can provide these people with a comprehensive course in 

education. A course that will bring them to down-to-earth-thinking in financing; cost of credit and the 

implications of it; responsibilities and principles of politics; drug uses and the implications of them 

whether it be cigarettes, liquor or the hard drugs. I want this type of educational program brought in so 

that we can prepare these people before they go into adult life so that they are prepared to face the 

responsibilities that adult life brings to them. 

 

A lot of people seem to think that experience is the best teacher. But the thing that I should like to point 

out is that with present interest rates and the implications of long-term credit and the habits that you can 

get through indulgence of cigarettes or alcohol or whatever may haunt you for the next 5 to 50 years of 

your life. And I think that we definitely need a better educational province covering all the areas that I 

have mentioned. With this I will gladly support the Bill, but I wanted to throw out these suggestions to 

the two Ministers and I would hope that they would act on them. 

 

Mr. R. Gross (Gravelbourg): — I have planned to enter this debate for several reasons. The main reason 

being that I happen to be the youngest Member in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

494 

Mr. Gross: — Let me assure, Mr. Speaker, I cannot steal all the thunder and that I am not along in this 

category, for take one glance at the Members on side of the House and it would be noted that a large 

number of the Members are under 30 years of age, in the eyes of our youth a significant and rewarding 

change. I should like to take this opportunity to commend our young, dynamic and brilliant Attorney 

General for this action… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — …for his action in introducing this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time is getting close to 5:30. I have other comments I should like to make on this 

matter, if I could call it 5:30 and resume afterwards. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 p.m. 

 

Mr. Gross: — As I was saying at 5:30, Mr. Speaker, the age of majority in Saskatchewan is a serious 

social issue, it requires a conscience in taking political action. It becomes strikingly evident in view of 

the number of pressing problems related to youth that young people must take an intelligent and active 

part in the affairs of Saskatchewan and Canada as a whole. Young Canadians throughout the nation form 

a unity unfounded by political convictions, but none the less amazingly conscious of Canada’s greatest 

problems Young people, idealistic as they are, are first of all humanitarians, the ultimate goal of true 

socialism. Here in Saskatchewan we must show the interest and initiative to grant those young men and 

women a legal voice and learn from their unique perceptions. The age of majority issue is not a minor 

one, since it involves all social problems the province and this country faces. Age of majority is 

inherently concerned with delinquency, social deviations, alcoholism, ecology, unemployment, crime, 

abortion, welfare and education. Youth are too often involved in the centre of their own phenomena. We 

accept the fact that youth have an opinion to express on these phenomena. We believe 18 year old men 

and women deserve the legal right to express their own opinions. The solutions to social problems 

concerning youth rests on the ability of youth taking a responsible part in alleviation of their problems. 

 

First, let me consider the thesis of this presentation and present it as the means for ultimate solution of 

problems related to youth. By lowering the age of majority from 19 to 18 we automatically involve men 

and women 18 years of age in the need to form intelligent judgements on social and political issues and 

grant them means to do so through democratic election. 

 

Young people are capable. Better and increased amounts of education have continued to raise the level 

of social consciousness among youth through the decades, and will continue to do so. Technology and 

job complexity demand higher trained and increasingly more qualified men and women. These issues 

involve younger people every year, needless to say. 

 

National employment has become a problem of critical interest to youth. How must it feel for a young 

man or woman to be willing to spend one quarter of his or her life in academic training only to find there 

is no place for them in the job 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

495 

market. These deep psychological consequences among youth in regard to this problem could only 

provide a vigorous motivation to aid in a solution. We once again find a necessity to grant 18-year olds a 

legal pathway to accomplish the ends they desire. 

 

In ecology there is no group of citizens so conscious of the problems of pollution than our youth. It is 

they who have the great investment in today’s environment, since it is they who will inherit all the 

problems the older generation will leave behind. Can we be sure that those who have lived the first half 

of their lives will tackle the environmental ecology with a passion and drive that a young person with 

over 40 years of life expectancy would? Certainly an 18-year old would, not to mention those younger 

who have a right to enjoy many of the tings most of us did up until a decade ago. 

 

Alcoholism, drug abuse and social deviancy. It may be alleged that the lowering of the age of majority 

will lead to the abuse of alcohol among our younger people. We have already found this is not the case. 

Our major problems associated with crime and social deviation are closer to drug abuse. Many of the 

problems previously associated with alcoholism among youth must increasingly be replaced by 

associations to drug abuse. This is not to state that marijuana causes crime as such, for all the scientific 

evidence so far has proved this to be false. As long as marijuana is legal we must accept the crimes 

associated with the use and sale of marijuana and other drugs. This will continue to exist, the best 

possible solutions to their problem whatever it may be must involve the active participation of youth. 

Prohibition has never been an effective way to combat the problems of this nature. By lowering the age 

of majority we can only gain by involving more youth in active solutions. 

 

Abortion is an issue frustrating particularly to young women. An 18-year old woman is no less capable 

of bearing a child than is a 19-year old. The case of unwanted children is not significant higher among 

18-year olds than 19-year olds. These young women by this token must be capable of participation in a 

solution of social problems such as this, if they are responsible for bearing the illegitimate children. 

 

The last point which needs to be made concerning this issue is whether or not 18-year old men and 

women are politically conscious enough to make responsible use of the democratic process. The 

question requires a generalized answer. However, in this case it is impossible to generalize. There are 

undoubtedly people who go through life in this Province never attempting to understand any political 

issue. Certainly some of them are now 18 years of age. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just the Liberals! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Just the Liberals. However, today’s 18-year olds and many of those younger are more 

than capable of making accurate and social value judgements about present day future and social 

political issues. They must take an active role in determining their own future. The preceding points rest 

on moral grounds to a large extent when dealing with people and social interaction we must always 

concern ourselves with morals. Politics must take an increasingly humanistic approach in the solving of 

today’s problems and in an increasingly technological age this will be necessary. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

496 

Saskatchewan is surrounded by Canadians who have seen fit to give their young people the rights they 

deserve. It is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan to lower the age of majority to 18 and to 

continue to involve subsequent generations at a lower age level, as the social conscience among the 

youth increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, we have heard three or four, I should say seven or eight, 

maybe ten speakers on this Bill. It seems to me that this Bill will have unanimous support from that side 

of the House, although I want to say very emphatically that I will oppose this Bill. I am amazed at some 

of the statements that come from people opposite to the right of you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A good deal has been said about our young people over the course of the last five or ten years. I am the 

first to admit that w have some very fine young people and we also have some real bad young people 

We have some find older people and we have some bad old people. I would say that the majority of our 

young people are good, if this is the case, these are not the ones who will pressure the Government for 

lowering the legal age. The Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) and these Members of this House can 

well applaud our young people but much of it I am afraid is for political expediency only. Good homes 

make for good families, where the parents exercise good discipline and are not afraid of their children, 

good citizens will emerge from these homes, it will not come from government legislation. Today most 

parents are very much concerned about the future of their children. If the home breaks down, the school, 

the church and the government breaks down as well. I am afraid that this has occurred in Canada, in 

Saskatchewan and indeed on the North American Continent and elsewhere in this world. It has occurred 

to such an extent the much of the damage that has taken place will be very, very difficult to repair, 

perhaps not at all. 

 

We talk about how responsible our young people are today. We talk about how much better they are 

educated today, as compared to some of those of my generation. Well, Mr. Speaker, and Members of 

this Legislature, I want to tell you that education does not necessarily produce character, it never has and 

it never will. If a person has not got a character 24 hours a day, seven days a week, then not too much 

faith and trust can be expected from that individual. 

 

Several weeks ago the Star-Phoenix reported, and I speak from memory and I stand to be corrected, that 

there had been around 2,500 marriages in the city of Saskatoon in 1971. It also reported that almost 50 

per cent or half as many divorces had taken place in the city of Saskatoon. It reported that those 

marriages under 20 years of age would all end up in divorce inside of five years. Do we call that 

responsibility? 

 

Alcohol is drug number one in North America today, it is not LSD, it is not marijuana, it is not any of 

the hard drugs, it’s alcohol and it will be for a long, long time. The Attorney General knows this. This 

Government knows this and yet in spite of it, it is anxious to give it another promotion, mostly for 

political reasoning. Liquor profits were up by almost $2 million as reported by the Liquor Board. Could 

it be that these profits 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

497 

came from the 19-and 20-year olds? If it did, these are the ones that want free education, free tuition 

fees. Car accidents increased by over 3,000 despite the fact that the Government told the electorate in 

June that we were losing hundreds and thousands of people in Saskatchewan. There should have been 

less drivers and there definitely should have been less accidents. I spoke against this Bill a year ago 

claiming that it would not be too long that university campuses, the students would ask for a bar or 

outlet at their campuses. Last year when Mr. Heald introduced the Bill on first reading, the very next day 

the Regina Campus students circulated a petition for an outlet. It makes good sense for them to ask for 

one. If a university student who is 18 years of age, wants a glass of beer, it will cost him 75 cents to get 

one, while the man that is uptown pays 25 cents, he has to take the bus to go to the hotel to get one and 

he has to take the bus to go back. So you are discriminating. I am telling you across the way that it will 

not be too long before you are going to have bars and outlets at most of our campuses and indeed maybe 

in some of our high schools. 

 

When the former Government increased liquor outlets in the Province, we were chastised by the 

Opposition as throwing liquor to the wolves. My, how these things change when you sit to the right of 

the Speaker. That was just purely hypocritical and I can see the Attorney General standing over here 

chastising the Government for opening more outlets, he was opposed to everything the Liberal 

Government did, but when they are in they anxious to promote it for those under 19 years of age. 

 

Our society today as recognized by the sincere Christian church is sick, very sick indeed. Our homes, 

our schools, our churches our governments as such are sick because many parents today are afraid of the 

children. The ministry today, and I understand you have two ministers of the United Church on your 

side of the House, the ministers today are afraid of the parishioners. The schoolteacher and the professor 

is afraid of the pupil, and the governments are afraid of the electorate. 

 

The basic concern that I have today is how we are parents can set examples to our younger people. I am 

not that much concerned who is the Premier of the Province as I am of who stands behind the pulpit 

today. If the home and the church will live up to its expectations we shall be sending good men to our 

respective governments. I took a good deal of interest when the Liquor Commission had its hearings in 

Saskatoon last winter. Last spring when the Liberal Government set up this Legislative Committee and 

later, when re-appointed by Premier Blakeney, I advised a good number of friends and church 

associations that they should go to these meetings and hearings and present briefs and let the public and 

the government know their stand. If I recall right 19 briefs were presented at Saskatoon, the city of 

churches, but not one church, not one church felt it worthwhile to present and express its concerns and 

beliefs to this committee. Now that the Bill has come to the Chamber we hear a few rumblings from 

some of the churches. The only Christian Association that presented a brief in Saskatoon was the 

Saskatoon Christian Temperance League for which I am very thankful. 

 

Out of a total of 149 briefs presented to the Committee only nine came from several churches and a few 

associations related to churches. That the Committee has formed its conclusions based on briefs present, 

I can well expect what the report will be. In my travels throughout the province over the last 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

498 

ten years, I can say without a doubt that the individual Christian and the Christian Church is 

overwhelmingly opposed to this legislation. Alcohol is evil and it is the source and root of most of our 

welfare problems as I am sure the Welfare Minister (Mr. Snyder) has found out by now. It is the root 

and source of most of the problems the white man has and also most of the problems that the native has 

today here in Saskatchewan. It is responsible for at least 50 per cent of our vehicle accidents on the 

highways. It is responsible for most of our murders and suicides in our country. I cannot see, Mr. 

Speaker, how we as a responsible body of elected representatives want to promote the use of alcohol and 

extend it to our young people. Because, Mr. Speaker, the Liquor Commission Report has not been 

tabled, we in the Opposition should like to know what the Commission’s recommendations are. I would 

suggest to you and to the Leader of this House that we do not further debate this Bill until this report is 

tabled and I, therefore, beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 13 – An Act to establish 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is a great privilege to introduce another Bill in second reading, a Bill respecting 

the establishment of The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in looking back over the history of this province, I think it can be said that Saskatchewan 

has been a pioneer in the field of human rights legislation. I want to say in a purely, partisan and 

political way that, in my estimation, Saskatchewan has been a pioneer in the field of human rights 

legislation primarily and almost exclusively during those yours when the CCF was in power and now 

when the NDP are in power. 

 

The first Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, in fact, the first provincial Bill of Rights written anywhere was 

authored by the Government headed by the Premier of the day, Mr. Tommy (T.C.) Douglas. It was about 

the only Human Rights Bill in the statute books of a province for a long time, and though I haven’t done 

a check, it still may be. It was followed up with fair employment practices legislation, fair 

accommodation practices legislation and so forth. The CCF established in the years of 1944 to 1964 that 

it was going to be at the forefront of human rights legislation in the Dominion of Canada. Regrettably, 

from 1964 to 1971 we were at a standstill. During the Liberal administration in the Province of 

Saskatchewan to my knowledge there was not one basically new, innovative piece of legislation 

introduced in the field of human rights. All around us in the Provinces of Ontario and British Columbia, 

Manitoba and Alberta, throughout all of the Dominion of Canada, provincial governments were moving 

to ensure protection of the liberties of their individual subjects. Everywhere, except in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, because the government of the day steadfastly refused to implement legislation. 

 

And I know why they so steadfastly refused to present this type of legislation. Because in their years of 

power, Mr. Speaker, from 1964 to 1971, they exhibited the most cases, the most blatant use of political 

power ever exhibited by any 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

499 

government in the history of this province. 

 

I’ve read in the newspapers from time to time about the Opposition, the present Opposition getting up in 

the House and saying that this Government is misusing its power. One or two comments about this 

Government being arrogant, and one or two comments about what the present Attorney General is doing 

in making sure that the powers are misused. Those are very find words coming from the Liberal 

Opposition. Very find words, Mr. Speaker, when every basic, democratic right — civil liberties I’m 

talking about, Mr. Speaker, — were mutilated by the Liberal government in the gerrymander Bill of 

1970. when Members of the opposite Liberal Party ask the people of Saskatchewan what the present 

Attorney General is doing to speak up for civil liberties, I ask them to tell this House what the former 

Attorney General, what the former Minister of Welfare, what the former Minister of Municipal Affairs 

and what every Member of the Liberal Government did when they mutilated civil liberties day in and 

day out from 1964 to 1971. Absolutely nothing. They were absolutely silent. They dismissed men 

without any notices. And they have the audacity now, seven months later to come back and to say to this 

Legislature, to say that there is an abuse of power by this Government today. Mr. Speaker, about the 

only thing that could be said about some of the boys when they were in power was that “we were going 

to it but somehow we never got around to doing it”. 

 

And those were critical years in the field of human rights and civil liberties, Mr. Speaker. Years when 

minority groups, our Indian people, our Métis people, were beginning to rediscover themselves, were 

beginning to fight tenaciously against stereotyping that we had exhibited towards them and inflicted 

upon them, were beginning to insist that the battle for their cultural survival be respected and be 

understood. In the past decade, cultural groups and individual groups, all intensified their efforts to 

recognize the basic human rights of women, the basic human rights of our young people, to make sure 

that we withstood the onslaught of technology and the deep depersonalising effects of a complex and 

complicated Government in the 1970s. Everywhere this was going about in the Dominion of Canada. 

Every Government in the Dominion of Canada saw the trend and acted, everywhere except under the 

former Liberal Government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, happily on June 23, 1971, the people of the province for a number of reasons, returned the 

Government that I said at the very beginning, pioneered in the field of human rights legislation, the 

NDP. And, therefore, it is no surprise to the people of our province that at this first full Session of the 

Saskatchewan House we are moving immediately to take steps to enforce and to protect the basic 

liberties of our subjects. We’ve done so by the introduction of the Ombudsman Bill. That is already 

under debate, Mr. Speaker. And we do so now with this Bill, The Human Rights Commission Act of 

1972. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to place this Act in its proper context, this legislation represents the first phase of a 

continuing effort by this Government to provide for the people of Saskatchewan the kind of leadership 

in the field of human rights which they enjoyed in this province prior to and up to 1964. During the 

months and years ahead, I hope to be able to bring in new legislation which will consolidate all of the 

Bills that are before us in the area of human rights. For example, I look 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

500 

forward to the enactment of a consolidated human rights code. The evolution of this work would involve 

the increasing dialogue between our citizens and our minority groups and all the other interested 

individuals of our province. In short, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, The Human Rights Commission Act, of 

1972, this legislation is a beginning, it’s the first step in what will be as the work of this Government 

progresses, truly the most advanced and enlightened human rights legislation in all of Canada again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more particularly with respect to the human rights Bill, what does this Act do? It will 

establish a body known as The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. This body, according to the 

proposed Bill, will be composed of not less than three members and there shall be attached to the 

three-man Commission a Director of Human Rights who will be the chief executive officer of and the 

secretary of the Commission, together with other duties that may be assigned to him. Subject to the 

direction of the responsible Minister, the Commission will administer The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, 

The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, The Fair Employment Practices Act. Members of this House 

will know that there is complementary and consequential legislation with respect to those three Bills to 

be introduce upon passage of this major Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, among the duties of the Commission will be an obligation to forward and to promote the 

basic principles upon which this democracy is founded including the paramount principle that every 

person is free and equal in dignity and in rights without regard to race, creed, religion, colour, sex, 

nationality, ancestry or place of origin. This is set out clearly in the Bill and I won’t belabour it. 

Members can read it for themselves. 

 

There are one or two other aspects in respect to the purposes of this Bill that I should like to draw to the 

attention of the Members and that is section seven sub (a) which forwards the principle of cultural 

diversity as a basic human right and a fundamental human value. This I believe and I stand to be 

corrected, is an innovation with respect to human rights legislation of this type, the recognition and the 

forwarding of the principle of cultural diversity. It’s a very important advance to my mind, Mr. Speaker. 

The status of so-called minority groups in relation to our legislation and human rights legislation will 

continue to be the subject matter of more considerable study by this Government in the years ahead as 

we constantly seek a dialogue with the various diverse interests in our society to find out how they react 

to and become involved with these laws and to anticipate additional legislation to assist them in their 

true realization of their potential as citizens of our province. 

 

This Bill also says that the Commission can in concert with these groups and societies conduct and 

encourage research in the field of human rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Commission shall investigate complaints of any person that an infringement of a right 

under an Act administered by the Commission has taken place and it shall endeavour to effect a 

settlement of the matter complained of. Such complaints can be easily submitted either orally or in 

writing. If the Commission is unable to effect a settlement after the complaint has been made then the 

Commission may conduct a formal inquiry. If, as a result of such inquiries, the commission finds that 

the complaint is supported by the evidence 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

501 

then it shall recommend to the Minister the course that ought to be taken with respect to the complaint. 

Now, in this area, Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw particular attention of the Members to the way the 

Bill is worded. What I have just said is the way the Bill is worded. The Commission will make an 

inquiry and a recommendation to the Minister and the Minister will then do whatever is necessary to 

carry out the recommendations of the commission. The wording of this particular section was taken out 

of the forerunner of our human rights legislation the Ontario legislation creating the Ontario Human 

Rights Commission. We though at the time of the drafting of the Bill that this was, in fact, an adequate 

provision. But I am not so sure that it is today. I’ve been very much impressed by the strength and merits 

of arguments that have been advanced by members of the Saskatchewan Human Right Association who 

say that we should deviate from the Ontario precedent to the extent that the Human Rights Commission 

itself should investigate and make the order finally without reference back to the responsible Minister 

and then that there should be the right of appeal from the final order made by the Human Rights 

Commission. In fact, there has been a recent case in the province of Ontario, a case which has been 

widely reported which has criticized this particular provision as it is written in Ontario and as it is 

written in the proposed Bill that is before the Members today on second reading. We think the criticism 

taken by the court in Ontario is well taken. We think the observations by the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights people are also well taken. And so, therefore, it will be my intention when we get into Committee 

of the Whole to change the wording of this particular section to allow the Human Rights Commission 

itself to investigate and to make final the order without any reference back to any Minister of the Crown 

and giving an avenue of appeal therefrom to a proper court of law along the lines of the criticism 

contained recently in the Ontario case. I think this will further strengthen and improve the basic 

provisions of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission and would and should alleviate the 

complaints raised in some quarters that this is a bad section. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides for penalty provisions to be contained in the Act for any 

person who fails to comply with a particular order. In the Act it says “of the Minister” should be 

changed in Committee of the Whole to the “orders of the Commission”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall have a few words to say when I introduce for second reading The Bill of Rights and 

The Fair Employment Practices Act amendments. Basically, they will redefine the terms to bring them 

into line with The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission Act which is before you on this day. The 

amendments will come into force on a day to be fixed by proclamation by the Lieutenant 

Governor-in-Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset of my remarks, this legislation won’t put Saskatchewan entirely in 

the lead with respect to civil rights action. What it will do is bring the Province of Saskatchewan on an 

even footing with what is developing and his developed in the other provinces of Canada in human 

rights. I think that there are one or two provisions of the Bill which will, if I may in honesty say, 

improve our Bill over the existing ones. I have already drawn the Members’ attention to them. The first 

one is about cultural diversity as a right and the second one is about the Human Rights Commission 

making the final order with a right of appeal, although one or two provinces 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

502 

have variations of this. It won’t put us ahead. It will bring us equal. But I say, Mr. Speaker, tonight, in 

second reading, that this Bill is another step forward to the guaranteeing of civil liberties in the province 

by this Government of the Province of Saskatchewan. And in the months and the years ahead with the 

initiative and the enthusiasm of the Premier, I think the people of the province can look forward to better 

and more legislation ensuring and enshrining the civil liberties of the people of our province. Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move second reading of an Act respecting The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission, 1972. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, although we welcome the laudable lines of this legislation 

we certainly must question the Member who stands up in this House and criticizes the previous Liberal 

Government for firing people without notice after he fires a senior civil servant on 40 minutes notice and 

has to have his Deputy Minister go and do it for him. Until we had the statement from the Attorney 

General as to the withdrawal, I assume it’s of section 11, on second reading, never has there been a 

human rights Bill introduced in a Legislature that was given so much power to do away with human 

rights and that is to be taken away by the Attorney General in the legislation that was proposed here 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — It makes you wonder about the thinking of a man who stands up and has stood up in this 

House and has completely opposed and chastised the Liberal Government for removing a right of 

review, and stands up and puts in this Bill, a complete waiver of review of an order of the human Rights 

Commission. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the thinking of the Attorney General behind this legislation 

certainly must come into question when we have a provision which does away with one of the basic 

human rights and that is a right to appeal to the courts. I’m very glad and I commend the Human Rights 

Commission and the other people who brought to the attention of the Attorney General the weakness 

and the danger of this particular provision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the thinking of the Attorney General in this legislation as it was drafted indicates that we 

were to have a czar of human rights in Saskatchewan and not a Human Rights Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — And I welcome the statements of the Attorney General that he is going to reconsider the 

principle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate, we wish to see the amendment as proposed by the Attorney 

General and I think it will affect the other provisions. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

503 

Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 14 – An Act to amend the 

Fair Accommodation Practices Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I shall be very brief on this, these are the amendments to the Fair Accommodation 

Practices Act, Bill No. 14. 

 

I think the Bill is fairly self-explanatory. There are certain changes with respect to the definitions which 

are a consequence of the comments that I have made in second reading on The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission Act. I think some further study of this Bill can be carried out in Committee of the 

Whole if the Members so like. I, therefore, move second dreading of An Act to amend the Fair 

Accommodation Practices Act. 

 

Mr. G. Lane (Lumsden): — I think is particular Act, of course, is predicated on the passing of the Bill 

for The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. I think we can assure the House that once we have 

the amendments we can get all these consequential Bills at the same time. In the meantime I would beg 

leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 15 – An Act to amend the 

Fair Employment Practices Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill also Human Rights Commission. This is a Bill to amend the Fair 

Employment Practices Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill goes a little bit further than the other Bills because of proposed section 6. 

Proposed section 6 says — “No employer or trade union shall discharge, expel or otherwise discriminate 

against any person because he has made a complaint or given evidence, or assisted in any way in respect 

of the initiation or prosecution of a complaint or other proceeding under this Act”. And again, nothing 

perhaps turns much on that except that it is a bit of a restrictive power. In section 14 is outlined the 

penalty provisions. These are all basically amendments, Mr. Speaker, which dovetail with the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission Act and, therefore, I would move second reading of An Act 

to amend the Fair Employment Practices Act. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, for the same reasons we beg leave to adjourn debate on this. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 16 – An Act to amend the 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. 

 

He said: On Bill No. 16, Mr. Speaker, again the same comments. This is the amendment to The 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights. The amendment will in section 3 add the words – sex, nationality, ancestry 

or place of origin and will do so throughout in clauses 4, 5 and 6 and 7 and 9 of the Bill. In effect it 

brings up to date the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act in the sense that it will dove-tail and make this 

Act subject to the actions of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 



 

March 9, 1972 

 

 

504 

On that basis, Mr. Speaker, and with those few words I would not move that An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, one comment before the same criterion is applied. On all the Bills, of 

course, that have been introduced one of the major changes is the intent to ensure the equality of sex, 

and I think this particular aspect is a very welcome one. I refuse to get into the discussion as the Minister 

of Labour (Mr. Snyder) did when he referred to them as the ‘fairer sex’. I think they are certainly the 

equal sex and the adjective ‘fair’, I don’t think any longer applies if this legislation passes, Mr. Minister. 

I think that’s certainly a welcome addition. However, for the same reasons we have given previously, we 

beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:47 o’clock p.m. 


