
























































Hansard: March 14, 1972


 621 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

14th Day 
 

March 14, 1972 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon-Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and 
through you to the Members of the Chamber a group of 37 students from St. Michaels School in 
Saskatoon-Mayfair constituency. I understand they are sitting in the west gallery. They are accompanied 
by two of their teachers, Mr. Mansfield and Mr. Boechler. I am sure that all Members of the Assembly 
will join with me and wish them an interesting day in the Legislative Chamber and safe journey back to 
Saskatoon-Mayfair. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. W.W. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like through you to introduce 
a group of 37 Albert School students from Saskatoon in my constituency of Nutana Centre. They are 
accompanied by their Principal, Mr. Bartel, I am sure that all the Members of the Assembly wish for 
them an educational day in the Assembly. I am particularly pleased to introduce this group, Mr. Speaker, 
because it happens to be my home school and my three children went through that public school. I hope 
their day is interesting and I hope they are interested very much in the legislative proceedings and that it 
will be helpful in terms of Social Studies to them. I wish them a safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J. A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to the 
Members of the Assembly another group of Grade Eight students from Weyburn Junior High School. I 
believe that there are some 80 in number and they are sitting in the east gallery. They are accompanied 
here this afternoon by their teachers, Jim Nedalcov and Mr. Bill Fletcher. Their bus drivers are Mr. 
Ernie Obst and Mr. Henry Bell. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that I am speaking for all the Members when I 
express our words of welcome again to them and that it is our wish that this visit to the Legislature to 
another day of worthwhile education for these students and that it will give them a little insight into the 
working of the Provincial Legislature. I join with the rest of the Members in wishing them a safe journey 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J. C. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, thee are a group of students here from 
College Park School accompanied by Mr. Cross and Mr. Right, their teachers. I hope when they reach 
my ancient age of 27 that there will be a more socialist society and barring that 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
622 

there will at least be a Legislature in some form of parliamentary democracy. I see also that we have 
with us the former Hon. Member Mr. Leith whose interest in the Liberal Party is perhaps in some way 
correspondent to my own in the New Democratic Party and that his 171 and our Waffle can make their 
contribution to the improvement and the saving of parliamentary democracy. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

PRELIMINARY ESTIMATE OF GRANTS TO INDIVIDUAL SCHOOL BOARDS 
 
Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). I wonder if the Minister could give us an indication when a 
preliminary estimate of grants to individual school boards will be made available to Members of the 
House? 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — The work is taking place on the grants at the present 
time, Mr. Speaker. Indications I have is that the work will be completed by Friday when all of the 
information will be available to the Members and, of course, to boards. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney 
(Provincial Treasurer) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, last night when I concluded my remarks I didn’t 
congratulate the two Members who were elected in the by-election and wish them well in this House. I 
know their contribution will be worthwhile over the next four years. I also congratulated the Leader of 
the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) on assuming the Leadership of the Party across the way. I notice in the 
galleries that we also have another leader in our midst, Mr. Nasserden, the Leader of the Conservative 
Party and I think we should recognize him this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — Mr. Leith was recognized as the leader of, I think Mr. Richards said the Waffle of the 
Liberal Party. I wish him well in his endeavours. I don’t think in 1975 there will be a party left at all 
anyway so I suggest he do some soul searching and come across here. 
 
Our short session last summer produced some far-reaching legislation which fulfilled a sufficient 
number of our promises. And with funds provided in this Budget as I referred to last night, we abolished 
the cursed deterrent fees, we changed the legislation affecting and protecting our helpless mentally ill 
and their family estates. We established a proper minimum wage of $1.70 as of January 1st and $1.75 as 
of July 1st. A 40-hour week for the province went into effect. We repealed Bill 2 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
623 

using collective bargaining as a free instrument to resolve our labour and wage difficulties. We instituted 
a new bursary program for several thousand students who made use of these for higher education. We 
removed the pupil-teacher ratio stigma. Oh, yes, we gave free Medicare and hospitalization cards to all 
those over the age of 65. A compassionate piece of legislation on recognizing our pioneers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — In this we brought back the measures the CCF legislated from 1944 to 1964 with some 
extensions. Yes, we had a glorious 20-year record from 1944 to 1964. I love to remind our 
anti-democratic socialists across the way about these, many of which they deliberately tried to erode 
during these past seven years, particularly to ruin our Medicare and hospitalization plan through 
deterrent fees. They tried to ruin our Trade Union Act with Bill 2. they kept minimum wages down to 
very subsistence levels as compared to other jurisdiction. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to participation in the Budget Debate. First of all I want to say 
how proud I am to be able to represent some 10,000 voters or 15,000 citizens in Regina Wascana as well 
as a bird sanctuary representing some 700 geese. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — Yes, on June 23rd, Mr. Speaker, last, they got a pretty good gander. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — Regina Wascana was the gerrymandered seat of the century. The Thatcher Government 
sure tried to get rid of me but the good people of Regina Wascana stayed by me while great odds were 
against them. 
 
The Wascana Centre Authority is in my constituency containing 2,000 acres of land and 300 acres of 
water, encompassing our parliamentary area, our Regina University, the Centre of the Arts and the 
Saskatchewan Base Hospital. Wascana Centre Authority is a unique complex, owned and operated by 
the Provincial Government, the city, and our Regina University. It is an area of numerous well-groomed 
parks and recreation grounds with many outdoor skating and barbecue facilities. It is here, first of all, for 
Saskatchewan people to enjoy and it is now considered a North American and part of a world-renowned 
tourist centre and attraction. 
 
I express appreciation to the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) and the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. 
Kramer) in providing $100,000 to promote Boggy Creek in King’s Park and as a start of the Regina 
Woods approved by us in Regina City Council in 1970. 
 
Over the years our CCF and NDP Governments have laid the groundwork all over Saskatchewan for the 
development of many fine parks and recreation and resources sites for our people. Our CCF-NDP 
conservation programs in years gone by have been the 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
624 

best in this country. Our natural wildlife multiplied so well that Saskatchewan has become a great 
hunters’ and fisherman’s paradise with modern resorts with swimming and camping sites. I suggest 
large areas of our northern part of Saskatchewan be set aside now as parkland to stop the erosion of this 
last sanctuary for wildlife, resort areas and also for our native people, the Indian and Métis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — The Budget provides funds to help create employment and provides monies to promote 
industries and smaller businesses. It gives tax relief to homeowners, small businesses and farmers 
through a property tax reduction of some 13 mills to the Saskatchewan people. The money from these 
tax reductions will put an added $23.4 million worth of purchasing power into the hands of our citizens 
which will certainly benefit all of our business communities. Over the past seven years in this 
Legislature I have prodded the Government to give unconditional or conditional grants to cities, towns, 
villages and rural municipalities in the amount of $10 to $12 per person. This $23.4 million property 
improvement grant actually means $24 per capita for every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan. We 
have completed the full part of our program as promised — to reduce the mill rate by 25 mills — our per 
capita grants to people in municipalities will be higher than any other province in this country. The full 
impact of this tax reduction will be felt over the next year or two. May I suggest also that over the next 
while we explore the possibility of exempting people over 65 on pension from paying education and 
school property taxes. Those who rent suites in apartments who really pay taxes indirectly will have to 
be considered in the future to share in this fine new property improvement grant as well as apartment 
owners. 
 
I said last evening it is most unfortunate that $6.3 million has to be provided to cover debts incurred on 
the Athabasca Pulp Mill Project. The Provincial Treasurer should send the bill with a mortgage to the 
Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues for signing the document nine days before the election. 
They really had no right to sign a document of that magnitude while they were only acting a s a 
care-taking government. This is your debt and that of your party. If you default by not admitting owing 
this debt then you will be forfeiting the remaining seats as I said in the year 1975. 
 
In my remarks last year I said the two main issues confronting us were unemployment and problems of 
agriculture. They are both still with us. Today some 660,000 Canadians are unemployed; 7.6 per cent of 
our total work force. Job opportunities are diminishing in our professional and technical groups. In other 
words some 2 million Canadian workers were affected with a period of unemployment at one time or 
another during the year 1971. A heart-breaking revelation. Because of this large scale of unemployment 
at present, Canada is losing $80 million worth of production each week. What a waste of material and 
human resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to create employment is to promote new and expanded industries. This in the main will 
stabilize provincial growth as a supplement to our primary industry, namely agriculture, which creates 
most of our real wealth. Good investment and risk capital must be encouraged to come here. I have 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
625 

always said that we need private, public, co-operative and joint private and public investment to achieve 
our industrial and agricultural goals. Threats must be avoided against sound investors if we are to 
establish the proper climate for people to come here 
 
Inflation with all its by-products created by the Federal Government was also one of the root causes for 
high unemployment. Imagine deliberately creating unemployment to stop inflation. We all know that the 
chief and main cause of unemployment was high interest rates. They are still high and this is still 
causing in the main increases in the cost of living. An increased money supply would also drive interest 
rates down. If economy would once more regain the confidence necessary to have it flourish. If 
permitted to fluctuate the way they are, investment will be slow and we are in for an over cautious 
economy standards of living with the continuance of rising costs, ultimately leading not only to 
recessions but a serious depression lurks in our midst. 
 
Yes, agricultural problems are in the main still with us. While there have been marked improvements in 
livestock prices, the grain farmer and the security of the small farmer or the family farm is still in 
jeopardy. Poverty has become a way of life for many Saskatchewan farmers as well as urban dwellers. 
Quoting from Wylie Simmons on poverty in Canada he says: 
 

35 to 50 per cent of all Saskatchewan farm families are listed as poor. This is caused by the fluctuation 
of yearly incomes. They are traditionally dependent on world wheat sales and a mishmash of 
Government programs. From 1931 to 1971 we have seen a mass exodus of family farmers and an 
exodus which shows no sign of slowing up or stopping. 

 
I am pleased to see that our New Democratic Government is taking some immediate steps to stop this 
erosion by giving a measure of security in providing funds to set up the Land Bank Commission. Beside 
stabilization we have orderly marketing in our well-organized public enterprise of the Wheat Board. The 
Wheat Board has initiated excellent sales of farm wheat over the years. The sale of all grains should be 
placed in the hands of this Board for the salvation of the Western farmer. 
 
New life must be injected into the transportation of grain as well as providing new and expanded 
terminals at seaports and inland. Much has been said about too few boxcars, impassable rail lines, no 
co-ordination in getting shipments of grain to our ports. I want to tell the House that I attribute the cause 
of this squarely upon our Ottawa Government as they are in complete charge. Why are they doing this? 
Chiefly to create the impression that the Wheat Board is at fault. With Trudeau in Ottawa, Richardson in 
Manitoba, Lang in Saskatchewan, they want to get the marketing back in the hands of private concerns 
such as the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. And you know who owns that. We are short of boxcars, let’s 
build more and give them to the railroads, we give them millions in subsidies each year anyway. Let’s 
double the capacity of our Hudson Bay Port at Churchill. Let’s double our capacity of terminals at the 
Vancouver Port. Let’s build large inland terminals on the Prairies for wheat where main railways 
converge. What would be wrong with 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
626 

a 25 million bushel terminal right here near Regina. How can this be accomplished? The so-called 
two-price system for wheat announced giving $3 a bushel on some 60 million bushels really gives the 
farmer only 13 cents a bushel. Applying it to average payment each farmer will probably realize around 
$300. Mr. Turner, the Wheat pool president said, I quote: 
 

This poor image of a two-price system is not what I visualize the two-price system to be. The method 
of payment chosen by the Federal Government makes it appear as a subsidy to farmers rather than 
consumer assistance. It doesn’t recognize the principle of a two-price system for wheat. It doesn’t 
make sense to make payments to producers of other grins and call it a wheat payment. 

 
Mr. Turner said: 
 

If a supplementary income is needed for other grains then it should come from other programs. 
 
The kind of two-price system I have advocated over this past seven years is the only answer, Mr. 
Speaker, to giving stability and a steady income year by year to the farmer. $3 per bushel, yes, but it 
should be given to the first 2,500 bushels of every farmer. This would immediately provide farmers with 
$7,500 annually from their first bushels sold. Sell other wheat at the present price up to a certain number 
of bushels and use a diminishing sliding scale for grains sold over and above other amounts. This will 
keep farmers on the land this will create means for our young people to go farming. This plan would be 
the key in giving the whole of Canada a continual measure of prosperity. We as a House should promote 
and adopt this plan. The programs approved over the past year such as LIFT and now this token of a 
two-price wheat program are mere chicken feed, and will continue to keep the Saskatchewan farmers 
slightly below or slightly above the poverty line. 
 
I also challenge the Ottawa Government to buy $250 million worth of grain and distribute if amongst the 
hungry of the world. I also suggest that those provinces that grow grain in Canada be asked to help share 
some of the cost. This would help the farmers of Western Canada and distribute much needed wheat and 
flour to the starving people. When you watch the streaming millions starving and dying daily surely we 
as Canadian citizens should have some compassion and make our rightful contribution. 
 
I had hoped the Minister of Agriculture would have reported what steps he had taken to work out plans 
as I had recommended last summer to see that our farmers were provided with holidays with pay just as 
the city workers, I hope to se hat pretty soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — I was pleased to see that the Provincial Treasurer placed moneys in the Budget to include 
free chiropractic treatment under our Medicare Insurance Program. While I am not the one to gloat in 
personal aggrandizement however I do say with some pride that my efforts in taking the lead to get this 
through the Legislature since the year 1965 have not been in vain. When approval was given in principle 
at that time it took a seven-year wait until the final results have been realized. It took a New Democratic 
Government to approve my request and have this 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
627 

come to fruition. 
 
Now that this has been accomplished my next priority as part of our New Deal will be to promote with 
vigour a free dental care program for our children. 
 
The 15 per cent increase on food for welfare recipients is appreciated. But we must admit much more 
money is needed to bring them above the poverty line. Ottawa must also be prodded to provide more 
welfare assistance in this regard. We should press Ottawa to change the Old Age Security Act and the 
Canada Pension Plan so that men in Canada can retire at age 60 and women at age 58 if they wish. This 
would make way for jobs for our younger people and for thousands now unemployed. I look forward to 
many changes over the next four years as well as rectifying the damage done during the last seven. 
 
Those things I am concerned with in my constituency and close to home include: the establishment of 
our own board of governors for the Regina campus. Complete autonomy is needed now for our Regina 
University, if we are to get maximum results for higher education and proper acceptance and sociability 
within our community of staff and students as well as giving proper status to our faculty members and 
our administrative body. I look forward to this being planned and done hopefully before the next 
semester. I strongly recommend that the cut of $3 million to $8.5 million for university construction 
should not apply to Regina campus. Between 10,000 to 12,000 students were to be here by 1976. Regina 
campus has been held back continuously because of more needed construction and also by the attitude of 
some of the board of governors and the president of the university. I would certainly request that the 
Premier have a good look at this and not cut back in university construction here but that it be 
accelerated. The space will certainly be needed. We must relocate and construct a new powerhouse to be 
located I would suggest near our lagoons northwest of the city as dual plant for steam and gas turbines. I 
shall press for this as it is needed and the relocation of our present plant is long overdue. A complete 
underground wiring system for Regina must be accelerated, according to the agreement when our city 
was forced to sell our power system which you all know I objected to most strenuously. 
 
I would ask the Government to have a feasibility study as to building a bridge between Winnipeg Street 
and Park Street as a connecting road to our University campus and the South Saskatchewan Hospital. I 
recommend that the Government restore the Territorial Government Administration building at 3304 
Dewdney Avenue, Regina, to its original structure and to be used as a public museum. This was the site 
of our territorial government as Regina was the capital of the Northwest Territories from 1882 to 1905. 
 
Other recommendations I would suggest are outside the city. First of all I would like to recommend that 
the Fort Sanatorium be retained as a home for senior citizens or as a nursing or special care 
establishment. I would suggest we embark upon a full-scale exploration program for natural gas and drill 
for it ourselves so that we become self-sufficient. A fully insured nursing home care plan should be 
initiated so those who need this care where we do not ask for more than their pension moneys. It is 
wrong to force them to sell and give up estates which were also helped and built up by other members of 
the family. A program 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
628 

of meals-on-wheels is a good plan to investigate and help those who want to remain in their homes. This 
should receive immediate investigation. We should prod our Federal Government to raise exemptions on 
income tax to $2,500 for single people and abut $5,000 for married couples. Tax cuts in this category 
would tangibly assist in encouraging expansion and would put more purchasing power in the hands of 
the workers. A $500 grant is given at present by the Provincial Government for new homes built in this 
Province. Hopefully this will be increased. I support an advanced program to provide money on a 
similar basis as grants on new homes for the repair and renovation of older homes in cities, towns and 
villages and farms throughout our province. This together with grants for new homes would be a great 
incentive to housing construction and repair and would create much needed employment. My time is 
running out, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to say that this is a sound Budget, a functional Budget and a 
Budget of security for many. I am sure that it will start getting our economy back on the rails. I support 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, just as the election of the New Democratic Government 
on June 23rd last was like a breath of fresh air so is this Budget brought in by our Premier, Allan 
Blakeney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — Before I get into the main comments of my Budget speech I want to take this 
opportunity to thank the people of Cut Knife constituency for showing their confidence in the New 
Democratic Party and re-electing me with an even larger majority than every before. And, Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of my constituents, I want to thank the Government for al the work it has done in my riding as 
well. The oiling of Highway No. 40 has been a tremendous boost to the towns of Cut Knife, Neilburg 
and Marsden and all the people who live along that route. Thanks also for all the Homecoming grants, 
the winter works grants, the grants to museums, particular thanks for the auditorium-gymnasium in the 
Maidstone high school which will be open soon and for the one now under construction in Neilburg. The 
ratepayers, teachers and students in the Lloydminster school unit have waited a long time for these vital 
educational facilities. Mr. Speaker, I know my constituents would also want me to thank this 
Government for removing the deterrent fees and for paying the Medicare premiums for those 65 and 
over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Budget now before us carries forth our major election promise to help stabilize the 
agriculture economy and to maintain the family farm as a way of life to be protected and cherished in 
rural Saskatchewan. Now, me of the Opposition have been condemning this Budget without offering any 
reasonable alternatives. The Opposition’s financial critic complained that we were spending only $1.9 
million more on agriculture than last year but he very slyly failed to mention the $10 million set aside 
for the Land Bank program. 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, if any program is strongly supported by the farmers of Cut Knife 
constituency, and no doubt all farmers in 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
629 

Saskatchewan, it is the Land Bank because the Land Bank brings with it a totally new and refreshing 
approach to land transfer and tenure. When the Liberal Opposition condemn this program they condemn 
the family far, they condemn father to son transfers and they condemn the smaller farmer to living in the 
big city and going ton welfare and unemployment insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ownership of land is really a myth, when one looks at what has really happened to our 
farmers in Saskatchewan over the years. Many of our farmers came from foreign lands to homestead in 
Saskatchewan because there was land available at reasonable rates. The main goal of many of them was 
to own land as time went on with the continual reduction of the price the farmer received for his 
products and the continual increase in the cost of production, some economists suggested that farmers 
were inefficient and urged them to buy more land and bigger machines in order to make ends meet. This, 
Mr. Speaker, many farmers did by borrowing huge sums from the Farm Credit Corporation and other 
lending institutions and this caused inflated land prices. As a result, one generation of hard work found 
hundreds of farmers perhaps owning that homestead quarter but heavily in debt trying to pay off the 
other quarters. And so we have the father in the predicament of having to get enough cash out of his 
farm on which to retire in decency and his son waiting in the wings wondering how he can raise the 
necessary capital to pay his dad and then wondering how in the world he would ever be able to pay off 
his huge debts within his life-time. Mr. Speaker, our land tenure system became archaic and the debt of 
one generation was passed on to the next generation with no hope of every paying it off. This system 
works well for the landing institutions. The benefit to the farmer is questionable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, our Government is bringing forth the Land Bank to help solve some of these problems. 
This program guarantees security of tenure without ownership. It will allow the father to be paid out at 
an negotiated price. The son will get first priority to lease the land without having to go to a lending 
institution to borrow large sums to pay off his father. The son will have the option to buy at a later date. 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers in my constituency are extremely optimistic and many keep asking if the 
legislation is already passed. And I have had people of all political beliefs admit that the Land Bank is a 
good idea. 
 
Members of the Opposition are saying that there is nothing in this Budget for the farmer and they will 
vote against it. Are they saying, Mr. Speaker, that they will vote against the $10 million for the Land 
Bank? Are they saying, Mr. Speaker, they will vote against the $150,000 to explore and develop new 
market techniques for our farm products? Are they saying they will vote against our program to detect 
crop insect outbreaks, so we don’t have another situation like the Bertha armyworm? Are they going to 
vote against the $400,000 assistance to milk producers in the province? Are they going to vote against 
doubling farm business management courses, the courses that are so popular among the farmers? Are 
they going to vote against an expanded crop insurance program which will add rapeseed and flax? Mr. 
Speaker, the Opposition have already indicated plainly that they are against all these vital programs and 
that they will be voting against them. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
630 

Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely amazed and happily amazed at the way the Premier who is also Provincial 
Treasurer has managed the financial affairs of our province to date. He has brought in major tax 
reductions. A total of $23.4 million will be paid out in property improvement grants for homes, farms 
and small businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — In no case will the grants be less than the previous homeowner grant. For many the 
grant will be an amount equal to 13 mills of assessed value up to a maximum assessed value of $6,000 
for a home, $10,000 for small business and $15,000 for farms. Now let’s take a quick look at what this 
would mean to an average one section farmer. If the assessed value of land quarter was $2,500, total 
assessed value for a section $10,000. Take off 13 mills and you get a tax saving of $130 for that farmer. 
Mr. Speaker, this is twice as much as the Liberal Homeowner grant and, Mr. Speaker, if a small business 
was assessed at $10,000, of course, he too would receive $130 a year tax reduction. 
 
Now one of the reasons our New NDP Government is able to bring about this fantastic reduction in 
property taxes is because we will be revising the tax and royalty rates on our mineral resources and we 
shall net some $6 million in new revenues. This is just another example of NDP action when it comes to 
getting more from our resources which duly belong to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — And, Mr. Speaker, this is an area of taxation that the previous Liberal Government 
wouldn’t dare touch because most of their campaign funds come from the huge international companies 
who really rule the old line Liberal and conservatives anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that our Government will be establishing a new Department of the 
Environment. The need to protect our land, air and water is being more obvious every day. We have 
gone through the mercury pollution of our Saskatchewan River system and you all recall the notices on 
fishing licences saying that fish from the Saskatchewan River system should not be eaten. We all know 
that DDT, that marvellous insect killer approved as harmless by world organizations such as WHO, has 
entered all the waters on this earth and we know that DDT has been found in fairly high concentration in 
penguins in the Antarctic and in livers in polar bears in the far North. We know that DDT slows down or 
kills the tiny microorganisms called plankton which releases about 70 per cent of the earth’s supply of 
oxygen from our oceans of the world. And we can see where that will lead. And what about adding, for 
example, such poisons as fluoride to our water system. Do we need any more, more pollution of our 
water systems? We have all heard of the Regina air pollution survey just completed last month which 
has determined that 70 per cent of the pollution in Regina’s atmosphere stems from motor vehicle 
exhausts. Most of us are familiar with detergents that contain high levels of phosphates that are dumped 
into our lakes. This leads to massive growth of algae and waterweeds. Beaches are fouled by rotting 
plant material. Desirable fish species die from lack of oxygen because decaying 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
631 

algae has removed oxygen from the water. The end result, stagnant lakes and streams and eventual death 
of man. 
 
We are also aware that industry is a major polluter of air and water. Pulp mills and chemical plants are 
our major industrial polluters. But, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned that our farmers too have become one 
of our major polluters, some knowingly, others are totally unaware. Pushed by fancy advertisements and 
chemical companies they use mercury to treat their seed. They spray with 2-4-D and other chemicals 
and these chemicals do not decompose and are simply washed into the land and into our major water 
systems. And we know that 2-4-D has an active killing effect of from five to eight years. Chemicals like 
stilbestral are being injected into beef to stimulate hormones and produce extensive weight gain. But do 
we really know what effect this chemical has on us humans who eat that meat? And one could go on and 
on. I am not blaming the farmers. I am just saying we need research and we’ve got to inform them and 
get our farmers to see that all of these techniques may mean a quick buck but at what cost in horrendous 
and in unknown side effects on mankind. 
 
Pollution controls must be improved in our oil industry as well. I have had the opportunity to witness an 
oil spill from a wildcat well in my constituency in the Battle River valley. A most unbelievable 
experience. I have seen a pipeline break and flood most of a quarter section with heavy, gummy crude. I 
have witnessed huge black clouds emitted from open pit burning of slag near the outskirts of 
Lloydminster. I have witnessed the result of a tank load of salt water being dumped from a truck that 
was stuck in a farmer’s field and nothing now is growing for an acre around that sterilized area. 
 
All these things are going on in Saskatchewan today. When the Saskatchewan Department of the 
Environment is set up it will have a terribly important job to do. It will need the support of every citizen 
in Saskatchewan if it is to do an effective job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that many small businessmen are looking forward to our program for them. I am 
pleased that a Business Assistance Branch will be set up to provide management advice and direct grants 
and loans to our small town businesses. In many aspects the small independent business is the only true 
free enterpriser left in the world today. He really has to compete for his business dollar and does not 
hold the monopoly of price fixing as the major chain stores do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to take a minute to compare the Liberal Budget of 1968 just after an election 
year with our Budget today just after an election year. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Black Friday… 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — Let’s take a look at that Budget. Receipts from mineral resources declined in 1968 
by $1.4 million. In 1972 under a new Government up $6 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — In 1968 the Liberal Budget raised the Education and Health tax from 4 to 5 per cent 
and that included hotel rooms, 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
632 

meals of $2 or more, all forms of telecommunications, total tax increase in that alone was $12,250,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shame! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — In 1972 and an NDP Government and no increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — In 1968 the Liberal Government introduced deterrent fees of $2.50 a day for hospital 
and $1.50 for a doctor, increase $7.4 million. August 1972, NDP Government fees and deterrent fees 
abolished. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — The 1968 Budget of the Liberals, gasoline tax up two cents, increase $8 million 
taxation. In 1972, this Budget no increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — Increased fees for operators’ licences, registration of passenger vehicles, school 
buses and farm trucks in the 1968 Liberal Budget, total increase $2.3 million. Mr. Speaker, the total 
increase in the taxation by the Liberals in 1968 was about $35 million. All in all, Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberals in seven years increased or added some 1,400 fees and taxes. Compared with our Budget, Mr. 
Speaker, we have given the people of Saskatchewan a reduction of approximately $35 million. Now, 
that’s performance and I am proud of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, because this Budget brought in by Mr. Blakeney offers so much to the 
people of Saskatchewan in meaningful programs, like $11.4 million for public works to create jobs, 
increased spending in tourism, a sound agricultural program, a major breakthrough in reduction of 
property taxes to 13 mills, in education a $166 million budget, room for 850 more students in technical 
institutes in Moose Jaw, Saskatoon and Regina, the abolition of the Grade Twelve departmental 
examination fees saving Grade Twelve students $100,000, 11.7 per cent increase in university spending, 
$12 million more for operating grants to school boards, almost $1 million for loans and bursaries to 
include technical students, and in the field of health inclusion of chiropractic care, and in other areas the 
elimination of the tax on meals of $2.50 or less better know as the Hotdog tax, and many, any more 
programs. Mr. Speaker, I am confident that this Budget will set Saskatchewan back on the road to 
economic recovery. I am proud to be part of this dynamic Government, a government that truly believes 
in carrying out its program and a New Deal for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, as you can readily tell from my remarks, 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
633 

I will be supporting this Budget with enthusiasm and with confidence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to begin by extending my best wishes to those 
Members elected to this House since we last met. And my best wishes for the speedy recovery of Mr. 
Steuart, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Opposition will be pleased to know that I do not intend to quote from the Bible this 
Session. They apparently find the language of St. Peter offensive. A Liberal friend in Davidson said, 
“Don the next time you quote form the Bible, you’d better tell them.” I think this person was right. 
Otherwise, it is very difficult to explain why the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) should 
misquote and distort my words in the Liberal newspaper. I don’t get angry too often but when I hear of 
the taxation of the sick, the taxation of cancer patients, the taxation of mental patients’ estates defended 
and excused by Members opposite, it makes me angry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I make no apology for being among those who express my anger through 
the words of the Bible. If it’s good enough for St. Peter, it is good enough for Don Faris. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I ant to take this opportunity to thank the people of Arm River for electing 
me. 90 per cent of the voters in Arm River turned out to vote, the highest turnout in history, and when 
they all turned out they elected the first New Democrat in the history of Arm River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — It is a privilege to represent this important area of the province which lies as it does 
between Diefenbaker Lake and Long Lake. It is in the centre of the agricultural portion of 
Saskatchewan. The people are friendly and hardworking. Many ancestries are represented, with 
Scandinavians in the West, Croatians in the North, Anglo-Saxons in the centre and Germans in the 
South, Arm River is a rich mosaic of cultural traditions. But Arm River has many problems. Lying as it 
does between Regina and Saskatoon, there is a tendency for these larger centres to drain the lifeblood 
our of our rural service centres. I consider it my duty as MLA for Arm River to see that this central 
region of the province gets a new deal and a fair deal. I have told the elected leaders of all of the 
communities of my area that if they have a reasonable request to ask of the Government I will support 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the people of Davidson feel that they have received a new and a 
fair deal. The people of 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
634 

Davidson were very upset to see that their town was being by-passed by the former Government without 
any adequate provisions for proper entrances. The Liberal plan was for one entrance to Davidson. 
Davidson is a town that has established itself uniquely as the halfway house, a historic coffee stop half 
way between Regina and Saskatoon. That one entrance would have meant the loss of up to 30 jobs 
which depended on highway traffic. What upset the people of Davidson even more was that they had a 
promise from the Liberal Government that the highway would continue through Davidson until there 
were four lanes. This promise was contained in a letter sent by the Minister of Highways to the former 
mayor of Davidson and dated July 26, 1966. the letter reads and I quote: 
 

Attorney General Heald has brought to my attention representations made to him by the citizens of 
Davidson and area to delay the bypassing of Davidson when we rebuilt No. 11 Highway. In view of 
the fact that the four-laning of No. 11 Highway in the Davidson area appears to be some years in the 
future, I am pleased to advise that we are now prepared to locate the new road on the present site 
through Davidson. Ultimately, as you can appreciate, it will be necessary to bypass Davidson when the 
four lane program is carried out. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Davidson could understand an eventual bypassing. They could understand it 
if all the option has been fairly studied. They could understand it if they were assured of adequate 
entrances. They could understand it if the promise to keep the route through Davidson had been kept. 
Mr. Speaker, none of these things were done. I want publicly to thank the new Minister of Highways 
(Mr. Byers) for taking action to correct the situation as best he could by providing proper entrances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — And I want to express my appreciation to the mayor of Davidson, Harry Edom and Dr. 
Hildebrand and the Chamber of Commerce for their co-operation. They played a major role in 
presenting the needs of the community. I should also like to thank Mayor Parks of Craik and Lou 
Dupuis, president of their revitalized Chamber of Commerce for their work in outlining improvements 
to the entrances to Craik. And I must add that I was very pleased to see the improved entrance to 
Aylesbury. Community groups and locally elected officials have been of great assistance in determining 
these communities’ needs and desires. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, lest the Hon. Members opposite doubt that this is a New and better Deal for 
the people of Arm River – just an isolated incident – I refer them to events just one year ago. At that 
time just before the Winter Games the former Government callously bypassed the towns of Aylesbury, 
Craik and Girvin at least six months before necessary. In January 1971 I wrote a letter to the then 
Minister of highways. My letter stated and I quote: 
 

This decision to bypass the towns has harmed all the 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
635 

small businesses in these communities. These businessmen have served their communities and the 
travelling public faithfully for years and should have been able to look forward to some trade from 
travellers to the Winter Games in February. The old highway would have served very well this winter. 
What we have now is a half finished highway with inadequate entrances to these towns. These 
communities deserve more consideration than this. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — What reply did I receive from the former Minister of Highways? No reply. No reply until 
the last session when he described my letter as impudent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, oh. 
 
Mr. Faris: — The Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) considered it impudent to be reminded of the 
damage that he was doing to small businessmen of Aylesbury and Craik and Girvin. It is difficult 
enough to keep a small business going without having to fight a Highways Minister who brands any 
protest as impudent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, the people of these towns have told me that they appreciate a Minister of 
Highways who will at least listen to their point of view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, we haven’t solved all the problems in Arm River. I wish to draw the 
attention of this Assembly to the great need of the rebuilding and hard surfacing of Highway No. 15 
from Kenaston to Simpson. This road which is called a highway was built to the earliest grid road 
standards in the early fifties. It is narrow and dangerous as it was built to 40 mile an hour standards of 
that time. This stretch of road is 36 miles long, hard-surfaced roads needed on both sides. For seven 
years there were surveys. For seven years the dust flew. If surveys and promises were pavement then all 
36 miles would be hard surfaced by now. How many miles do you think were rebuilt and hard surfaced 
in those seven years? Well, it wasn’t 36 miles, it wasn’t 36 inches. It was zero, zero miles, zero inches. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, shame! 
 
Mr. Faris: — I urge the Members of this House sometime to look at the provincial highway map. They 
will find Highway No. 15 hard surfaced across the province except for this 36-mile strip of gravel. I am 
pleased that this year will see the completion of the first eight and a half miles being rebuilt, a contract 
Mr. Byers, the new Minister of Highways let soon after the election. Apart from that there will be a 
year’s delay for legal and financial arrangements to be made as the former Government I have been 
assured did not have any of this road in their highway program until 1973. I am urging an acceleration of 
this program 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
636 

and I intend to report progress on Highway No. 15 to this Legislature next year. I am also arranging to 
have John McJannett and Pete Sagen, two of the community leaders in the area provide the Minister of 
Highways with a ceremonial wheelbarrow ride upon completion of this highway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, until this moment Mr. McJannett and Mr. Sagen were not aware of this 
coming historic event and upon completion of the Session today I intend to contact them to negotiate 
whose wheelbarrow will be used and for what distance. I have specified a wheelbarrow because if 
Highway No. 15 isn’t fixed soon they may come down to Regina with a front-end loader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank this Government for the jobs they have created in Arm River 
this winter and the few facilities that will result. As the Premier mentioned in the Budget speech winter 
works grants towards a new $100,000 gymnasium at Imperial, a $200,000 civic centre at Davidson, 
museum renovations at Craik, a repair depot for the R.M. of Loreburn are just a few examples of a new 
and better deal for Arm River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — The Budget Speech mentioned another item with which the people of Arm River will be 
pleased. This is the announcement of the establishment of camping and picnic facilities at Lovering 
Lake. During the election we raised the issue of guaranteeing public access to this beautiful, crystal clear 
lake. This objective will be achieved and in addition this Government is prepared to spend some $35,000 
this year along to develop the facilities at this lake. In addition there will be greatly increased tourist 
facilities along Diefenbaker Lake. Over $55,000 will be spent in Danielson and Douglas Parks, an 
increase of over $40,000 from last year’s budget. This will particularly help the towns of Elbow and 
Loreburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several areas of my riding which I should like to see given the opportunity to 
have natural gas. I realize that the more heavily populated areas must be served first. Therefore, I 
propose firstly to ask the Minister-in-Charge of the Power Corporation to give serious thought to 
including the towns from Simpson to Bethune in the areas served by natural gas. I am sure this matter 
requires some study but I should like to see it in the program for 1973. 
 
A further area of concern is the fate of the irrigation area. I have met on many occasions with the 
irrigation farmers. They have condemned the former Government for the band-aid approach to their 
problem. We need a clear-cut irrigation policy. I was pleased to see that the Budget included provision 
for onion storage facilities at outlook. This area will only find its proper economic base when it is 
involved in intensive specialized uses. I await with interest the report of the irrigation committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another item that I wish to bring to the attention of the House is a problem related to the 
public health 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
637 

programs. A family in my riding has been faced with enormous expenses, some $80 per month due to 
the fact that their newborn baby had internal deformities. Now if this baby had external deformities there 
would be a program of financial assistance to help them. I would like to see this program changed as the 
distinction between these deformities seems to me to be unfair and works in some cases great hardship. 
Mrs. Berne Schmidt, our very excellent public health nurse in the area was able to find another way to 
help in this instance. But such cases are more common than we think and such help is limited. 
 
I have shown that this is a good Budget for Arm River. It is also a good Budget for the taxpayer. I want 
to give you an example of what the Property Improvement Grant will mean to a few families in my area. 
In Hawarden it will mean this. The grant on his house in town assessed at $4,500 will mean $70. The 
grant on his farm $125, a total grant of $195. To a small businessman in Imperial it will mean this: The 
grant on his home will be $78 and the grant on his business $117, a total grant of $195. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — In eight months of action the new Government has done the following for one retired 
couple in my area. They are retired in town. They rent out the farm. The man has cancer. The grant on 
the home will be $70. The grant on the farm will be $125, the savings on the Medicare premiums will be 
$72. Their savings on deterrent fees will be $180. The total savings will be $447, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, these eight months have meant a New Deal and a good deal for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, the Opposition financial critic has called the Budget a poor cousin Budget. 
He complains because our Premier is tough and smart enough to get more money out of Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — I want to ask the Members opposite a question and it is this: Where do their loyalties lie? 
The people of Saskatchewan know that for generations they have been like a cow that got its feed kin 
Saskatchewan and is milked in Ontario. They know that for generations they have had to pay high prices 
for goods produced behind the high tariff protection that we all give Ontario industry. The people of 
Saskatchewan know this. They have known it for generations. How is it that the Liberal Members don’t 
know it? They must know it. Then I must ask them again: where do their loyalties lie? The answer is 
clear. They lie with Ottawa Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
638 

An Hon. Member: — . . . Otto Lang. 
 
Mr. Faris: — Yes, we all remember Mr. Steuart saying that they were all going to get behind Mr. Lang 
and this is how they got behind him. I can hardly believe that anyone who puts loyalty to Saskatchewan 
first could attack the Saskatchewan Government for getting too much money from Ottawa! But that is 
what they have done. They call it a poor cousin Budget. I call their reply a cry-baby criticism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — They are complaining because Mr. Blakeney is tough and smart enough to do what he 
said he would do, get a better deal, a New Deal for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I left my home at Davidson this weekend to come down for another week, as I 
backed out the driveway I looked up at our front window. In that window there were three heads with 
wide eyes. There was Tinker the cat and Paul and March my two sons. I couldn’t help but ask myself 
why I was coming down here. If I had my preference I’d rather be at home with them. I would rather 
take them skating. I would rather sit down each night and talk to them about the things that bewilder or 
frighten a six or two-year old. But I know why I am here. 
 
It is because there are things in our society that bewilder and frighten me. There are things in our society 
that I don’t want to be there in my sons’ world. I don’t want to tax mental patients and I don’t want 
farmers driven off the land. And there are things that I want for myself and my sons. I want an economic 
system that gives the little guy a break. I want a Saskatchewan where a man can make a decent living for 
a decent day’s work. I want our rural life, which is perhaps the most fully human existence on the face 
of this earth, preserved and strengthened. I want a society where men are free and equal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, because this Budget takes steps in that direction I am proud to be here and I 
am proud to support this Budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.L. Cowley (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to take part in 
this Debate. 
 
I should like first of all to take this occasion to thank the people in the Biggar constituency for the 
confidence which they placed in my be electing me last June 23rd. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — On that historic day for Saskatchewan, I along with the other Members on this side of 
the House, were elected to get a job done. That job was to make our program outlined in the New Deal 
for People a reality. 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
639 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget represents a giant step in that direction, and I am proud to have a part in its 
implementation. 
 
Before turning to some of the specific proposals contained in the Budget I should like to comment on a 
couple of statements made by the Liberal Opposition Budget critic, the Member for Albert Park (Mr. 
MacLeod). 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Where is it? 
 
Mr. Cowley: — I don’t know it is pretty small and it is hard to find. 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — I got more votes than the guy from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, in yesterday’s debate near the end of his address he stated that he was not 
proud to have our province reduced to the status of a beggar. Earlier in his address he had suggested that 
the NDP will continue to ask for welfare payments from other governments. They are his words, not 
mine. 
 
I was most surprised, I shouldn’t have been I suppose, and angered by his statements. I was surprised 
because I didn’t believe that any Member of this Liberal Legislature would be so ill informed. I was 
angered because nothing could be further from the truth. If the Member was in possession of the facts, 
and he should have been, then one can only deduce that he ignored reality in search of political gain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have paid through the nose since this 
Province came into being because of tariffs designed to protect Eastern Canadian industrialists. I ask the 
Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) if he calls them beggars. Does he refer to them as being on 
welfare? 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers in Saskatchewan have paid through the nose because of the Federal Government’s 
cheap food policy. They have been forced to buy in a protected market and they have been forced to sell 
in Canada and on the world market at depressed world market prices. It is only recently that we have 
seen the introduction of something called, but only vaguely resembling, a two-price system. Was this 
passed on to the consumer? No. It was passed off as a subsidy to farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reality it is a subsidy to consumers. But does the Member opposite call consumers 
beggars? Does he refer to them as being on welfare? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have paid through the nose in the form of high freight rates 
which are patently unfair to Saskatchewan. We have paid because of concessions to the railways and in 
particular, to the CPR. We have helped to pay off the debts incurred by the Federal Government 
financing that railway. Does the Member opposite refer to the CPR as a beggar? Does he refer to the 
CPR as being on welfare? Mind you, if you take a look at their record in grain handling they should 
maybe be fired and placed on it. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
640 

The Member for Albert Park referred to the Premier of British Columbia as screaming about 
equalization payments going to other provinces. I would remind the Member opposite that this is not an 
unusual activity for British Columbia’s Premier. I would also remind him that Premier Bennett shouldn’t 
scream too loud. A good part of the reason for his province’s prosperity is business generated there 
because of Saskatchewan purchases and Saskatchewan products passing through it. 
 
“Saskatchewan, a beggar province.” That is an odd way for the Member from Albert Park to put it. His 
colleague, the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) followed him yesterday and he stated that the 
increased equalization payments were the result of the hard work done by the former Premier, Ross 
Thatcher, and one Mr. Dave Steuart. And if that is true, and if they agree with one another then I can 
only conclude that the Members opposite consider their new Leader, the former Treasurer Mr. Steuart as 
the greatest beggar of them all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I support the principle of equalization payments. They are a necessary 
part of our federal system of government. They serve two purposes. On the one hand they help to 
equalize opportunities, and on the other hand they help to make up inequities which arise because of 
other government policies such as tariffs. They also serve to help regions which are faced with 
short-term recessions like seven years of Liberal Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak in this debate about the Property Improvement Grants 
mentioned in this Budget. 
 
During the election last June we as a Party, and I in my constituency promised to reduce the mill rate for 
school purposes to an average of 25 mills across Saskatchewan, based on an equalized assessment. The 
Liberals said that it could not be done. It would bankrupt the province, it would mean increased taxes 
and all sorts of glom and doom was predicted. The average mill rate in Saskatchewan was 43 mills. So 
we were talking about a reduction of 18 mills. Mr. Speaker, in our first year of office we have reduced 
the mill rate by 13 mills as a result of the Property Improvement Grant and the very substantial increase 
in school grants which will allow the average mill rate to remain at 43 mills in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — And where are the tax increases that the Members opposite talked about? Well, there is 
an increase in taxes on the potash companies. I wonder if they are objecting to that? There is an increase 
in royalty revenues from the oil industry. I wonder if they object to that? There is a reduction in taxes - 
the hotdog tax goes. Mr. Speaker, what has happened is that we have gone 13 mills of the 18 mills 
which we promised and there are no tax increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
641 

Mr. Cowley: — In my constituency most of the ratepayers will be paying 25 mills or less for education 
as a result of these two programs in the Budget. 
 
I want to give you three examples of what I class as typical constituents. In the first case — a farmer 
with six quarters of land assessed at $18,000 and with the school mill rate at 38 mills. In 1971 he paid 
$684 in school taxes, less the $70 Homeowner Grant for a net tax for school purposes of $614. In 1972 
he will pay the same school taxes in all likelihood, receive a Property Improvement Grant of $195 for a 
net of $489. That is a 20.4 per cent reduction net taxes paid. 
 
Another farmer with four quarters of land and a house in town with a total assessment of $11,000. His 
net school taxes are reduced from $348 to $275, a 21 per cent reduction in net taxes paid for school 
purposes via the mill rate. 
 
A businessman with a home assessed at $2,000, his business at $10,000, his net school taxes are reduced 
from $386 to $300, a reduction, Mr. Speaker, of 22.3 per cent. No tax increases, reductions in the mill 
rate like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Property Improvement Grant represents a giant step forward in reducing school taxes 
on property. A promise made and a promise kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — I want to turn to another area, Mr. Speaker, which affects particularly my constituency 
and that is the Department of Highways. 
 
I noted with interest, the Opposition complaining bitterly that the capital expenditures for Highways is 
being held at last year’s figure of $45 million. I am confident, however, that under the present 
Government we shall see more miles of highways built this year than last with the same budget, because 
of good management. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they were great planners. Highway No. 14 from Perdue to Biggar was planned 
every year from 1965 to 1971. If the stakes that their surveyors planted had roots we would have a forest 
worthy of a pulp mill on either side of the highway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — They put on a great show, but their crews were so busy leaving the constituency after 
the 1964 election that they never even bothered to finish the stretch of highway between Perdue and 
Hawoods Corner on Highway 14. Mr. Speaker, I am confident that we can do better dollar for dollar 
than they ever did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the budget for the Department of Agriculture which is particularly 
important to my constituency. The Opposition Budget critic complained yesterday that it was too small. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can agree that I should like to have seen a larger budget for Agriculture. I 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
642 

don’t think that any of the Members here would disagree that there are many fields in which we could 
have spent more money. But I want to remind the Members opposite that it represents a 10.5 per cent 
increase over last year. And it has associated with it an item of $10 million in capital for the Land Bank. 
 
Now if money is to be usefully spent then the plans for the spending of that money must be laid well in 
advance. I believe that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) and the Cabinet have acted wisely in 
not bringing forward programs for which adequate planning had not been done. I look forward in future 
years to further substantial increases in the Budget for the Department of Agriculture. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that not all financial benefits to Agriculture attributable to this 
Government show up directly in the Budget. The Members opposite continue to accuse us of having 
killed the Federal Liberals’ Grain Stabilization Bill. We accept the credit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — I noticed, with interest, one or two of the Members over there cheering when the LIFT 
Program was mentioned by a Member on this side of the House yesterday. I can only conclude from that 
that they must have been city Members. Anyone out in the country would know better. 
 
I would like the Members to look at the facts regarding the Grain Stabilization Income Bill. Farmers 
would have received a one-shot payment of $100 million and a Stabilization Plan which would have cost 
them 2 per cent of their gross sales and likely returned them nothing for several years at least. Along 
with this, the Temporary Wheat Reserve Act would have been wiped out, and wiped out retroactively. 
Farmers lost $100 million and the Members opposite continually remind us of that. But they saved 2 per 
cent of their gross grain sales. They received $62,116,018.42 from the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act 
for the 1970-71 crop year. The $73 million final payment was in no small way attributable to the 
retention of the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act. 
 
Recently a so-called two-price system was announced which will pay out some $60 million. There is no 
one on that side of the House who will convince me that it would have come along if the Stabilization 
Bill had passed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are told — and I hope we can believe, and I am sure the farmers of Saskatchewan hope 
they can believe — that this isn’t a one-shot program, but a permanent program on the part of the 
Federal Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Add up the figures — lost $100 million, gained $62 million, part of $73 million, $60 
million and the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act and the two-price system should return benefits to 
farmers year after year, after year. Not a bad deal for farmers! 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think from those figures one can deduce why 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
643 

the Party on this side of the House opposed the Grain Stabilization Bill and why we feel there have been 
some financial benefits to farmers from that act on our part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to another area in the field of agriculture, the Land Bank. The Land Bank is 
not a solution to all the problems faced by Saskatchewan farmers. It is, however, a sincere attempt to 
provide farmers of Saskatchewan with an alternative method of acquiring land to farm. I don’t see any 
great financial advantage to being a farmer leasing land. Neither do I see any financial penalty. The land 
payments for the farmer purchasing land will necessarily be greater than the lease payments because the 
farmer will have to pay the principal if he is paying for the land. I grant he ends up owning the land, but 
if the lease operator puts the difference in the bank at the same interest rates, the two would end up with 
the same amount of money in ten years, 20 years or 40 years, as long as land prices remained constant, 
and they might go up and they might go down. So, Mr. Speaker, what I am trying to say is I don’t see 
any great disadvantages financially or any particular great advantages financially from the Land Bank. 
Why then do we have a Land Bank? 
 
Let me give you an example. We have a young man whose father is 45 year old, he saves some money 
and he can purchase a line of equipment. However, his father has his own land tied up and the young 
man has no collateral to allow him to borrow enough to purchase the land through the Farm Credit 
Corporation. The Land Bank is his opportunity to start farming on his own. Mr. Speaker, that’s whom 
the Land Bank is designed to assist, not particularly the farmer who at present would have no trouble in 
buying the land through the Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rents have been criticized as being too high. They are supposed, as I understand it, to 
reflect fairly the cost of purchasing the land. If the rents are too high it will either be because the land 
prices are inflated or because farm incomes are too low. I repeat, however, if a farmer can afford to buy 
the land he can afford to lease it. Not even a Liberal mathematician can make the lease payment larger 
than the land payment. The approach taken by the Liberal Party to the Land Bank will not help to create 
an agency to serve Saskatchewan farmers, nor might I add, will it help to establish the Liberal Party as a 
credible alternative to this Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should not like to turn to the field of Education. Yesterday, the former Minister of 
Education (Mr. McIsaac), the Member from Wilkie, criticized this Government for its failure to provide 
for more capital construction on the University Campus. There are two reasons for this, Mr. Speaker. On 
the one hand it is necessary that we know a great deal more about what the costs will be once these 
buildings are constructed. You don’t just erect buildings you also have to staff them and put programs in 
them year after year. Secondly, we cannot afford expensive duplication of facilities and I am sure that 
even the Members opposite, in the light of their comments, would agree with this. We need to have a 
plan of what our two campuses should look like 10 years from now. Unfortunately the Members 
opposite didn’t leave us one. Either they didn’t have the courage to make the decision or else they didn’t 
have the initiative to draw one up. We simply can’t continue to fly by the seat of our pants. Until the 
planning is done it is absolutely necessary that there be a go-slow policy or we should be doing a 
disservice to the taxpayers of this Province. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
644 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to spend a few minutes also on grants to school boards. You will note, and I 
noted with pleasure, and I am sure the public will be pleased with it, that there was a substantial increase 
in grants to school boards from under $80 million to over $90 million. I am firmly convinced that this 
will be enough to prevent the average mill rate in the province from rising and it may, in effect, bring 
about a decrease. I am also pleased to note that there will be a formula under which the grants will be 
paid out. What his means, of course, is the restoration of autonomy to school boards. The former 
Minister didn’t use a formula, maybe he wasn’t a chemist, I don’t know. He and his Government used 
the grants to force school board into line. 
 
If a board hired more teachers than the Minister thought appropriate, they were threatened with a 
substantial decrease in their grants. The new formula removes the pupil-teacher ratio. School boards will 
know how much money they will receive from the Provincial Government and from local taxes. They 
can decide their spending priorities, how many teachers they can afford and, if necessary, they can vary 
their mill rate accordingly. The Department of Education will no longer restrict the number of teachers 
they hire. How boards spend their money will be their decision. There will not be, nor should there be, 
Mr. Speaker, the heavy-handed approach used by the previous Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to spend a couple of minutes reviewing the proposed community College 
development in Saskatchewan. A community college should be a place where you can improve your 
skills in work and in doing things you would like to be able to do well. It should be a place where you 
can learn to be more effective in all the roles you play such as a family member, an organization 
member and a concerned citizen. There is an increasing need and desire for continued learning under the 
conditions of modern life. Also local communities are more than ever affected by events and decisions 
at provincial, national and international levels. If people of such communities are to influence decisions 
affecting them they must understand the forces at work and know the means by which they can make 
their voices heard. 
 
Traditionally the greater part of the educational system has been focused on the young, from primary 
school through university. This emphasis has tended to overlook the fact that learning continues 
throughout life. The need for learning may indeed even become greater as one advances into and 
through adult life. Learning does take place through experience, reading, listening, viewing, discussions 
and through participation in various organized activities. The opportunity for adult learning in a 
systematic way has not been great, particularly outside of the larger centres. The need for adults to gain 
additional information and skills from time to time has largely been overlooked, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan. It is this gap in the educational system which community colleges are designed to fill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see this development in Saskatchewan and I am pleased to see that under 
the leadership of Mr. Gordon MacMurchy, it is well underway. Mr. Speaker, I am also extremely 
pleased to see that under his leadership there has been a very definite emphasis placed on the role of 
community colleges in rural Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, unless we can take the community 
colleges to rural Saskatchewan 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
645 

they are not going to play the role which I am sure all Members of this Assembly hope community 
colleges will play in this Province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to deal very briefly with one other item and that is the Winter Works Program 
or the Local Initiatives Program which was carried on this past winter by the Federal Government and 
which was supplemented by a program of the Provincial Government. Now the Members opposite have 
berated the Provincial Government’s program, but I should just like to point out that in my constituency 
if it hadn’t been for the provincial program there wouldn’t have been any Winter Works Program. All of 
the programs in my constituency were turned down by the Federal Government, but fortunately three or 
four of those programs were picked up by the Provincial Government. Without the provincial program 
there wouldn’t have been any Winter Works in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I should like to comment on a couple of statements which emanated from 
the Members opposite in this debate yesterday. The Budget critic (Mr. MacLeod) yesterday commented 
that the industrial sector of the economy should subsidize other parts of the economy, I presume through 
the provision of government services. I could wholeheartedly agree with that. But he went on to say that 
an industrial sector does not exist in Saskatchewan. I repeat that the Member said an industrial sector 
does not exist in Saskatchewan. That’s a sad commentary on seven years of Liberal Government. I 
wonder if his colleagues agree with him. Unfortunately, under the previous government the rest of the 
economy subsidized the new industries. One only ahs to examine the proposed pulp mill and the 
agreement involving it to see this. Perhaps the Budget critic should not have been so quick to disavow 
being a Conservative. He doesn’t sound as if he is too closely akin to the former Liberal Government. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I should like to add my congratulations to those of the other Members to the 
new Members sitting with us, the Member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) and the Member for 
Morse (Mr. Wiebe). I should also like to congratulate the new Ministers on their appointments, Mr. 
Thorson appointed as Minister of Industry and Commerce, where I am sure he will do an excellent job 
for the Province of Saskatchewan, and Mr. Brockelbank, whose constituency borders mine, and who 
will be working with us in Saskatoon-Biggar to re-elect Alf Gleave, who will I am sure be a credit to the 
Government of Saskatchewan in the new Government Services Department. 
 
I should also like to congratulate the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) on his election as 
Liberal Leader and Leader of the Opposition. I hope that some of the Members opposite will carry my 
congratulations to him. I tried to sit down last night and graph out the fortunes of the Liberal Leader 
from last June 23 rd to the next election. You know when you draw a graph you get a curve and this one 
turned out to look something like a slide on a playground. The high point was his point as Provincial 
Treasurer. On June 23rd he went down and then came the leadership race and you know there is a little 
turn up at the bottom of the slide and up he went. Still up in the air. I want to remind him that the last 
part of the ride is the hardest part and it comes in June 1975. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
646 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be a part of the Government which brought in this 
Budget. I want to commend the Provincial Treasurer and the Premier, the Hon. Allan Blakeney, for the 
excellent job which he has done. 
 
Mr. Cowley: — I am sure that my constituents are pleased with the effort that has been made to 
improve Government services and at the same time the hard work on the part of the Provincial Treasurer 
to keep taxes down and provide a level of tax reduction on the mill rates for school purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you may have gathered from my remarks, I will be supporting the motion. 
 
Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the Member who just sat down he should 
take a little more time in writing out his speech so that he would be able to fill the radio time and not 
repeat the last five minutes of what he said the first five minutes. 
 
It is indeed surprising, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) still hasn’t told us 
what the Land Bank is and he has left it up to the teachers to tell us what the Land Bank represents. The 
Member from Cut Knife (Mr. Kwasnica) and the Member from Biggar Mr. Cowley), both teachers, 
spent practically all their time telling us what the Land Bank represented… 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — . . . and the concern about the farmer. I want to tell this House and particularly these two 
teacher Members that the farmers aren’t very much concerned today. The wheat is moving, barley is 
moving, beef and port prices are good. The concern of the province today is teacher-salary negotiations 
and at no time did they even mention the teacher-salary negotiations. When they were the Members on 
this side of the House they had all kinds of recommendations to make about how the Government should 
run the Department of Education but the teachers today have not even mentioned the problems that the 
boards and your Government is facing. 
 
Now in regard to the Home Improvement Grant, the Member from Biggar says, “We have already 
reduced the mill rate by 13 mills.” Now according to the Premier this is a falsehood, absolutely false, 
almost a deliberate lie when you look at the Budget Speech by the Premier on page 24 he says this, and 
he is honest about it. “A total of $23.4 million will be paid out of the program during the year 1972-73, 
almost double that paid under the Homeowner Grant of the Liberal Government.” So if this is a 
reduction of 13 mills these two programs, the Homeowner Grant represents more than 50 per cent of that 
reduction but they would like to tell the farmers of this Province, the taxpayers of this Province, that 
they have reduced the mill rate by 13 mills. 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
647 

The Member from Biggar also said that teacher-student ratios have been done away with. I find that hard 
to believe when you look at the Estimates of 1973, and on page 67 University of Saskatchewan – 
operation. Here is a reduction of staff of 35. Why the reduction at the University? 
 
The Member from Arm River (Mr. Faris) mentioned a few things about Highway No. 15. He should go 
to the Minister of Highways and he will find that Highway No. 15 was included in the program of the 
Liberal Government before June 23rd. But he doesn’t know this, he hasn’t consulted. He mentioned 
about the letter that he wrote to me regarding the bypassing of the smaller communities in the year of 
our Homecoming. Well you know that it wasn’t very long before that that there was a very severe 
accident around Craik very close to his home where a family was killed. People in that area were 
anxiously awaiting for us to open up the new highway. I suppose the Member for Arm River didn’t 
consider the danger of the old highway. But when I received the letter it was signed by Dr. Faris. I didn’t 
know who Dr. Faris was. It was a very arrogant letter and I didn’t feel that it deserved answering nor did 
the officials of the Highway Department. 
 
The Cut Knife Member (Mr. Kwasnica) also mentioned, and he went back to 1968, on tax increases. 
The number of tax increases and he had to had to go back to 1968. Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 
come forward to 1972 and talk about the tax increase that this Government is imposing upon the people 
of Saskatchewan. And when I look at page 6, education and tax increases will be roughly $4 million; 
gasoline tax will be $5 million; mineral tax from $2.8 million to $6.5 million; and increase in liquor 
profits of over $3 million. I imagine that they are hoping to get that form the 18 year olds who will not 
have the privilege of entering liquor stores and beer parlours when the Bill has been passed. 
 
I want to make a comment on the former mayor from Regina. I believe he represents the Wascana seat. 
He again came out with his 13 point welfare program. Only this time I think it was 13 times 13. All 
Henry wants is a good pension plan and an early retirement and I hope the people of Regina will give 
that to him very shortly. 
 
I should like to say a word to the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). The day before the Budget 
was presented the question was asked by the Hon. Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) what about 
the 175 teachers who face dismissal from the University faculty and the cancellation of some of the new 
buildings on the drawing board which were cancelled only a few days ago. The answer he gave then was 
that the Budget would provide ample funds for the University. We will just have to wait until next day. 
 
Well, for the benefit of the Minister of Education, budgets are being discussed long before the day the 
Premier, in this occasion, presents them to this House. And the University knew what kind of budget 
they were getting. But the Minister said everything will take shape after March 10th. 
 
I have a news release here from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, issued on the day the Budget was brought 
in and on the third page it says: 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
648 

Faculty furious with Budget. 
 

The University Faculty Association, Thursday, blasted the Provincial Government and the University 
Board of Governors in the current Budget crisis. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

The Association almost unanimously criticized the Government and the Board of Governors for not 
negotiating early enough to prevent the great and unnecessary hardships now facing a considerable 
portion of the faculty. 

 
But the Minister of Education said after the Budget all things will become well again, all the teachers are 
going to be hired and the buildings that were on the planning board are going to be started with. This is 
not the case according to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I consider the Budget, the 1972 Budget, the greatest welfare Budget in the history of 
Saskatchewan. When we look at the increase in staff in most departments we come up with a grand total 
increase of around 500, and I use that figure loosely. It could be closer to 800, of new permanent 
positions as compared to last year’s estimate. Oh, the Premier mentioned that a few temporary positions 
had now moved to permanent positions, but this in no way guarantees that they will not appoint or hire a 
whole rash of people to fill temporary positions. The increase in the Civil Service must be the greatest 
job creating industry this Government can muster. Yet the increase in staff is not nearly the total picture. 
What about all the additional staff required for the dozens of commissions and boards the Government 
intents and has announced and will announce it will set up. 
 
The Land Bank is an example. We shall be asked to approve a grant to the Commission of $640,000 in 
this Budget, but we are not told how many positions will be required. By my guess it would be that there 
would be in the neighbourhood of 40 to 50 people employed in this branch alone. All these 
Commissions and Boards could easily add up to another 400 or 500 additional staff, increasing the 
public service personnel by 15 per cent in the first year of the NDP New Deal and I am not including 
any Crown corporations in this percentage. 
 
Let us take a look at some of the departments with major increases. Agriculture 22. The outspoken, 
ill-advised Attorney General, his Department will be increased by 33; the Education Department, headed 
by a dirt farmer, needs an increase of 97; Government Services, formerly the Department of Public 
Works will have 65 new positions, to inform I suppose, the public why there are no capital expenditures 
in his Department. Industry and Commerce will have 49 more people added to its staff. I suppose they 
will be needed to figure out how to tax existing industry out of the Province. The Treasury Department 
will add 37 to its staff. The three lawyers have done quite well for themselves. With rather small 
Departments they have received the lion’s share of staff percentage increases. Then, of course, Welfare 
tops them all with a total of 196 new positions. I had always thought that this Province was 
over-governed, but this Government is out to police every single individual and control him in thought, 
speech and deed. 
 
One of the very few pleasant surprises of the Budget to us is the fact that the highway budget was not 
cut by $20 million 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
649 

as you have stated so often in this Chamber you would do if you formed the Government. The Highway 
Department was the most severely criticized Department from Members opposite when we were the 
Government. All kinds of deliberate falsehoods were spread around the country where you questioned 
the integrity of the highway officials, the Minister and every contractor. I watched the tenders advertised 
and I want to commend the Department officials for having convinced the new Minister in the 
Government that the Department’s long-range program adopted over a period of four years is a good 
one, as you are proceeding with it fairly closely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — As the Wafflers have stated there is no change in the Highway Department except that 
you’ve got a new sign. The Highway budget, the capital budget is in fact reduced although it does not 
show so in the Estimates. Your maintenance costs will increase by $2 million, mainly to offset rising 
wages and to maintain more high quality miles of road, but a $45 million capital Highway program will 
not go as far this year as will previous year because of increased costs so the contractors will have less 
work. Because of your pre-election utterings a good number of contractors have sold out and a number 
have left the province. The highway contractor, in my opinion, is a tremendous asset to the province and 
I hope that confidence will be restored with that industry. 
 
Now for the benefit of the teachers in the Government I should like to turn for a moment to the Land 
Bank Commission. $640,000 is earmarked for administration. $10 million will be advanced to purchase 
land. If this program is to put young people on the farm the Minister cannot expect to purchase a viable 
unit for less than $50,000, more likely such a unit would cost $75,000. Even at $50,000 the Minister is 
looking at about 200 farmers, or an average of about five farmers for every rural constituency. 
 
But let’s look at the administration. The administration of this commission is just so top-heavy that it 
scares me. If we were indeed able to buy out and resettle 200 farmers, by your own figures, Mr. 
Minister, you are estimating the cost of such a transaction of about $3,000 per unit. That’s about $2,800 
more than the mean old, some dirty old lawyers would charge for an agreement of sale and a transfer of 
title. This is what you call efficiency. $3,000 for one transaction. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . you said it. 
 
Mr. Boldt: — Well you got $640,000 for administration. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . we got more money . . . 
 
Mr. Boldt: — You have, you have time to speak and to tell us how you are going to spend that 
$640,000. You still don’t know. If land allocations are to be made, as was the case under the old CCF 
Government, particularly under Tobie Nollet, you will then have about 20 land commissars buying out 
the efficient socialist and resettling socialists, if that is possible. The CCF-NDP Land Branch of 
pre-Liberal Government years was nothing more than a political propaganda machine for the NDP. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
650 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — And the conduct of this Government since June 23rd does not seem to have changed its 
philosophy. Politics still is a very important role with the present Cabinet. 
 
The Property Improvement Grant is nothing more than a continuation of the Homeowners’ Grant. The 
Liberal Government initiated this program, with the NDP Member opposing the legislation. The rural 
municipal associations endorsed this program only a few days ago at their convention. The Liberals 
promised to increase the Homeowners’ Grant to a minimum of $100 per year. The farmer who needs the 
assistance most is the three-quarter section farmer, he in most cases will have less than a $6,000 
assessment so the Premier has promised that he will receive no less than $70 but under the program as 
announced by the Premier he will not receive $80, $90 or $100 as would be the case under the former 
Liberal program. 
 
This province is also intended to give the small businessman a real shot in the arm. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
he needs a lot bigger shot in the arm than a mere $130 maximum he might receive under the Property 
Improvement Plan. This might repay two or three per cent of the cost forced upon him by this 
Government under the hours of work and the minimum wage regulations. Small businesses, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan, would far rather forego this measly grant of $130 in exchange for the privileges 
they enjoyed before the Government dictated to him as to when he may open and close his shop. This 
grant is peanuts to the businessman and in no way do I see this grant making the individual business a 
success. 
 
It appears now under this high cost Government, or the Welfare State, every sector of the economy must 
be assisted by government. Nowhere do I see in this Budget, any encouragement whatsoever for 
industry to come to Saskatchewan. Nowhere do I see in the Budget that the Government is to embark on 
a wide range of smaller industries. All you hear about is setting up commissions to study the problem. 
What is even more discouraging about this Budget and capital programs are away down from previous 
years. Not one new building for construction on the University campuses. Had the former Government 
not proceeded with its high capital works program at these campuses before you took office you would 
not even have jobs to complete the work that has been started. 
 
Government capital expenditures will be down by $4 million. The Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation advances are down by $ million. And it is highly unlikely that the $8 million 
to be advanced will be needed. The Saskatchewan Municipal Financing Corporation is down by $5 
million. These four corporations’ reductions are down by $15 million, making it possible to shift $10 
million to finance the Land Bank Commission. However, the Land Bank Commission is not intended to 
create new jobs, except for the commissars who will be administering the program. 
 
It is also interesting to note that the NDP interest in the construction of homes on a massive scale for our 
native people faded away after they became the Government. How they used to sob and cry for the poor 
Indian and the Métis in his hut when they were in the Opposition, particularly the Member 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
651 

for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes).He had a great heart for the welfare of the Indian. Look at this 
Government which claims to have such a sympathetic heart for our native people. When last year the 
Liberal Government spent $480,000 for the construction of houses for sale or rental to people of Indian 
ancestry, that Budget this year is exactly $480,000, not one cent increase. You fellows out there are just 
a bunch of saintly hypocrites when it comes to Indians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — One of the most extraordinary admissions of this Government’s failure is the size and 
magnitude of the Welfare Department’s budget. It feels, it is necessary to cope with the increasing 
number of people added to the welfare roles, the alcoholics, the drug addicts and the NDPs wanting 
handouts. 
 
The expenditure of this Department will increase from $50 million to $66 million for an increase of $16 
million. If you deduct a federal contribution the increase to the Province cost is from $29 million to $39 
million or an increase of 25 per cent in welfare. I know what is happening in the Welfare Department. 
This Government and its predecessors have preached since 1944 that the state owes everybody a living, 
well or sick. 
 
When I became the Minister of Welfare in 1964 I fond out that it was not the Department’s officials’ 
fault for the many abuses that had been going on for years, but rather the Ministers and the Government 
in power. No votes were to be lost for the sake of issuing a welfare cheque was the slogan in those days. 
Inside of two years with the support and approval of the staff when I became the Minister in 1964, by 
1966 the welfare rolls were reduced by 25 per cent. The Premier stated in his address the other day that 
the welfare rolls had increased by 35 per cent. The Government has no alternative but to increase the 
staff of the Welfare Department because 30 to 40 and maybe 50 thousand people, not including the 
natives on reserves, are committed to remain on welfare for life in the Province of Saskatchewan under 
the socialists. 
 
Surely, if you had confidence that your philosophy and political would create jobs your welfare budget 
should in fact be reduced. But no, it is increased. 
 
No one in his right mind in Canada will deny assistance to those in need. All people are concerned about 
the unfortunate, not just the NDP, but let me tell this Government and the Federals that more and more 
people are getting fed up with the able bodied free loader who has no intention of working nor 
supporting his family. The Federal and the Provincial Government must share equal responsibility. 
Unemployment insurance benefits and welfare cheques are metered out in multi millions of dollars as if 
money has gone completely out of style, while farmers and industry cannot hire help and are forced to 
buy bigger implements and mechanize the industry cutting off more and more jobs that will never be 
replaced. 
 
These slogans of free education, free health, free dental care, free rides and free meals must surely and 
sanely only apply to those in need. Unemployment Insurance is not for those who decide to take time off 
from their jobs in winter to have a holiday. Unemployment insurance benefits and welfare cheques are 
becoming larger every year, so that wages in many 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
652 

instances, cannot compete with these schemes. 
 
I must agree with the Minister of Welfare in British Columbia, the Hon. Phil Gagliardi who reported in 
the Western Producer on March 9, 1972 and I read from the article — it has quoted Mr. Gagliardi as 
saying in the past Mr. Gagliardi has complained about the number of dead-beats, those who he considers 
too lazy to go and get jobs and the transients, especially the long-haired type who are on BC’s welfare 
rolls. Now some of our longhaired fellows in this Chamber here are not welcome, according to Gagliardi 
in British Columbia. 
 
Let me say a word about the farm economy, Mr. Speaker. The financial position of the farmer is much 
better today than it was a year ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — but there is no way that, there is just no way how the socialists in Saskatchewan can take 
credit for that. Not one red penny of the farmers’ income has come from the NDP, not one cent. Indeed 
if the socialists were not around the farmers would be much better off. 
 
The hours of work and the minimum wage have added costs to the farmer, directly and indirectly. The 
farmer’s source of income is directly related to the success and the efficiency of the Canadian Wheat 
Board. If they can sell grain the farmer benefits and if grain sells usually the price of beef and pork is 
also good. 
 
I want to give credit today to the Minister in Charge of the Wheat Board for selling more grain than the 
railways can handle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — I have always maintained that subsidies, rents or even a two-price system doesn’t mean 
as much to the wheat farmer as an extra two-bushel quota. Otto Lang has finally got some bugs out of 
the Wheat Board officials. Had the Federal Liberals fired Wheat Board Commissioner McNamara five 
years ago we would have very few grain surpluses today. There are still some problems with storage and 
the railways to our Western ports. Constructing another railway will not solve the problem when nature 
controls many factors in the movement of grain. The answer I believe is a storage problem. If storage 
were increased at the West Coast railways could operate at full capacity when hazards of nature are not 
threatening. These problems will be tackled and solved hopefully very shortly. 
 
I hope when the Prime Minister calls an election, Saskatchewan will send a good number of Liberals to 
Ottawa to represent Saskatchewan on the Government side. God forbid that we send incompetent 
arrogant socialists from Saskatchewan to Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — This Government has shown that they can spend money all right, if it is given to them by 
seven years of good 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
653 

Provincial Liberal Government and from the Federal Government. We have enough of the welfare state. 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure it is obvious to you that I will not support the main motion. I therefore move, 
seconded by my colleague from Milestone, Mr. MacDonald: 
 

That all the words after “That” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

This Assembly deeply regrets that this government has completely ignored the need for industrial 
growth and development to eliminate high unemployment and has sought solution to this problem by 
massive increases in welfare spending. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 
 
Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, last Friday afternoon our Premier and Treasurer of the 
Province introduced the Budget for 1972. The largest Budget in the history of the province and a 
balanced Budget. A because which has been very carefully planned and thought out with one main 
object in mind, and that is to implement our election policies and province which in turn will introduce a 
New Deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am sure, Mr. Speaker, it is only natural that all Members look at a budget in the terms of just what does 
it contain that will be of benefit to their own constituency. As an individual I am very interested in my 
own constituency and its progress. But as a Member of Government one also has to realize that you are 
working as a team or group to formulate and introduce legislation, setting aside sums of money to be 
used for the betterment of the province in general. I am sure that this Budget will change the slump that 
we have fallen into in the past few years and will once again start the wheels of our economy rolling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pepper: — My concern, Mr. Speaker, is that each constituency shares equally in the economy of 
our province and that every citizen has an equal opportunity with its advancement or its improvements 
regardless of their religion, their profession, their nationality, their colour or their creed. And this 
Budget, Mr. Speaker, is one that is based on the needs of all its people and I believe will give our people 
this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have decided to gear my remarks to and how this Budget is going to have its effect on the 
economy of our province, chiefly in the field of agriculture. Because I believe, Mr. Speaker, if 
agriculture is not given its rightful place as top priority, the wheels of progress will grind very slowly. 
 
At the current Legislature Session many important pieces of legislation relating to the agricultural 
industry will be and have been introduced. At the top of the list is the Land Bank Commission. We are 
convinced, Mr. Speaker, that a Land Bank will be a major asset to the family farm in Saskatchewan. We 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
654 

are at the same time providing much needed assistance to younger farmers and to allow them to develop 
an economically viable family farm unit. It will be arrangements advantageous to farmers who wish to 
pass on their farm from father to son. But, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that it won’t be of any 
advantage to the large corporate farm. 
 
The Hon. Minister of agricultural (Mr. Messer) was met with an overwhelming response from the public 
as he travelled around the province in January, holding public meetings dealing with the proposed 
program. I believe in all there were 11,000 people who attended the 13 meetings. The meetings enabled 
the Minister to get a first-hand assessment of his proposals and at the same time involve the public in 
building the legislation to best serve the needs of the agricultural community. But despite this, the 
Liberals went boldly ahead and announced that they would vigorously oppose its implementation. You 
would think they would learn something after their defeat in last June’s provincial election. Obviously 
they haven’t because they are still convinced that behind the Land Bank lies a dark and sinister plot to 
take away the land from the farmer. Even the Federal Liberals have endorsed the principle of a Land 
Bank. I think someone should give the message to the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West and his 
colleagues sitting in this Provincial Legislature. 
 
Price stability in feed grains is another issue of major importance to both livestock and grain producers. 
In the last few years both farmers and operators of feedlots have been hampered by the uncertainty 
produced by major price fluctuations in feed grains. For this reason we are introducing legislation to add 
greater price stability in the marketing of feed grains. 
 
We are planning to construct veterinary clinics and also provide for inspection of all feeder cattle and 
hogs sold at auctions. This will help maintain the high quality of beef and pork produced in the province 
of Saskatchewan and I cam sure it will also give added protection to the consumer. 
 
In this Budget there are provisions drawn up in legislation to help the dairy industry by providing grants 
to encourage the production of manufactured milk. We hope to provide greater stability to the incomes 
of dairy producers and keep the smaller producer in business. In some areas of our province this industry 
is very important and I am pleased to see this Government is giving dairy producers consideration. 
 
Surface rights legislation is another area in need of revision. The Weyburn area is a major oil producer, 
but as you will know, Mr. Speaker, very little of the wealth remains here or even in the province. Higher 
provincial revenues are definitely needed to compensate for the loss of this non-renewable re. 
Legislation to provide a fair method of compensating farmers for their surface rights will also be 
implemented. Perhaps at a later debate I may have more to say on this legislation. 
 
I have mentioned a half dozen aspects of Saskatchewan agriculture which will be covered in the current 
Legislative Session and which have been covered in the Budget. However, we still need to go further, 
Mr. Speaker,. While the Land Bank Commission will be a necessary first step to improve the economic 
and social structure of rural Saskatchewan there is still a need for Federal assistance in order to check 
the 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
655 

decline of our rural communities, to stop the exodus of citizens from this Province and to ensure that our 
family farms achieve economic viability. 
 
I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, that our task would be much easier if agriculture were purely a 
provincial responsibility. Unfortunately the Liberal Government is doing almost nothing to help western 
agriculture. When they do come forward with programs aimed at the agricultural industry they find that 
almost in each instance, their proposals are inadequate and unacceptable to Western Canadian farmers. 
One only has to look at such programs as the LIFT program, Stabilization Bill, the Task Force Report 
and the Federal Land Bank scheme. I would have to say that the later is a perfect example of Liberal 
shortsightedness. While the Province Land Bank will limit the expansion of farm assets covered by the 
Bill to some “$60,000, the Federal scheme has no such provision. The effect of the Liberal plan can only 
add to rural depopulation and increased corporate farming. Though they deny it, Mr. Speaker, this is 
another proof that the Liberals are determined to eliminate two-thirds of our farmers off the land. I can 
only say, with friends like this, who needs enemies. 
 
One of the most pressing problems being encountered by prairie farmers centres on the movement of 
prairie grain to West Coast ports. While Otto Lang’s projection that the Canadian Wheat Board will sell 
some 800 million bushels of grain this year is good news, he doesn’t like being reminded that we are 
already 25 million bushels behind meeting our current obligations. The Wheat Board just signed an 
agreement last week, I believe, with Russia to supply up to 185 million bushels of wheat and flour over 
the next 18 months. Since 40 per cent of all wheat that was exported in the last crop year was shipped 
through West Coast ports the next year will probably see the greatest bottleneck of wheat in Canadian 
history. Then I believe it was just the other day a further omen surfaced with the announcement from 
Lang that shipping problems to the West Coast will probably mean a cutback in meeting our current 
commitments. I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not much encouragement from a Federal 
Government which has repeatedly done nothing to improve the handling system, despite suggestions and 
pleas from Western Canadian farmers. To show where Province Liberals stand on this critical situation, 
Mr. Speaker, one is only reminded of the various occasions when emergency debates are launched by 
our New Democratic Members to press Ottawa for greater action and to alleviate some of these shipping 
problems, rather than sharing our concerns, the Members sitting to your left, Mr. Speaker, prefer to 
either criticize our action or they introduce amendments giving praise to the Federal Liberal Government 
for its neglect, its lack of interest and lack of planning that the Government demonstrates towards our 
Western farmers. So you see, as I have heard the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) say before, a 
Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pepper: — Their persistent arrogance when it comes to discussing agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
continues to amaze me. 
 
I should like to briefly highlight some other aspects of the Budget Speech delivered in the Legislature 
Friday afternoon 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
656 

by Premier Blakeney. Replacement of the Homeowner Grant program, one which doubles the amount of 
money to be paid out in grants to property owners and includes small businesses for the first time, along 
with a heavy emphasis on agriculture, I think these must be considered as highlights. 
 
This, the first Budget of New Democratic Government since assuming office last June, is balance as I 
said earlier and the largest in Saskatchewan’s history. The speech is optimistic about the economy of the 
province which showed a marked upturn in 1971. Total estimated revenues are some $514 million, 
while expenditures are estimated at $513.2 million. Realized net farm income increased 876 per cent 
over the previous year. Livestock marketing of cattle, calves, sheep and hogs were all up. The gross 
value of mineral production rose $421 million over that of 1970. Retail sales, Mr. Speaker, of some 
$1,121,000 were 10 per cent above the previous year. 
 
The combined ordinary and capital budget of the Department of Agriculture amounts to some $18 
million an increase of 11 per cent over the estimate of last year under the former Liberal Government. 
The because Budget sets aside $10 million for the purchase of land and some $600,000 for a ‘start up;’ 
and operating expenses for the Land Bank Commission. Approximately $2.3 million will be spent on 
further development of irrigation works on the west side of the South Saskatchewan River project. 
 
Somewhere over $150,000 is provided to explore new approaches and develop new techniques to 
increase marketing opportunity. $400,000 is provided to assist in the development of an industrial milk 
processing industry. Grants amounting to 40 per cent of the estimated cost for construction of veterinary 
clinics, which I mentioned earlier, will be provided. Another $300,00 is allocated for expansion of the 
community pastures program. 
 
The crop insurance program is to be expanded to include all crop production areas of the province and 
will include the additional crops of rapeseed and flax. 
 
Now just le me mention, Mr. Speaker, at this time how pleased I am and I am sure that many of our 
citizens will be, when on April 1st the sales tax or the Education and Health tax will be removed on 
meals costing $2.50 and under. This tax, Mr. Speaker, was a tax implemented by the former 
government, a tax which again in most cases affected those least able to pay. I should like at some time 
to see it completely removed on all meals. But I have to say that if one can afford a steak dinner or 
whatever it might be in the area of $ to $7 range, I say he can afford to pay that extra tax as well. But, 
there are many of our pensioners and lower income families, our young students and our civil servants 
who have the occasion to eat out where their financial resources are very limited. These are the people, 
Mr. Speaker, who will reap benefit from this removal of the tax, and I am proud that our Government 
has seen fit to recognize them. 
 
When the history of our province, Mr. Speaker, is being prepared and noted achievements are being 
listed, I am sure that one of Saskatchewan’s greatest accomplishments will be the development and 
pioneering of hospital and medical care programs in Canada which took place under the former CCF 
Government. And from this Budget, Mr. Speaker, the Premier introduced it in 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
657 

this House on Friday, it will prove to me that our New Democratic Party intends to continue that 
tradition and will not be satisfied until this right of every citizen is provided for them and strongly 
endorsed. 
 
I was very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see the Alcoholism Commission is being given a greater assistance 
to provide the much needed treatment for those patients who require it. I am sure the opening of the new 
in-patient treatment centre in St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon will prove to be of vast importance and 
will increase the facilities to be provided for the use of the Alcoholism Commission and the treatment of 
those unfortunate people. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, so often as governments and as Members we place such strong emphasis on the 
standard of living that we should provide for our people in this province. This is very important, I grant 
you, but very seldom – and I emphasize this – very seldom, do we consider the standard of life itself, 
and I think this is equally important. By increasing our contributions substantially to this Alcoholism 
Commission and introducing a new program to assist the Native Alcoholism Council with its work is to 
be a very important step to improving the standard of life for many people and I am sure credit will be 
given to the Premier for this very commendable inclusion of it in his Budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are other things I suppose I could touch on at this time, but I think you will 
gather from my remarks that I am wholeheartedly supporting the Budget. I cannot support the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I was thinking here a minute ago as I was 
watching the opposite side of the House that I was going to compliment the Members opposite on 
returning to the Chamber because I noted that during the last one hour or so there has been a maximum 
of four out of 15 in their seats at any one time. I note that that has even got down to three out of 15. It 
seems that the Members opposite refused to listen to the people of Saskatchewan in June and they 
continue that kind of a policy today as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after listening to the Member from Arm River (Mr. Faris) in this debate I now know better 
than every before why so much work done by the former Government was so haphazard and confused 
and I should like to congratulate the Members from Arm River and Cut Knife (Mr. Kwasnica), Regina 
Wascana (Mr. Baker), Biggar (Mr. Cowley) and Weyburn (Mr. Pepper), on the excellent job they did in 
presenting their addresses today. Their words were a valuable contribution to this Legislature and are a 
pleasant and welcome contrast to the negative approach taken by the Members opposite. 
 
Now the Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) spoke of not answering letters written to him when he was 
Minister of Highways. I would suggest that he should search deep down within this conscience, Mr. 
Speaker, and re-assess his thinking and he may conclude that his very neglect was a display of the kind 
of arrogance that he spoke about. The Member from Rosthern also referred to the Welfare Budget. He 
spoke of an increase in 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
658 

staff in the Department of Welfare. Well let me remind him that it was the Leader of his political Party 
in Ottawa, Prime Minister Trudeau, who has forced people to go on welfare by intentionally creating 
unemployment in his lame-duck effort to stop inflation. And it is his Federal Leader who is 
responsibility for increasing welfare costs. He and his colleagues opposite have supported this kind of 
ruthless policy to the last letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a new Member of this House I have listened and watched with anticipation the 
proceedings. I must say that yesterday I listened with some degree of amazement as I heard the 
comments by the Members from the opposite side of the House as they struggled desperately in their 
attempts to find something in the Budget to criticize. 
 
Last Friday the financial critic closed off his remarks with the bold enunciation that the Budget was a 
poor cousin Budget, whatever that means. And I believe that the Member from Arm River explained 
only too well. Clearly the Liberal Members opposite are only interested in the Liberal Party and not in 
Saskatchewan. And after a whole weekend of research and toil at this speech, he began and closed on 
Monday with the same statements. 
 
And not to be left out, Mr. Speaker, even the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) got into the act, 
and I stress the word ‘act’. He is quoted in the Leader-Post as saying that Saskatchewan is destined to 
become the highest taxed province in Canada within the next four years. He would have preferred to be 
able to say so during the Provincial Treasurer’s Budget speech but the best that he could muster at that 
time was some comment about the distribution of the Budget to Members. Mr. Speaker, either he has a 
very short memory about the usual procedure of the former Government, of which he was a Minister, or 
he is trying to take advantage of radio time to distort the facts and mislead the public in the usual manner 
of the former Government. 
 
Now Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, proved last June that they were not so easily fooled but 
evidently the Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) is easier prey because it seems that he was 
convinced by his colleague on the Opposition front bench to the extent that he had to try and defend the 
actions of the former Minister of Welfare when he interrupted the Premier during the Budget Speech. 
 
The Member from Albert Park should read the Debates and Proceedings of the last seven years from 
time to time and see for himself how badly he was misinformed. To give one mild example, Mr. 
Speaker, the financial critic had all weekend to prepare his statement on the Budget this year, in 1970 
the present Provincial Treasurer who was the financial critic in that year had one day to prepare his 
reply. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Members opposite speak of increased taxes. Well I wonder why they don’t talk 
about the taxes which have been reduced or even abolished. They talk about increased taxes but they 
make no mention of deterrent fees which this Government abolished last summer and reduced taxes to 
the sick by $7.5 million. 
 
I wonder why they don’t speak of Medicare for our senior citizens provided to people over 65 years of 
age without payment 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
659 

of premiums. I wonder why they don’t talk of reduced taxes to those senior citizens who built this 
Province. A tax reduction of $3.5 million. And why do they choose to ignore the tax that they had 
imposed on the estates of mental patients which this Government removed last summer. A saving of 
$355,000. 
 
Now the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and the Member from Regina Albert Park (Mr. 
MacLeod) talk of increasing taxes. Well, Mr. Speaker, talk is talk, and I never hesitate to give credit 
where credit is due and I must say that they are very good at talking, but it is this Government that is 
removing the hot dog tax on meals of up to $2.50. 
 
The financial critic talks about robbing from Peter to pay Paul. He bewails the fact that this Government 
will be getting increased revenue from our natural resources. He doesn’t like it because he still believes, 
as all the Members opposite believe, as the former Government believed, that the old, the sick and the 
mentally ill and those who because of the nature of their work must eat in cafes, should be taxed so that 
the corporate friends of the Members opposite could be paid to come into Saskatchewan to exploit our 
resources. They believe that those least able to ay should be taxed so that our resources can be part of a 
big giveaway to corporate magnates of New York and New Mexico. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the 
resources of this Province should benefit all the people of Saskatchewan. The stress on increased 
revenues from resources are welcome and I must say, it’s about time. 
 
Members opposite may talk of increasing taxes. They may turn and distort the figures but their own 
record is still there and it is a dismal one. In 1968 along, despite the promises in the 1967 election to 
reduce taxes and hold the line, the former Government created the most massive tax increases in history. 
An increase in taxes which was a total cost to taxpayers of $38,000,000 in 1968 was announced on that 
Black Friday: 1. Sales tax was raised from 4 per cent to 5 per cent and expanded to include other areas. 
2. Deterrent fees were imposed on the ill. 3. Gasoline tax went up 2 cents a gallon. 4. Driver’s license 
doubled. 5. Car and school bus licenses went up 50 per cent. 6. Farm truck licenses doubled. And that is 
only a partial list, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am amazed, Mr. Speaker, when I hear Members opposite speak of increasing taxes. They still seem to 
be unable to accept the fact that the voters of Saskatchewan cannot be fooled. Unwilling to realize that 
last June the voters listened and acted on that Liberal record. Mr. Speaker, had the financial critic 
studied the financial statements of the Province of Saskatchewan covering the period of time from 1964 
when the Liberals took office to October 14, 1970, he might have decided to follow in the footsteps of 
Mr. Rock who the other day left the Trudeau party. Unfortunately he jumped out of the frying pan into 
the fire because I noticed he has joined the Conservative Party. 
 
Those records, Mr. Speaker, show the provincial taxes, fees and license charges which were increased or 
invented by the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan since 1964. During those dismal years the number 
of fees and taxes affected, Mr. Speaker, counts up to a total of 1,147 increases. 
 
And while they were doing this to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan they were giving away our resources 
with every kind of 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
660 

concession to corporations that they could find. I invite the Members on your left, Mr. Speaker, to 
compare that record to the record of this Government in the last eight months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the burden of taxation on property owners is a heavy one. Great inequities exist and action 
needs to be taken to correct them. In the fiscal year of 1969-70 Saskatchewan farmers paid $59,883,000 
in property taxes. Of this amount over $34 million was used to finance elementary and secondary 
education. The average total per capital property tax levied was $232 for farmers, $106 for village 
residents, and $165 for city residents. The education portion of a family of five was approximately $600 
for a farm family, $300 for a family residing in a village and $350 for those in cities. 
 
When farm income fell to bankruptcy levels, the property taxes still had to be paid. When the city or 
village or town resident was forced into the unemployment list because Prime Minister Trudeau, 
supported by the former Province Government, decided that the way to fight inflation was to create 
unemployment, he still had to pay his property taxes. This system of financing education is unjust. 
Education is a benefit to the entire province and nation and should be financed on the basis of ability to 
pay. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s examine the record of the former Government in this area of taxation. Let’s 
examine the record of those who seem to indicate such enlightened knowledge about increased taxation. 
Let’s look for example at the Yorkton Unit: 1965, 35 mills; 1968 up to 45 mills – 10 mills in three years. 
Let’s look at the Melville Unit: 1965, 34 mills; 1968 up to 45 mills – up 11 mills in three years. These 
are moderate examples. Let’s look at Yorkton City where between 1964 and 1967 the mill rate increased 
by 20 mills in three years or let’s look at the town of Lemberg where the mill rate increased by 22 mills 
in three years. 
 
Now the financial critic opposite suggested that this Government was passing the buck in education. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree. I agree that this Government is passing the bucks to school boards in the 
form of an 11.7 per cent increase in grants over the last year and an increase of 13.5per cent if calculated 
on a student basis. I agree that this Government is increasing operating grants to school board by $12 
million over the grant levels approved by the previous Government. The costs of education have 
increased and the increased grants presented in this year’s Budget will be welcomed by the taxpayers 
and school boards of this Province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s announcement in his Budget speech of the massive new program to provide 
grants for homes, farms and small businesses, the Property improvement Grants, will help ease some of 
the burden of taxation on the property owner. It will help some of the burden of taxation whether he be a 
homeowner, a farmer or a small businessman. No doubt the Members opposite, who pretend to be the 
friend of the farmer, pretend to be the friend of the small businessman, are going to vote against this –
Property Improvement Grant because there is no doubt about it that they will be opposing the Budget. 
 
The average mill rate for education in Saskatchewan for education purposes is 43 mills. The grant of 
amounts of money equal to 13 mills of assessment indirectly means a reduction to 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
661 

an average of 30 mills and is a major step in reducing the mill rate for education to an average of 25 
mills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals promised to reduce taxes in 1967, they raised taxes in 1968. The New 
Democratic Party promised to help the property owner and action is being taken on that promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The financial critic, Mr. Speaker, spent some time expressing his concern about 
the fact that construction at the University of Saskatchewan is down. He was strong and repetitive in his 
suggestion that some 100 university teachers will not be rehired this year. It is amazing how he and his 
colleagues to your left are able to make a political about face unmatched by any military drill on the 
parade ground. 
 
It was only two short years ago when the Members opposite were complaining about the varsity pupil 
ratio. I have here a news article from the December 22, 1970 edition of the Star-Phoenix where the 
headline reads as follows: “Varsity pupil ratio must rise. Thatcher.” 
 
The former Premier was quoted as saying: 
 

The University of Saskatchewan will have to sharply increase its student-teacher ratio next year if it 
hopes to get the normal grant. 

 
Now I am not suggesting that I agree with this, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to point out the inconsistency 
and the confusion of the Members opposite. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite had already forgotten their stand in 1970. The day when 
it was expected that all high school students had to get a university degree before they could be 
considered educated are gone. Education has taken on a far wider sphere. Young people are needed in 
greater numbers in the technical field. 
 
I am pleased that the Budget makes provision for a new Department of Continuing Education and I 
welcome the announcement of the provision of some 950 additional placements in our Institutes of 
Applied Arts and Sciences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see that our Government is taking major action to revitalize our rural 
communities. Over the past several years, rural communities have undergone very serious setbacks. 
Rural depopulation has contributed to the loss of business in our small towns. A serious loss of farm 
income has been a contributor to the closing of many businesses in small towns and villages. The more 
attractive opportunities and facilities in the city have been attracting our young people away from rural 
communities. Our Government recognizes these problems and major programs are being developed to 
meet them. 
 
The Land Bank will not only provide an opportunity for our older farmers to retire with dignity and 
comfort, it will provide an opportunity for young farmers to get started in farming and thus slow down 
and maybe even stop rural depopulation. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
662 

$10 million has been allotted in this Budget for purchase of farm and offered for sale. 
 
People in our rural communities will welcome the announced $2 million to continue the program of 
extending telephone service to previously unserved areas. People in our rural communities will welcome 
a new program in this Budget to enable towns and villages to apply dust-free surfacing to their streets. 
We must develop our rural communities and make them more pleasant places in which to live. 
 
This Government’s Winter Works Program to complement the program introduced by the Federal 
Government has helped create employment. It has also helped to provide much needed facilities for 
local communities — facilities which people today have a right to expect. 
 
The program has helped provide facilities for recreation, facilities to improve needed services such as 
hospitals, fire protection and community centres and facilities to promote cultural activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party promised to help small business people and programs will be 
provided to fulfil this promise. Small businesses have been included under the Property Improvement 
Grants along with homes and farms. This will help ease the tax burden which multiplied itself under the 
seven years of Liberal Government. 
 
Whereas the former Government concerned itself only with large corporate enterprises such as Parsons 
and Whittemore, our Government recognizes the importance of the small businessman and will be 
providing direct assistance within the Department of Industry and Commerce through the Business 
Assistance Branch. 
 
Our rural communities and the small businessman in those communities are essential to provide the 
services necessary to rural Saskatchewan. We must make very effort available to prevent Saskatchewan 
from becoming a province of a few large cities with vast empty stretches of land in between. This 
Province, Mr. Speaker, has a resource which is envied by almost every nation on this earth. We have 
some of the most beautiful expanses of land that can be found anywhere. Our waters are to a large extent 
not yet polluted as they are in most other parts of this continent. 
 
There is a potential in Saskatchewan for one of the most important industries in Canada. People across 
North America are begging for the opportunity to get away from the smog and begging for the 
opportunity to get away from the pollution in the overcrowded cities. 
 
The former Government seemed determined to destroy this natural beauty and this potential industry. I 
am pleased that our Government will be putting a great deal of importance in the development of our 
tourist industry. The provision of tourist facilities and the promotion of our province’s tourist attractions 
will make Saskatchewan a Mecca for millions of not only Canadians, but North Americans in their 
search for some relief from the over-organized, overcrowded, polluted cities of this continent. 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
663 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget presented on Friday is a blueprint for the prosperity of Saskatchewan. It is once 
again a Budget which will begin to put our province in the lead in every facet of government across this 
country and I submit that in years to come other provinces will once again follow our example as they 
once did before the Liberal Party took office in 1964. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Individual rights and human development will once again take on some 
importance. Our working people will no longer be abused and progress in labour relations will be made. 
Agriculture will be recognized for its importance not only to Saskatchewan, but to all of Canada. The 
property owner will be given a New Deal. Education and health are being given high priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after seven years of Liberal mismanagement and stagnation, after seven years of social and 
economic drought, after seven years of cold-hearted neglect of the basic problems of society, 
Saskatchewan is once again on the move. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, may I say that I am most impressed with the Budget and in the way that it 
was presented by the Premier and Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Blakeney). I can recall listening to Budget 
speeches of the past seven years which spent more time on petty politics and less time on the programs. 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker, this was the case because there were few programs to talk about. 
 
This Budget, as presented last Friday, is truly a people’s Budget and I congratulate Mr. Blakeney on an 
excellent job of preparing it and presenting it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I oppose the amendment and will most emphatically support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A. Taylor (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to take much of the time of the 
House in this debate. I know that will please some of the Members opposite who are always afraid to 
listen to the truth at any rate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Taylor: — I should like to take the opportunity of commending the Treasurer and Premier (Mr. 
Blakeney) on a Budget which has been designed to serve the needs and aspirations of all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In our local area of Kerrobert-Kindersley constituency there has been a good deal of pleasure already 
expressed about the Budget after it was revealed on Friday. They know that they are grateful that it 
appears that this New Deal will continue for some time. Just yesterday the Industry and Commerce 
Minister (Mr. Thorson) announced that a museum grant had been approved for the Kindersley Plains 
Museum, a museum which is an effort of people in the local area concerned with preserving their 
heritage. Concerned with preserving a way of life that 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
664 

is important to each and every one of us. A way of life that we will not sell out to big business or foreign 
countries. 
 
I should like to look at a few of the programs in the Budget itself. One can hardly start without 
mentioning first the Land Bank. Now it was said a little while ago, across the floor, that no one was 
interested. Well that is a rather amazing statement in view of the turnout and the attendance at meetings 
held throughout the province. I attended the meeting at Rosetown a few weeks ago, when the Minister of 
Agriculture (Mr. Messer) was there. Although I was about ten minutes early for the meeting I had 
trouble getting in the door. The hall couldn’t hold everyone that wanted to be there. 
 
Just about four weeks ago we conducted four Land Bank workshops throughout our constituency to get 
the feelings of our own people, for we want to be a representative government. In one of the 
constituencies that isn’t that large we have over 200 people attending. 
 
Now the Budget has set out $10 million for land purchase and $600,000 for operating expenses. Maybe 
if the Members opposite are not particularly interested, this should indicate that we at least take this 
program seriously. But there has been a good deal of confusion. I am not sure where it all comes from 
but one of my friends in the area who happens to be a good Liberal came up to me concerned about the 
Land Bank proposal. He was concerned about the proposal and he said, “The only thing that bothers me 
is the option to buy.” And I said, “Well what is wrong with the option to buy clause?” He said, “Well 
that means that the Government will own all the land.” It seems to me that this was good Liberal 
thinking. 
 
Now there is also in the Budget, a general increase which will be available for agricultural purposes, an 
increase that will show up in many fields. We are pleased, in our area, to see the crop insurance being 
extended to cover the whole province and to include the two additional crops, something we feel is 
necessary. We are very happy particularly in the north end of the constituency around Kerrobert, which 
has a good many farmers interested in cattle, to see that the Provincial Government will assist in the 
establishment of veterinary clinics by paying 50 per cent of the estimated cost of construction. 
 
I think the amount budgeted for Agriculture shows the importance to which this Government places in 
the agricultural industry itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Taylor: — This is why we considered the movement of grain, a good subject for an emergency 
debate in this House, because we think this is vital to the economy and welfare of our people. We feel 
this way particularly after the Government checked to see that there were alternatives available. And 
while Members opposite tell us there is no way to get from one track to another, the newspaper tells us 
that 100 cars when over that track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
665 

Mr. Taylor: — Now the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) made a statement I thought I would never 
hear in this House. A statement I thought I would never hear any Member on any side of the House ever 
say. He said that farmers aren’t concerned. I suggest that after the next Federal election he will see how 
concerned they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Taylor: —The Budget also promises assistance for small towns. In our constituency there are many 
small towns. Too many, almost, to consider individually in terms of listing them, but small towns that 
are literally fighting for survival, attempting to exist in a day of bigness and a day when men are being 
chased off their farms. It seems to me that the Budget is going to give them help. They will be happy to 
know that the amount being made available for dust-free surfacing of their roads will almost be tripled 
under the New Deal for people. 
 
Now this does a number of things, not the least of which will be to help maintain population and provide 
services without a vast increase in property taxes. I say it will help to maintain population. We have 
many elderly citizens in these communities who have difficultly in getting around, particularly in the 
constituency where I come from where we have some pretty sticky mud. They sometimes leave and the 
only reason that many of them leave is because they are shut in all during the rainy season or spring and 
they can’t get out. Most of them go to cities and when you talk to them afterwards you find they are 
anything but happy there. 
 
The towns themselves have wanted to make these improvements but the cost has been astronomical. 
They will look forward, I am sure, to receiving this kind of assistance. 
 
I mentioned during the Debate on the Speech from the Throne how happy I was to see that a small 
business branch would be established, and again I say this as it arises in the Budget. It is time that we 
considered more than just the large corporations which have all the borrowing power in the world at 
their fingertips, and give some consideration to the small man who is the only independent agent, who is 
the only real free enterpriser left in our society. This Government intends to assist him by providing 
management advice, direct grants and loans. This is all badly needed. 
 
The Property Improvement Grants will also assist the small town and the rural community. Every 
segment of society will benefit from it. I am not going to say much about this as it has already been 
covered adequately by most of the speakers. But I do want to say something about Welfare or what will 
be the new Department of Social Services. 
 
I am most happy to see that funds will be made available for an increase in staff. Mr. Speaker, it disturbs 
me when I hear Members in this House casting insinuations about the clients on the welfare rolls, 
suggesting that they are poor because they are lazy and they don’t want to work. What actually happens 
is that the Senate Committee on Poverty, although it didn’t do an awful lot it did set some facts straight. 
It says that three quarters of all poor families have at least one 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
666 

full-time wage earner. More than 60 per cent of low-income family heads worked in 1967. It says in the 
Committee Report that all evidence demonstrates that they are poor, not because they do not want to 
work, but in spite of working. 
 
The same Report also points out that 84 per cent of the people receiving welfare are incapable of 
working. That leaves only, in my subtraction, 16 per cent that are able to work. The Senators also said 
that the number of poor who try to beat the system is extremely small. They say that it is almost 
certainly less than 2 per cent. That is a pretty small failure rate. In my work I deal with people who are 
on welfare quite a bit of the time, people who need social assistance. One of the concerns that I have had 
is that under the previous Liberal administration the Department of Welfare was strangled literally to 
death. It wasn’t able to do the job it was intended to do. The job it was intended to do was not just 
provide handouts but to provide assistance to the families. The only thing that this stranglehold, is to go 
into the house, sit down, fill out the form and leave. I suggest that with a larger staff they can do more in 
assisting the families to find alternatives, to find a new direction when it is needed, for life itself. 
 
If I may say just a word about highways. The criticism has been levelled that it is stuck at $45 million. I 
think we will get more miles out of the $45 million than the previous administration. But I hope too that 
the new Minister will consider more the social need of the people in the area than simply the shortest 
route for long distance trucking. We have seen more farmland wrecked and destroyed by highway 
construction than by any other means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Taylor: — I would be less than honest if I didn’t admit that I hope in the Highway budget there will 
be some work for our constituency. We have been asking for it for a long time, for a good number of 
years for two highways, 44 and 330. We are looking forward to hearing the Minister’s report and hoping 
that he has something worthwhile to offer us. 
 
We are also happy about the removal of tax on meals under $2.50. It was rather a nuisance when 
children went to the fair to have to pay tax on their hot dogs or on their hamburgers, or on anything else 
that they bought. It also created a number of difficulties for charitable organizations putting on banquets 
at $1.50. but then everyone is taxed by the Liberals. 
 
I think one of the things that can be said of this Government, and I think it is one of the most important 
things, it concerns its approachability, the way it is available to the people who want to reach it. The 
Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) said that he did not reply to a letter from Dr. Faris because he thought 
the letter was arrogant and not work answering. In spite of the fact, he also admitted he didn’t know who 
Dr. Faris was. The letters he doesn’t like get thrown in file 13. Now, this isn’t an isolated case. Our 
school board wrote to the previous Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) about two years ago and never 
received the courtesy of a reply. Now, this wasn’t an individual, it was a school board. We didn’t even 
get a reply. Never has Saskatchewan seen such arrogance 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
667 

as was displayed during the seven years of wandering in the Liberal wilderness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Taylor: — This is one of the reasons that I think in spite of the figure mentioned, it’s good to see a 
hot line being established. I hope our Ministers will always show more courtesy than this. 
 
In the Throne Speech Debate, Mr. Speaker, I said that is was encouraging to note that it expressed pride 
and confidence in our province and our people. It promised programs that emphasized social 
responsibility and human values. It is obvious, Sir, that this Budget provides the means for carrying out 
these programs and I am happy to support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recess until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to congratulate the Premier, the 
Treasurer for the wonderful Budget that has been presented to this Province. I am sure that it is a 
progressive Budget. I think that by the time the people get acquainted with the New Deal for this 
Province which is only a few months old, the truths will be pretty well proven to this Province at the end 
of four years. I also want to congratulate the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) and the Member 
for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) for making their way into this House and also the Member for Prince Albert 
West (Mr. Steuart) for becoming the Leader of the Opposition. I am sure he is going to do his job the 
best he can. I must say I hope he soon gets back to the House. It will liven up the other side a little bit 
because he contributes quite well. 
 
I haven’t spoken in the debate of the Speech from the Throne so naturally I will continue a bit on 
congratulatory messages. I also want to congratulate the two Members in the Cabinet, the Member for 
Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) and the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank). Some might 
think Mr. Thorson is new in politics but I remember sitting with him in 1960. So he is not new to me. I 
am quite sure he will prove his ability to us before too long. I also want to congratulate the Member for 
Saskatoon Mayfair for being appointed as Minister of Public works. There again you have youth and 
ability. I want to congratulate the Premier for making such good choices for his Cabinet. 
 
I also want to say a few words about what has happened in the last years. I want to say a few words 
about the introduction of students in this Legislature. I can remember a few years ago, the then Member 
for Souris-Estevan got up in this Legislature and brought in a resolution that he didn’t want to be 
bothered introducing students any more, that it was a waste of time. I have been keeping time a little bit 
during this Session and it amounts to about two and a half minutes a day. If we cannot spend two and a 
half minutes a day to introduce a couple or three hundred students, the day that a Party starts to feel that 
it takes too much time to recognize these young people who sometimes travel 300 miles, I say you are in 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
668 

trouble. I advise every Member of this Legislature to pay special attention to these young people 
because they are going to be the Government before too long. We are only here for a time. I should like 
to point out that there are very few Members left who were here when I first came. Time goes very fast. 
I also want to point out that I am the closest to the door. I don’t know what that means. This could very 
well mean something, that I may not be back. But I have been told that I wouldn’t be back every election 
that came along. The last time I was elected, I was elected to represent two constituencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Melfort and Kinistino. They said, “If we can’t defeat him, we’ll wear him out.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — So, anyway, they will have to find other means. I should like to say a few words about 
our students. I have visited teachers, and even this year, I was asked to go into the classroom to speak to 
the students. I want to advise every Member of this Legislature that that is a good thing. You try to keep 
it on a non-partisan basis. You would be surprised what these young people are asking, the questions 
they ask. Even the teachers were amazed. I got into the school at 1:30 and I was able to leave only after 
school was dismissed. Well, there is one ting it does, it creates an interest in Government and that helps. 
The students write letters, they want information. I might say that there is one thing that they ask for and 
I want to recommend it to the Government. They said that the statute books of this Province should be in 
every high school in the province. And what’s wrong with that? I think it would be a very good idea 
because they are curious to know what’s in there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — I brought along the statute books, the Votes and Proceedings, Hansard, Public 
Accounts, journals and explained these to them. They told me that is worth something. I left them with 
the school. But what would be wrong to send a copy of the Journal, a copy of Public Accounts and so on 
to every high school in the province? Nothing wrong with it. Someone told me if we let the MLAs come 
to the school, and I would go only on invitation, no other way. The school kids invited me in and I said I 
wouldn’t go unless the teacher invited me. The teacher did invite me under pressure from the students. 
They said if we let you in then it will be the mayor of the town, the fire chief, the police chief. I said, 
“What’s wrong with it?” There is nothing wrong with having the police chief come to the school to talk 
to the students on invitation. I think we should develop more respect for the law. I think it would go a 
long way. We should not ignore these young people. They want our attention. Let’s give it to them. 
 
Another think, I would appeal to the Members of this House, that when the galleries are filled with 
students we put on a better show than what we sometimes do. I think a little more decorum would 
certainly be a good example to our young people. 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
669 

Mr. Cody: — Get rid of those Members. 
 
Mr. Thibault: — I won’t take any blood tests. 
 
Now I want to say a few words about the Land Bank. I want to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture 
(Mr. Messer) for the wonderful job he has done bringing the information . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — . . . to the people. I want to tell the Members of this House that the people who 
attended the Land Bank meetings were across the way that even people who are on your Executive told 
me that they were waiting a long time for this and they are going to support the question of the Land 
Bank. I don’t say that they are going to change their political stripes but I think before the Members 
across the way want to condemn the Land Bank, they’ve got to be careful of just what they say. You 
complained that we were steam rollering. We didn’t do that steam rollering. It’s the voters of the 
province who did the steam rollering last June 23rd. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Any time that a political party whether it be on this side or that side is going to try to 
perpetuate itself in power against the will of the people, the people of Saskatchewan are going to use the 
steam roller. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — There is another thing that we must look at in this Land Bank. I look at it in this light. 
The average age of our farmers to day is somewhere around 57 years of age. Given another ten years 
and what are you going to have? I do not buy the argument that our young people do not want to farm. 
They want to farm. Show them a way that it can be done. Show them where they can get the money. 
Show them how they can get the land. I know when I started farming I rented a couple of quarters of 
land. It is not everybody who has the same chance. I think that will the Land Bank we will give a chance 
to a lot of young farmers who want to farm. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — I am quite prepared to look at the arguments providing they are done constructively 
and not with the purpose of trying to destroy the Land Bank. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Just look at what is actually happening. I’ve got charts showing the depletion of our 
farm population into the small towns and then from the small towns they’ve gone to the bigger towns 
and from the bigger towns they are going to the cities. If you project that for 20 years, you have a couple 
of ant hills of human beings with a couple of land barons holding 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
670 

the land and social problems galore in the cities. It may be late, but let’s try to do something about it. I 
am sure if you can show a way where young people can rent land and get established on farms, that they 
don’t have to inherit a farm in order to farm a farm, that you are going to have many farmers in this 
Province who will go back to the farm. Many of the young people in the city would be glad to go back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — We know very well that the grass roots of our society is on the land. If you keep a fair 
amount of people back in the agricultural industry, even if we have to subsidize these people in 
agriculture, we would be doing a heck of a lot better than doing it in the city and calling it social welfare 
or what you like. I think that people do not all want social welfare. I don’t buy that argument. I’ll deal 
with that later on. I am sure that we would develop a better society by restocking our agricultural 
industry with more young people. 
 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words for a group of people who cannot speak for 
themselves. A few days ago along with the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) I attended a banquet at 
Tisdale put on by the Association for the Mentally Retarded. I have to say a few words about this today 
because I have been connected with the organization for the last ten years. The Association has 45 
branch organizations. In the town of Kinistino through the work of a handful of dedicated people and 
dedicated teachers we were able to have a classroom, a home for the retarded, and today a farm for the 
retarded people. I want to congratulate the former Government for having co-operated with the 
Association as well as they did. Give credit to where credit is due. Any community that wants to do 
work in that area would do very well to visit the set-up that we have at Kinistino. The home is called 
Haven of Hope, the farm is a 30-acre farm with a great big house with a middle-aged couple looking 
after about six retarded people and the name of it is the New Horizon Home. 
 
I would also recommend to the people of the House to read the article in Time Magazine February 14, 
1972. They call it a human warehouse where you have 3,000 retarded’s in the Home of Willowbrook, 
understaffed. People are tied to chairs and wagons, the picture is right here. Anybody who is interested 
should read this article. I hope that we are not working in that direction if we work in the direction of 
providing for these people something more of a home life where they can come in and say dad and mom 
to the people that are looking after them. Where they can tell their little story and be listened to rather 
than have a large institution that I call the home of the forgotten people. I want to advise the Minister of 
Education (Mr. MacMurchy), the Minister of Social Welfare and Labour (Mr. Snyder) and the Minister 
of Health (Mr. Smishek) that when the Retarded Association makes representation in behalf of these 
people who cannot speak for themselves, that they listen to what they have to say, because we cannot 
always depend on the bureaucracy for information. I strongly recommend to the Government that you 
listen to the Association for the Mentally Retarded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
671 

Mr. Thibault: — Now they did not set any limit on the time I should put in but I want to say a few 
words about social welfare. 
 
I can remember a few years ago when I defended the Minister of Social Welfare who now sits in the 
Opposition when he came up with a new program, I said I would not make any politics out of social 
welfare, it’s about the poorest place to make politics. But in the last years I could not agree with him. At 
first I did, I said, “Let him try his new plan.” Now today we are changing the name of the Department of 
Social Welfare. It reminds me of a story, it’s not a story, it actually happened when I was working with 
horses. We had one that was kind of balky and dad came to the field and I said, you know I called that 
horse all kinds of names and it doesn’t help. He said you cannot change the horse by changing the name, 
the only way you change him is to change the horse. That’s what we have done in Social Welfare… 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — …we have changed the horse. Now there is one piece of advice that I want to give to 
the new Minister of Social Welfare that there are several local governments in this Province and I 
strongly advised the former Minister to involve local government in the programs of social welfare and 
if our Minister takes the path of the old one, well he shall wind up in the same rut. If he wants to take 
advantage of the help that is available by local governments in drawing up programs and so on, I would 
say that he would be much more successful. The names that Social Welfare is being called will 
disappear. The derogatory terms of social welfare will disappear if we can get the people out in the 
country to understand and with the help of local government I am sure that the people will understand 
the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Now there are a few more areas I should like to deal with and that is the question of 
roads. As a former reeve I couldn’t get up here and speak without saying anything about roads. The 
circumstances concerning roads is changing at a rapid pace. There are many areas and many roads that 
need re-evaluation, whether they should go in the highway system or be taken out of the highway 
system. We cannot sit back and say we are not putting any more roads in the highway system or vice 
versa. We cannot go ahead and take roads into the highway system without any assessment and I hope in 
the four years of the New Deal that we will have a reassessment of some of the roads and if we need to 
put them in the highway system, fine. I am sure the time is here when municipalities should be able to 
oil and dust-free some of these grid roads that are carrying a heavy load. And this I will say to the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs, the Minister of Highways, that I have full confidence in them that they 
will do exactly what I am saying right now. 
 
Now a few words about our Indian people. We have a new Department of Indian Affairs or a new 
Department of Northern Affairs, call it what you may but it certainly pertains to our Indian and Métis 
people. I certainly would advise the Government not to proceed with programs without involving again 
the native people. I think we have been deciding for them too long. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
672 

They want a word in what should be done and if they do make mistakes, and who doesn’t make 
mistakes. I think we are all entitled to some mistakes but I hope by all means that the Minister will 
involve the native people in the decision making of this Department. 
 
Now a few more words — well I’ve got about 22 minutes in now — that’s not too bad and I am only 
have way through. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — I should like to say a few words about highway safety. In 1960 I brought in a 
resolution that we have more driver training in this Province on account of the death rate. At that time 
we were killing only 160 people a year in this Province so we did bring in a resolution to encourage 
driver training but that wasn’t good enough for me. We demanded a highway safety committee, a 
legislative committee, where you could involve the Opposition as well as the Government side for a 
study of the cause of accidents in this Province. 
 
After two years of study we made our recommendations. The Attorney General at that time really did a 
job in trying to enforce the recommendations that we made, but in that recommendation we also said 
that there should be a continuing committee to study traffic problems as they keep piling up. But the 
Government of the day said, “No we are going to discontinue the traffic safety committee.” Now I am 
going to give you the figures of what has actually happened. You start back in 1960 where we killed 
about 165 a year. The figure kept increasing. In 1962 192; 1963 200; 1964 229; 1965 223; 1966 279; 
1967 287. Then when the committee reported and new legislation was brought in there was a drop from 
287 in 1967 to 264 in 1968. In 1969 down to 223, in 1970 down to 207. Now we are back in 218 and the 
line is going up again. I will blame it on the dropping of the legislative committee who should spend 
their time studying the problems of traffic. 
 
Now I think there is no better place to spend your time as an MLA as on a legislative committee. Where 
we can lay our politics aside and study a problem and bring recommendations to the Legislature and do 
something about it with a non-partisan approach. I am sure that we could deal with many other problems 
in the same way. Take the problem to the people and then come back with our recommendations and I 
hope that this Government in their Deal for people will take that path and I am confident that they will. 
 
Now when you kill almost 300 a year you never notice it too much until you start attending the funerals. 
I attended a funeral at Wakaw a few years ago, there were 11 new graves. I asked a question, why so 
many new ones? Well, they said, six traffic accidents. I think you could have gone to many graveyards 
with the same story, traffic accidents. I should like to see a study made of our traffic safety. I should like 
to see an evaluation of our driver teachers. Right now we have a training program but who knows 
whether we have a good teaching program or not and I think an evaluation of our trainers can easily be 
done and then bring the best teachers to the top to teach the teachers, we’ll put it this way. I don’t think 
it would be a very big problem to computerize the accidents and who was the driver trainer and so on. 
When we made our study the many places throughout the world where they had driver 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
673 

training there was a definite low rate of accidents. I think the courtroom and the jail and the heavy fines 
is not an answer to safety on our highways. I think a better driver training education should go a long 
ways towards providing this. 
 
Now as I have a few more things to say about the conduct of the House, the first few days there was a 
letter, perhaps it is a little bit out of date, because it was written on March 4th. I had a visitor from my 
constituency who sat in the galleries and watched the performance. After he got home he wrote me a 
letter. I think I will read this letter because it expresses much better than the words that I can find to say 
what can he said about it. If is address from Weldon, Saskatchewan, March 4, and I will table the letter, 
by the way. 
 

Mr. Art Thibault, MLA 
Room 207, Legislative Building, 
Regina, Saskatchewan. 
 
Dear Art: 

 
Friday, of last week, must have inevitably have been branded by those that listened to the Legislature 
either from the galleries of this House or from the radio in their own homes as Black Friday. The 
performance of the House was a deplorable disgrace and it did irreparable damage to the public image 
of the democratic parliament. The Government must do everything in their power to see that this does 
not occur again. I feel however, unless a new method is found to deal with this problem we can expect 
more of the same today. I therefore suggest that the Government recognize two things. Number one, 
that the Opposition consist of the remnants of the once powerful Government who were drunk with 
power, rode roughshod over everything and everyone. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — 
 

The few seats now occupied by the Opposition Members is clear evidence of the public condemnation 
handed down by the people of Saskatchewan on the tactics employed. Number two, that we also 
recognize that anyone that has become accustomed to proceedings in this manner cannot be expected 
to return to sanity in just a few days and must be dealt with on the same basis as wise mothers deal 
with their neighbours. Unruly children are not punished in public. If the Opposition is bent on political 
suicide and determined to further reducing their number I see no reason why we should stand in their 
way. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — 
 

I recommend that you reverse your ruling of last Friday and grant the Opposition equal radio time in 
which to do their screaming over the Saskatchewan network. The Government has yet four years in 
which to implement programs that will do far more than drown out any silly noises of a handful of 
Opposition Members can make in a few hours of free radio time. 
Signed: Mr. Sam Apesland. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
674 

Those are not my words but it was one way that . . . 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Is he a president . . . 
 
Mr. Thibault: — No, he is not a president, not even his zone manager. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — He is just a taxpayer like you and everybody else. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that you 
can see by the few remarks that I have made that I will not support the amendment, that I will be 
supporting the Budget. 
 
Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, when I spoke in the Throne Speech 
Debate, I referred to it as the people’s Throne Speech and I believe that that is what it really is. I said 
that it was a good start for this Government in implementing its promises that it made to people of 
Saskatchewan and I think that it really did. It is equally true, Mr. Speaker, that one can call this Budget a 
People’s Budget. It brings to fruition, Mr. Speaker, in a real practical sense many of the promises that 
we made in the June election. The financial critic of the Opposition has labelled this Budget a “poor 
cousin budget.” He has labelled it a “windfall Budget.” And he has labelled it a “quitter’s Budget.” 
 
If I recollect accurately, Mr. Speaker, he said last Monday, some have called this a poor cousin Budget, 
some have called this a windfall Budget but it just so happened that when I was driving home last Friday 
with my colleague back to Saskatoon who should they be interviewing on the radio but the financial 
critic. In his talk he said this is a poor cousin Budget, this is a windfall Budget he said later on. I listened 
all weekend to find out if other people had labelled this Budget in these three terms. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
I really don’t care what they call this Budget, names don’t really mean anything, it is what is in the 
Budget that really counts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this is a good Budget. Not only is it a good Budget but it is a 
sound and a practical Budget. A practical Budget that comes to grip with some of the very basic issues 
that are facing the people and the ordinary citizen of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, all one has to do is 
peruse the Budget and you will find that there are many good things for many people of Saskatchewan. 
There are benefits for the farmer, there are benefits for the labourer, there are benefits for the small 
businessman. Even, Mr. Speaker, teachers will find some benefits. I will, a little later, elaborate on that. 
We shall find benefits for the disadvantaged groups and, Mr. Speaker, not to be forgotten, we shall find 
benefits for the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
From the considerable time, Mr. Speaker, that the financial critic spent on matters not pertaining to the 
Budget, one must come to the conclusion that he found it very difficult to find things that he could 
criticize in the Budget. Saskatchewan’s 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
675 

economy, Mr. Speaker, is still largely dependent on agriculture. I don’t think anyone will deny that. I, at 
this time, want to commend this Government for making this the first priority in this Budget. The people 
in Nutana South, which is my constituency, recognize that their livelihood is certainly dependent upon 
what happens in agriculture. They realize that we must have a sound and viable agricultural economy. I 
know, Mr. Speaker, that they would want me at this time to congratulate the Hon. Minister of 
Agriculture for recognizing the serious plight of some of our farmers. His proposed pieces of legislation, 
and I don’t intend to mention all of them because we are aware of what they are, but especially the Land 
Bank, will be most welcome by many farmers. We know that it is not the panacea, Mr. Speaker, for 
solving all the agricultural problems. No Member on this side of the House has ever claimed that, but we 
have said that it will in some way help out the farmers in the 1970s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank, I think, personally speaking, will certainly help poverty stricken farmers, it 
will help the young farmer. I know that many, many of our big farmers will probably not be too happy 
with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I did in the Throne Speech Debate and as I should like to do for a little time now, I 
should like to turn to the youth of our province. I worked with many of our youth and I have for the last 
10 or 12 years. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that I shall insult this House when I say again that the youth of 
this Province are the most important natural resource that we have. The Members of this House should 
let the youth know that we believe they are important. Let us, for example, support the Age of Majority 
Bill, let us, Mr. Speaker, give credit to this Government for recognizing the importance of youth as they 
have done by establishing the new Department of Culture and Youth and also for bringing in a bursary –
pro for our youth. Mr. Speaker, I should like to commend this Government for the money, the large 
amounts of money it has allotted to the establishment of a Department of Youth and Culture. 
 
I should also, Mr. Speaker, like to commend this Government for legislation that will allocate $900,000 
for a bursary program. Here, Mr. Speaker, I want to say, that for many years I have advocated that we 
substitute bursaries instead of scholarships. I beg the indulgence of the House if I might just briefly for 
those people who do not know the difference explain why I would advocate bursaries. Scholarships, Mr. 
Speaker, recognize only academic excellence, usually speaking. Most Bursaries, however, not only 
recognize academic excellence, but they also recognize financial needs of students. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I am very pleased that bursaries are going to receive more importance from this Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past when it came to scholarships, there were many students who had 95 and 96 
averages and certainly I think one should recognize this particular accomplishment. These students 
walked away with not just $2,000, but very often these students walked away with $5,000, $6,000 or 
$7,000 with absolutely no regard to whether they needed it or not. The next student who had a 94 
average was lucky if he got $1,000 could not carry him through university, or post-secondary education. 
I hope that this 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
676 

Government will continue to de-emphasize scholarships and emphasize bursaries, even to a greater 
extent than what we have done in this Budget. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to return to the Department of Culture and Youth. If this 
particular Department developed I think it could be a real avenue, a real source, or a real vehicle 
whereby we could make use of the ideas of our youth. Our youth want to participate, I wish the Member 
from Rosthern were here, even though I respect his views on youth, I think he has got to come to realize 
and people like him have got to come to realize that much of the frustration in our youth today is 
because half of the adult population is telling them to shut up and the other half is telling them to mind 
their own business. Yet, time and time again, we tell them they have got to take their responsibilities 
seriously. But we will not let them participate. I should hope, Mr. Speaker, that through this new 
department this Government is going to make it absolutely clear that we will not dictate to them, but we 
will consult with them we will ask them for their ideas, that we will ask them to fully participate and to 
criticize this Government when they feel that we are on the wrong path. 
 
Criticism, I think, Mr. Speaker, is good. I hope the Members opposite will not take it as an insult when I 
say that one of the main reasons they lost on June 23rd last was because they shut themselves off from 
the people. It came through time and time again, Mr. Speaker, in the area of welfare, education and 
almost any other area you want to go into, that the previous Government was telling the people what 
was good for them. Finally, the people just simply said, No. We are going to determine our own lives, 
our own destiny, we need a new group of people to do this. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we will not in our 
term, at least in the first term, disappoint these people. If we do, Mr. Speaker, I know our doom will be 
similar to the doom that the people opposite experienced last June. But if the past is any indication, we 
have at least another 19 years ahead of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through this Department of Youth and Culture, I think the youth of this Province — after 
all the ’70s and ’80s are going to be their future — I think they can help us to build a truly democratic, 
peaceful and co-operative society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could now revert a little bit to scholarships and bursaries. I should hope that in the 
future this Government is going to make absolutely clear to the people that we will let the decisions of 
who the recipients of bursaries and scholarships should be decided by other sources than the Department 
of Education or the Government. I should like to advise our Minister if he has not already done so, that 
we give this power back to the universities where it belongs. 
 
Before I leave this particular topic I want to spend some time in other areas of education. Both Members 
of the Opposition to whom I should like to say a few words are not here. This afternoon in the House the 
Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) quoted from an article in the Star-Phoenix. I thought I had 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
677 

read the article last weekend, and what he said and what I read just didn’t seem to correspond, Mr. 
Speaker. So I went to the library and got that particular issue of the Star-Phoenix. He is correct when he 
says that, “Faculty Furious with Budget.” The particular paragraph that he read said this — he read it I 
believe: 
 

The crisis surfaced February 29th, when 175 non-tenure faculty members received letters from the 
administration saying at least tentatively they had not been recommended for tenure or renewal 
appointment. 

 
However, if he had read one paragraph further, this is what it said. 
 

The letters were sent as a legal precaution, as university contracts stipulate that faculty members must 
be notified by the end of February as to the status of their employment. 

 
And the next paragraph is the key one, take this message to him, the Member from Lumsden (Mr. Lane), 
will you? 
 

It is estimated that between 20 and 40 faculty may be dismissed. 
 
Not the impression that the Member left in the House that 175 faculty members were in danger of losing 
their jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not new from what I have experienced from Members opposite. They have a 
tendency to misinform the House, to mislead the people of Saskatchewan. Well, I don’t know but it 
seems that way to me when you hear people quoting from articles like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I regret the fact that any person might lose his job at the university. However, I think we 
must face the fact that the enrolments at the university are not what we had thought they would be. To 
simply build buildings for the sake of building buildings does not make sense to me, if you do not have 
students to fill these buildings. I should like to commend this Government in taking this step which I 
think in the future will be appreciated by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Melfort-Tisdale — I was going to say I think that was the old 
riding — Melfort-Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) referred to or spoke for a few minutes on a topic with which I 
have been very much concerned and that is the mentally retarded of the Province of Saskatchewan. In 
this regard, Mr. Speaker, I should simply like to say that I was very sorry to hear the announcement 
made by the Federal Government that they would discontinue their funds for the Alvin Buckwold Unit 
in Saskatoon. The Alvin Buckwold unit previously known as the Alvin Buckwold Mental Retardation 
Unit works with about 500 families with mentally retarded children. If this particular unit is closed, Mr. 
Speaker, these families will have absolutely nowhere else to go. All other facilities in Saskatchewan are 
taxed to the maximum. They tell me that as of April 1st, the Federal Government will cease to forward 
any funds. When we heard about this some of the Members of Saskatoon met with the Minister of 
Health (Mr. Smishek) and persuaded him to do some interim financing for three months in order to keep 
the unit open in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I must 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
678 

commend the Federal Government for carrying out this experimental program fro five years; we found 
out that it is a good program. This program will keep some of the mentally retarded people out of our 
training institutions, very, very expensive operations. It will also keep these people with their families. It 
is not only a service to the city of Saskatoon but to the area surrounding Saskatoon and probably all of 
Northern Saskatchewan. I should ask in this regard that all Members of the House, both sides of the 
House, contact Senator Buckwold, Senator Argue and the Hon. Otto Lang to try to get them to persuade 
their Minister to continue this particular project. I think it would be a shame, Mr. Speaker, if these 
children and these families would be cut off from this service. 
 
In the same line, Mr. Speaker, I received a telephone call a few weeks ago from a constituent in Nutana 
South who informed me that the Federal Government also was cutting off funds for a developmental 
class at the John Dolan School. This again, Mr. Speaker, is what they call an experimental project, its 
five-year term is coming to an end and these 18 children have just no place to go. We know that good 
work is being done, we know that it requires about $40,000 to $50,000 a year to keep this program 
going. Again, Members of his House must convince people in the Federal Government to continue these 
grants. I think for the sake of the mentally retarded we have just go to do something about it, it is our 
responsibility. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that after the three months some other arrangement can be made in 
this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend the rest of my time on education, but in some other areas. Before I do so, 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that to me education is a life-long process. It starts when one is born 
and it ends when one dies. I would hope that education will take on this meaning under this 
Government. I was therefore very happy and very pleased that our Minister of Education announced that 
there would be studies on kindergarten and there would be studies on community colleges. Furthermore, 
Mr. Speaker, in this regard, I was also pleased to hear that the Minister announced that we will try to 
give back much more autonomy to local school boards. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that our schools must 
become community schools. Our schools must adopt their curriculum from their community. It is 
absolutely senseless in my opinion to have a Department of Education formulate a curriculum and ask 
the schools to adopt it. I know that in the past there has been considerable leeway, however, I should like 
to see community schools, where a school staff and school board, could decide what they think is 
important and that is the program that would be adopted in those schools. 
 
In this way, Mr. Speaker, the schools would become a focal point of the community. Some day maybe 
we can have this where the community revolves around the school. Not just open from 9 until 3, 
learning doesn’t just take place from 9 until 3, and the people could feel free to use these schools or use 
the resources… 
 
Mr. Lane: — Lighted schoolhouse? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Pardon me. Well, I don’t know if you want to have it lit up physically that is not the 
point, although I suppose some people look at the physical aspects and say, that is the program. I hope 
that is not what you mean, Gary, but maybe you 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
679 

do. 
 
In regard to community colleges, Mr. Speaker, I think there are many people in today’s society who 
would like to continue their education outside of the formal institutions, outside of the technical schools, 
outside of the university, certainly outside of our high schools. I think in this regard community colleges 
could become very effective, but again, let us make proposed legislation that the Liberals had prepared 
prior to June 23rd and we substituted our own. 
 
That particular legislation, Mr. Speaker, I think indicated very clearly what they had in mind with 
community colleges. Community colleges in their minds are colleges that are set up and directed and 
dictated to from the Department of Education. The community has very little to say as to what should go 
into it, how it should be established, what kind of staff they should have. That would all be decided by 
the Department of Education. If the Members opposite don’t believe me I am sure that you can still find 
copies available and read it. We have in the meantime come through with our own program and I think 
the autonomy, the control will be with the local people. They will decide if they need a community 
college and they will decide what the programs are going to be. They will decide how they should be 
run. That, Mr. Speaker, was one of our election promises and that, Mr. Speaker, I hope will be one that 
we will soon fulfil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a few minutes on the new grant formula. The new grant formula that we 
hope to have in effect very soon – the principle of this particular formula, Mr. Speaker, will give equity, 
I believe, in educational opportunity to all school boards in Saskatchewan. 
 
Although, Mr. Speaker, I have some reservation about the formula, basically I would accept it. There are 
some kinks we have to iron out, but I think it does do the job it is supposed to do. 1. To give equity to 
school boards in the province as far as educational opportunity is concerned. 2. To restore to the local 
boards the autonomy that they need in deciding what kinds of programs they would like to carry out. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it does the job that we want it to do in decentralizing the Department of Education, 
in making out of the Department of Education an advisory department, a consultative department. It is 
very difficult to break up a bureaucracy once it is set up. I think our Minister, again, must be 
commended in streamlining the Department of Education. All right he took some flak on it as to why he 
did it, but those of us on this side of the House know why he did it. It was to streamline the Department 
of Education so that one particular Branch in the Department know what the other Branch was doing. 
And in this regard, Mr. Speaker, I should just like to refer back to what happened, I believe in 1970, and 
I stand to be corrected, when the Members opposite came through with their legislation on the mentally 
handicapped. 
 
At that time, Mr. Speaker, I was at a meeting conducted by Mr. Bestvater, I believe his name was and I 
asked him at that time how much money would be available for the mentally handicapped. And he said 
to me at that time, “Look I am not in the Finance Branch. I am only in the Planning Branch and I don’t 
know what the Finance has planned. I don’t even know if they have any money available for it.” Here, in 
the meantime, 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
680 

Mr. Speaker, we have legislation passed, we tell the school boards that they were responsible to provide 
educational opportunities for the mentally handicapped and at the same, time, we found out later, that 
there was no money available to carry out these particular programs. I think the Minister of Education 
(Mr. MacMurchy) must be commended for taking the step in streamlining this particular Department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, we have taken some flak from the Members opposite on Area Bargaining. I 
should just like at this particular time to say that I think the cheap political tactics that have been used in 
this House by the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) is a disgrace. 
 
Standing in the House last night, Mr. Speaker, as he has done on other occasions, he accused this 
Government of bringing in a Bill on the eve when there was a possibility of a stroke, when there was a 
possibility of school closures, when he himself knew that it was not us who proposed that this Bill be put 
on the agenda for the evening, but it was his side of the House who proposed that we bring it in. This 
type of thing, Mr. Speaker, cannot be condoned in this House and I would hope that he has learned his 
lesson. Now this is not the first time that he has done it. It has been done at least two, three or four times. 
But let me say this, Mr. Speaker, about Area Bargaining. 
 
I think it has got to be amply clear that area bargaining difficulties rest on the shoulders of the Members 
opposite. It has nothing to do with this Government now. Had they not brought in the Teachers’ Salary 
Agreements Act in 1968 we would not be in the difficulties that we are in today. 
 
Anytime, Mr. Speaker, when you have compulsory arbitration and either side knows of it – and 
obviously they do – they have a way out. They do not have to bargain if they really do not want to. I will 
say that compulsory arbitration has been a hindrance to area bargaining at this time. I think the sooner it 
is removed the better off we will be as far as free collective bargaining is concerned. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, in this regard when the Member from Milestone again referred to the Northern 
Affairs settlement he said to the House, and therefore said to me also, that we had a 2.7 per cent 
settlement. Let me say that I have been in contact with both the trustees and the teachers and they say to 
me, give us a settlement that the northern areas received of 7.72 per cent and we will take it. Regardless 
of whether you want to pay us $500 to teach in Regina as an allowance, we are interested in the total 
amounts of money that will be allocated. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that if Members of this House would maybe stay out of the area negotiations 
as they are progressing at the present time that we can possibly expect some settlement within the next 
week or so. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to area bargaining I would simply like to say that I believe in free 
collection bargaining. I don’t see how anyone in this day and age can simply say that bargaining can 
really take place sincerely and honestly when you have compulsory arbitration. I will not elaborate on 
this 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
681 

because I want to speak on this particular Bill when it comes up for second reading again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this about the Budget again. I want to commend this Government. I think it 
has done an admirable performance in bringing in this type of a Budget, a Budget that has many good 
things for the ordinary people of society. The ordinary person who has been so much neglected in the 
last seven years. Yes, I agree, that big business will not receive a big chunk out of this Budget, but the 
small businessman, will receive lots of benefits. I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, want to commend the Premier 
of this Province, the Provincial Treasurer, for bringing in this type of a Budget in our first year of a 
four-year term of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — From what I have said, Mr. Speaker, you will note that I will definitely oppose the 
amendment and support the budget. 
 
Mr. D.W. Cody (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, it seems that I don’t have quite the problem today in rising 
to speak that I had last Friday, however, maybe it is because it is getting later on in the evening rather 
than in the afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Saskatoon just mentioned a few minutes ago that names don’t really 
mean very much. Well I would say that I quite agree with him, however, some labels do tell us 
something. “A poor cousin Budget, a windfall Budget, and a quitter’s Budget” as far as I am concerned 
mean very little, this is quite true. But, Mr. Speaker, last year our Budget critic labelled the Budget as a 
“Bogus Budget,” and that label as far as I am concerned has a meaning and the meaning simply is “a bag 
of gimmicks under Steuart.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise in this debate and it gives me a great deal of pride to be able to identify 
myself with this Budget. It is a great Budget. It is possibly the greatest Budget, as I said in a Press 
release the other night, we have seen the best Budget in all history of this Province. It is a record Budget 
for the province and it has many records in it. Maybe it has welfare records in it. That may be the way 
we have to deal with the rest of the defeated Liberals as time goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with agriculture for a moment. We have record spending of $18 million 
which is an increase of 11 per cent. This increase shows the concern our Government has for our 
farmers. It shows that we will not allow farmers to be moved from their lands and from their homes. It 
will show that we will not do the same kind of think the Federal Government is doing with their Task 
Force Report on Agriculture and move people off the land with reckless abandon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I of course, am speaking about the Land Bank Commission. The Budget, sets aside $10 
million for this program. This figure will not buy a great deal of land in its first year; however, the 
Opposition seems to think that we are going to buy up all the land. I am sure that with $10 million by no 
stretch of the imagination shall we be buying up all of the land. 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
682 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with $10 million what can you purchase? You use an average of approximately 
$40,000 per section and you would probably get something like 2,000 sections in the first year. With 
2,000 sections in the first year, if we spent $10 million each year, it would take 75 years before we 
would have all the land in this Province. Mr. Speaker, I submit that it is virtually impossible for us to 
purchase all the land in this Province and you will never see it come about in any case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can see that the claim by the Liberals opposite, you can see that the claim is the same 
kind of claim that they had in 1946 when we were implementing the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance office. It is the same kind of claim that they had when we were implementing Medicare in 
1962. It is the same kind of claim that you hear from the Liberals at any time when a progressive piece 
of legislation comes about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this Province were not scared off in 1946, they were not scared off in 1962, 
and they won’t be scared off in 1972. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, this program will go down in history as another first of social security and 
humanity and humanity first in its programs in which we certainly believe in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the Government for the massive new program for homes, farms, 
and small businessmen. It is a giant step forward in relieving the heavy load of taxation on the citizens 
of this Province. It took our Government only eight months to see that the cost of education had to be 
shifted from the property owner. $23 million, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Member from milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald) is massive in my mind. It certainly is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, turning now for one moment to rural communities. We shall be expanding the Municipal 
Works Program and a new program of assistance to rural communities which I am certain will be 
appreciated by all. I am pleased to see that this Government is showing interest in small towns and 
villages which hasn’t been shown for the last many, many years. As you know small towns and villages 
today are just like farmers, they are dying off. With this new program more new people will be attracted 
to small towns and villages! A further program which will aid them will be the expanded program of 
telephone services for unserved areas. Mr. Speaker, it may have come from the Liberals but it never 
hurts to expand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, this Budget is my mind has its priorities in the proper place for a change. It 
has its priorities in the places where we most need them which is something we haven’t seen for the past 
seven years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably one of the sad things in the Budget as one of my colleagues said this afternoon, 
was the $6 million which we shall have to pay to opt out for the pulp mill deal. However, one 
consolation may be that it is $6 million now rather than $170 in several years from now. 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
683 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, let me turn for a moment to this pulp mill issue which has, of course, been 
raised from time to time by the Opposition. In fact, this afternoon, at one point the Hon. Member from 
Lumsden (Mr. Lane) said again, oh, let’s have an inquiry. Well, as the Leader of the Opposition 
mentioned in the Throne Speech Debate one week ago, he requested or challenged the Government to 
have a judicial inquiry regarding his conduct in promoting and developing the Athabasca Pulp Mill. Mr. 
Speaker, why an inquiry? 
 
Why do we need an inquiry? Tell me this, when all the facts that are going to come up in any inquiry are 
laid right here before the people and right before this Assembly and have been for quite some time. Why 
did they sign, as the Hon. Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) says? Why did they sign? They only 
signed for one reason as far as I am concerned which I wouldn’t want to say at this time. Mr. Speaker, 
there is no need for an inquiry as far as I am concerned. The Liberal Party placed the pulp mill issue 
before the people of Saskatchewan and they utterly and totally rejected your deal. Without having the 
facts that you people had and wouldn’t deliver to them. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) 
seems to reject the voice of the people. He seems to reject the voice of the people and goes on in the 
same old arrogant manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Party intends to listen to the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan and it believes that 
it should involve them fully in development of programs. Mr. Speaker, we were elected on that basis and 
you’ll see we’ll be re-elected on that basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to now turn for a few moments to health and social services. In this 
area we have come a long way in the past eight months – abolishing deterrent fees, removing of 
premiums for those over 65 and many other programs. The Budget again says that there is going to be 
large and extended programs – chiropractic care and what have you. Mr. Speaker, I want at this time to 
turn to what I term is a very grave situation in my constituency that which involves the promising of a 
nursing home by the former Liberal Government. Mr. Speaker, I want to point out the irresponsible way 
in which the former Liberal Government and particularly the then Minister of Welfare (Mr. 
MacDonald), the Hon. Member from Milestone carried out his duties. Mr. Speaker, I shall now turn to 
some excerpts of letters and correspondence between the town of Bruno, some citizens of that area and 
the Government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this correspondence, of course, dates back a long ways, back as far as February 8th, 1957, 
and I want to read them into the record. The first piece of correspondence was February 8, 1957, a letter 
from Mr. Schulte, Chairman of the Health Committee, to the Director of Housing and Nursing Homes 
Branch, requesting information regarding a nurses’ home, and that they had a building which could 
serve elderly citizens. Professor Baker of the University of Saskatchewan had conducted a survey of 
need in the area. February 27, 1957, a reply from 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
684 

the Department to Mr. Schulte asking that the building be identified because it would have to pass fire 
and health standards. March 9th, 1957 a reply that the building was a brick school which was vacated 
and also that the committee was being supported by the whole community. April 17, 1957, the 
Department received a report from the Fire Commissioner advising that he could not permit the use of 
the school as a home for elderly. April 25, 1972, a letter to Mr. Schulte advising of the Fire 
Commissioner’s findings but that the Department might explore with the Committee alternative building 
proposals. December 6, 1957, Mr. Keith Wiggens acknowledge the Department’s letter of April 25th, 
1957 and expressed continued interest in senior citizen housing. January 13, 1958, a Department letter 
suggesting January 21st as a date to meet (I guess I’ve mentioned that one). January 17th, 1958 meeting 
and timing agreed upon. January 24th, 1958, the Department wrote Mr. Wiggens and submitted 
literature about organizing and planning a home for elderly and also that the local Committee explore 
obtaining various paramedical services with in area. October 1st, 1964 here we go, here comes the 
merry-go-round. Mr. Schulte and 18 members of the Centennial Committee met with Department 
officials to being exploring the possibilities of a nursing home or a small hospital. 
 
Arrangements were made for the Committee to meet health officials the following week. September 15, 
1969 a letter from A.R. Meyer, who incidentally is the town clerk, to Minister C.P. MacDonald 
indicating interest in a senior citizens’ home. Preliminary survey indicated a need for a 25-bed unit. 
October 6th, 1969, a reply by the Department advising fiscal arrangement criteria for the development of 
a special care home and indicating that Bruno could not likely meet the necessary conditions. March 
23rd, 1970, a letter from Mr. Meyer to the Minister, restating the community’s interest and hoping for 
approval to proceed. April 3, 1970, the Minister acknowledged and advised that the request would be 
considered with other priorities later in the year. February 6, 1971, a letter to the Minister from Mrs. Joe 
Rink asking for definite information regarding a senior citizens’ home. February 17th, 1971, Minister 
acknowledged the letter and advised that the matter was still under consideration and that advice would 
be sent shortly. March 8th, 1971, Minister wrote Mr. Meyer advising that their request for 1971-72 
would not be granted but that they could subsequently renew their application. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is March 8th, 1971, keep that date in mind, will you Mr. Member from Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald). Mr. Speaker, on April 1st, 1971, 23 days later, the Humboldt Journal carried a large press 
release in big, bold letters stating: “$300,000 Bruno Home for Elderly Citizens Announced.” 23 days 
after the Minister said there would be no home built in Bruno. Mr. Speaker, within this press release it 
says” 
 

Welfare Minister Cy MacDonald in announcing approval of the project Tuesday said the Government 
has ascertained that the facility was needed in Bruno and hopes work will start in the very near future. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on April 12th, of course, the Minister then sent a communication to the town with the 
approval of a 30-bed special care home providing for levels I and II, plus a commitment providing a 
grant of 20 per cent of capital cost. He 



 
March 14, 1972 

 
685 

also states in this Letter: ‘Because Department staff were not aware of details the Minister asked the 
Committee to meet and outline their plans with his staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I wish to make is that on March 8th, 1971 the Hon. Member from Milestone, then 
Minister of Welfare, stated the application would not be granted. There had been no feasibility study 
done, there was no feasibility study done between the period of March 8th and April 1st and in fact there 
has been no feasibility study done to this very day. Mr. Speaker, the only reason that I can put my finger 
on, that may have prompted the Hon. Minister to carry on in this way is, of course, that he knew there 
was an election in the offing. And, of course, they needed this particular issue if they wanted to get any 
votes in Bruno at all. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — How did we do in Bruno? 
 
Mr. Cody: — You got a lot less votes than you ever did in the history of this Province before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that using elderly people in this kind of way is completely irresponsible and shows 
callous, hard-heartedness on that Minister’s part. Mr. Speaker, let me hasten to say that I don’t know if it 
is feasible to build a home in Bruno and I also say that the Minister didn’t know if it was feasible to 
build a home in Bruno. We have homes in Humboldt which is 15 miles away, we have a home in Middle 
Lake which is 15 miles away and we have a home in Cudworth which is 15 miles away. Mr. Speaker, 
Bruno will get a home if it is feasible, Bruno will not get a home if it is not feasible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will reiterate again my stand, if a feasibility study is done and the citizens of Bruno will 
have to do it, of course, we are not going to do it. We have no right to do it. If a feasibility study is done 
and if the project is feasible I will be the first man to stand up in that town or this Legislature or 
anywhere else and press this Government and press them hard to build a senior citizens’ home in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say that I am proud that this Government has now seen fit to work on policy rather 
than on political favouritism and political manoeuvring. I want to congratulate the Government on the 
way in which it is handling the situation, today with regard to the nursing homes, and also the study 
which is presently being done which I am sure will bring forth meaningful legislation. Legislation which 
will truly help the people which they are trying to help and that, of course, is the senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many things in this Budget that I should like to touch on and there are many 
things that the people in my constituency are happy about. The agricultural area in the Budget is terrific, 
the new bursary scheme is terrific. There are many areas in the Budget which a person could speak on, 
you could speak for four days. However, I am going to give way to some of my other colleagues and as 
you will have gathered, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the amendment, I will support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1972 
 

 
686 

Mr. A.W. Engel (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, it is a great privilege to take part in this 
Budget Debate. First off I should like to congratulate the Members for both Morse (Mr. Wiebe) and 
Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) for winning the by-elections. 
 
Special congratulations to the appointments to the Cabinet, the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair to Public 
Works and the Member for Souris-Estevan to the Department of Industry and Commerce. They are both 
proving very capable, Mr. Speaker, in the dealings I have had with these gentlemen. They display much 
energy and enthusiasm and I am sure these two men are very valuable in helping to ease the workload 
that these Members of Cabinet were sharing. I would like to congratulate the Premier on the Budget 
Speech he brought down and on the excellent delivery. 
 
There are many aspects in this Budget speech that I would like to talk about. The one thing I think that is 
going to do very much good in Notukeu-Willow Bunch particularly is what the Land Bank is going to 
do for our farmers. I have many neighbours right around the areas where I am farming that are there 
because they have to stay on and farm a little longer. They would like to quit and yet they can’t find an 
easy way to transfer their assets from themselves to their families. This Budget is a vehicle which will 
aid in this kind of a transfer, the benefits that are going to be shared by the residents of Saskatchewan 
because of this Land Bank is tremendous. The $10 million will generate much enthusiasm and will 
generate much work besides making an easy transfer of land. 
 
I intend to speak on several areas of this Budget Debate, Mr. Speaker. There are problems that have 
arisen in my constituency in the southern part of it with regard to rumours that the Federal Government 
is considering the creation of a national park there and I should like to speak about it. I think this type of 
an area maybe needs some coverage and for that reason I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:30 o’clock p.m. 
 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES

