



















































Hansard: February 25, 1972


8 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

Friday, February 25, 1972 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock pm. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

TEACHER SALARY SETTLEMENT AREA 13 
 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker before the Orders of the Day I should 

like to announce to the Legislature that a satisfactory settlement has been reached in teacher salary 

negotiations in Area 13 for a 1972 contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Area 13 includes the jurisdiction of the northern school board. The details aren’t 

complete but the salary settlement is based on an increase of 7.72 per cent on salary grid and northern 

allowances. 

 

I can tell the House that we are very pleased that one settlement has been reached and we hope that other 

areas of the province will rapidly follow suit. 

 

Mr. Stuart: — It just proves that lightning speeds up… 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. K. Thorson (Souris-Estevan): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to introduce to the 

Assembly a group of students who are visiting with us today from the city of Estevan. This group of 

students consists of young men and women in the upgrading class, known as the Upgrading Class 510. 

They are here in company with their teacher Denis Cooley. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

WINTER WORKS PROGRAM 
 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. A number of municipalities are still expressing interest in 

the Winter Works Program and are making enquiries wondering if it is still possible to make an 

application under the Provincial Government’s program for winter works? 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the terms of reference 

of 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

9 

of the Winter Works Program were initially laid down by the Federal Government and they indicated 

that applications would have to be made by January 31st. We have said that we would carry on their 

program so far as funds were concerned that when the local initiatives program, which we understood 

would be in the neighbourhood of $2 million, was used up we would extend this by a million dollars and 

that their loans program of $6.9 million would also be extended insofar as money was concerned. The 

indication was that we would carry on under the same terms of reference as they had. Now there has 

been some difficulty in some programs being turned down and coming back in the form of local 

initiatives programs and we are quite prepared to take a look at these if application had already been 

made by another program, I should be prepared to look at them again. I think that we shall be holding 

with the original stipulation that original application had to be in by January 31st. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — A supplementary question. Then my understanding is that no totally new 

applications would be accepted at this time? Is that correct? 

 

Mr. Wood: — I don’t think so, we have never made any decision that way. The stipulation was that 

they had to be in by January 31st. 

 

TEACHER SALARY SETTLEMENT AREA 13 
 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a question of the Minister of Education before the 

Orders of the Day. In light of the settlement he has just announced something close to 8 per cent plus 

increments running to 10 per cent, the Government has just concluded with the Northern Area teachers. I 

wonder if he would care to indicate if this is the pattern of increases that he expects the other areas 

throughout the province to follow? 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Hon. Member from Wilkie I do not have full 

knowledge of whether the increments are included or not included in the 7.72 per cent. I think I 

indicated in my announcement that I haven’t the full details. I have just received this by telephone. 

When the full details are available I shall make them available to you, to the House and the Press. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — A supplementary question to the Treasurer, the Hon. 

Premier. Will he then guarantee to this House that if all other boards settle for 7 or 8 per cent plus 

increments, if that’s the deal he gave to your own teachers, because they are your own teachers in effect 

in the North, will you guarantee to give that amount of money to all school trustees and school boards in 

this province to make those settlements. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, to reply to the question, I am interested first in his 

observation that they are our own teachers. I can remember the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) 

strenuously objecting to any suggestion of that so many times… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

10 

Mr. Blakeney: — Indeed if he was a government employee when he was elected it follows that he 

couldn’t have sat in this Legislature. 

 

To come to the particular question asked, I think the Minister made it perfectly clear that the figure 

announced included (a) the grid increases; (b) the northern isolation bonus and (c) very possibly, 

although he isn’t clear on that, the increments. Now when we have the full details we will certainly 

analyse them. We will see what parts of the settlement apply to the areas in the southern part of the 

province. May I say this, I can assure the Leader of the Opposition and everyone in this House that the 

increase in school grants this year will be far larger than in any year that he served as Treasurer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

FLUORIDATION OF MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLIES 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Minister of Health. In light of the recent release from the National Research Council calling for close 

investigation of the effects of fluoride on man and suggesting that possibly man is adding more fluoride 

to his environment than he should, has his Department made any change in his policy on the 

encouragement of fluoridation of municipal water supplies? 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — To answer, Mr. Speaker, no, there has been no 

change in policy. 

 

Mr. Grant: —To answer, Mr. Speaker, no, there has been no change in policy. A supplementary 

question, is his Department considering a change in policy in light of this? 

 

Mr. Smishek: We shall be considering a policy. 

 

MOTION 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE – EXPORT OF GRAIN 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move pursuant to Standing Order 17 

that Priority of Debate be given to a definite matter of urgent public importance. I should like to state the 

matter of urgent public importance to be: 

 

The reported interruption of the export of grain through Pacific Coast ports consequent upon 

inadequate rail routes, insufficient numbers of box cars and inefficient handling of grain at the 

port, resulting in a drastic reduction of export and possible loss of buyers. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to introduce a statement of a matter of public 

importance. Is leave granted? Carried. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce this subject. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

11 

I think some other Members will probably want to address a few words to this House on it. I raise it in 

this House because I have become alarmed and I know others have become alarmed by successive 

statements which have been issued by authorities who work with the Federal Government, by Cabinet 

Ministers of the Federal Government and more recently by statements attributed to the manager of the 

port of Vancouver. 

 

We have heard of tie-ups because of shortage of ships, tie-ups because of shortage of storage and 

handling facilities, tie-ups because of shortage of boxcars, tie-ups because of blockage of lines by snow 

slides, tie-ups because of the inadequate distribution of boxcars throughout the prairie region. We heard 

a report some days ago from the Hon. Mr. Lang that we were about 25 million bushels behind in 

meeting our overseas commitments, in meeting our commitments with respect to grain which had 

already been sold and only remained to be delivered. At that time Mr. Lang assured us that this gap of 

about 25 million bushels would be caught up. He indicated that it would be caught up by making an all 

out effort, by moving boxcars into Vancouver at the rate of 800 boxcars a day, and that at this rate the 

gap would be closed by mid-May. Many people who I talked to indicated that it just wasn’t possible to 

handle boxcars at the rate of 800 a day at Vancouver, day in and day out. They suggested that probably 

600, day in and day out, was the best that could be done. And apparently my advisers may have been 

right, because more recent statements by a number of people have indicated further cause for alarm. I 

have a copy of a press release issued by the Palliser Wheat Growers Association bearing date February 

21st which indicates that. As a result of a three-day fact finding mission by 25 delegates to Vancouver, 

the Association sent a telegram to Prime Minister Trudeau, Opposition Leader Stanfield, Agriculture 

Minister Olson, and the Hon. Mr. Lang, as well as Chief commissioner Vogel of the Canadian Wheat 

Board, requesting immediate action to remedy the “Disastrous grain situation at Vancouver.” They put 

forward their solution of having unit trains of pre-cleaned grain go to Vancouver. Mr. Nelson the 

president of the Palliser Wheat Growers indicates that shipments through West Coast ports are some 24 

million bushels behind. He says that although the Canadian Wheat Board has set a target of 800 cars per 

day it is not taken seriously out there. When trains can get through they can unload only so many cars 

because of the cleaning situation and when they can’t get through there are not reserves of wheat to load 

the ships. I understand that that’s the current situation today, that there are no reserves of wheat to load 

the ships and that there are variously stated, 13, 14, 15 ships waiting to be loaded. Well, this situation 

which a week or so ago Mr. Lang viewed with equanimity and which the Palliser Wheat Growers 

suggested was a serious matter has now been found to be a serious matter by the Hon. Mr. Lang. 

 

On February 23rd, speaking in Thunder Bay, he said that the pressure on the grain transportation and on 

the handling system is so crucial that the Federal Government might reduce the present sales efforts. 

“We are rapidly reaching a position,” to quote Mr. Lang, “where we might be forced to decide either to 

make sales we might not be able to deliver because of an unpredicted system breakdown or to cut back 

on our present sales efforts.” Mr. speaker, that’s not good enough. This is just not good enough. Surely 

we can organize our grain delivery system so that we can at least get our grain to the port of Vancouver, 

to the ships that are ready to take it… 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

12 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — …grain which we have in abundance at every whistle stop on the prairies. 

 

We agree that no system can operate at 100 per cent capacity all the time. There will be interruptions, 

we all know that. Ships will be delayed at sea and weather will cause delays, there’ll be snow slides, 

there’ll be work stoppages at one place or another in the delivery system, there’ll be boxcar congestion 

and misallocation. We must expect all of those things. We must have a grain-handling system which can 

operate in spite of one or more of those things holding up delivery. We have got to have a system with 

some spare capacity, some margin for dealing with the ordinary problems which will beset any large and 

complicated grain-handling system. 

 

We on this side of the House have put forward some of our solutions. We have called for more storage 

capacity, and this is urgently needed. We have suggested that there be a new rail link connecting the 

CPR and the CNR just west of Kamloops to the Pacific Great Eastern which parallels the CN and the CP 

lines into Vancouver, but just to the West. If there was this 40-mile link between Kamloops and the PGE 

line there would be a third rail line into Vancouver and incidentally a line which is virtually not subject 

to any blockage from avalanches and snow slides. We have had encouraging contacts with the PGE. I 

expect the Deputy Premier who has been doing this on our behalf will enlighten the House on some of 

those contacts. After he has enlightened the House on these contacts I know that the Members opposite 

will enlighten the House on what they did about this matter when they sat here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They will be able to tell us just what they propose to do, and I know they will, I know 

they won’t leave the House disappointed. They will tell us just what they did and why we find that there 

is now a crisis in the grain-handling system due to situations which were clearly discernible one year 

ago and in respect of which they did nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is perhaps not all that much a Provincial Government can do, but we intend to do 

what we can. The Deputy Premier and Mr. Messer, the Minister of Agriculture will be leaving this 

evening and going to Vancouver. They will be there discussing matters with the Wheat Pool and with 

other grain-handling companies. They will be discussing the matter with the Port of Vancouver 

authorities and also with the officials of the Pacific Great Eastern Railway. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was alarmed enough at reading the statements by the Hon. Mr. Lang, saying that it 

looks as if we should have to cut back our sales of wheat. But my alarm was heightened when I heard 

over the news this morning — and I regret that I haven’t got a statement in writing as to what was said, 

but I heard over the news this morning — a report attributed to Mr. Duncan, the acting manager of the 

Port of Vancouver, indicating that the grain-handling situation in the Port now today, was in a state of 

catastrophe. I say, Mr. speaker, that this is simply not good enough. Western farmers don’t demand 

perfection, they don’t demand 100 per cent 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

13 

performance all the time but they do demand that we have a system which has some margin for error. 

They do demand that the Federal Government act to see that we get that system that has that margin for 

error. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They do demand of their Provincial Government that it do everything it can to see 

that the Federal Government acts to get us a proper grain-handling system. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Resolution is to add our weight to representations made by farm 

organization after farm organization across the prairies to the Federal Government. The purpose of this 

Resolution is to add our weight to those representations so that we may speak with a united voice in 

asking the Federal Government to act now, act now in a way to protect our farmers from loss of sales 

due to these quite unnecessary circumstances; act now to get the Federal Government to remedy the 

dilatoriness and the delay which they themselves have caused in the handling of grain of western 

farmers. I want all Member of this House, not only on our side but the side opposite to join with us in 

sending a common representation to the Federal government asking them to act and act now in this very 

important matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think to formalize the debate it is necessary that I move: 

 

That the matter of the reported interruption of the export of grain through Pacific Coast ports 

consequent upon inadequate rail routes, insufficient numbers of boxcars, and inefficient handling of 

grain at the ports resulting in a drastic reduction of exports and possible loss of buyers, be given 

“Priority of Debate” under Rule 17. 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a matter of urgent public 

importance. The Premier’s remarks and the Resolution that he has tabled I think bring that to the 

attention of this House and also, I think, shows the course of action that is open to us in this Assembly in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I am certain that all Members of this Legislature, be they Government or Opposition, be they rural or 

urban representatives, know the seriousness of such problems and how they relate not only to the 

farmers of the Province of Saskatchewan but to the total populace of this province. Every businessman 

and nearly every industry suffers when the farming income of this province plummets downward. And it 

is problems such as these which contribute to those downward declines of farmers’ incomes over which 

they have absolutely no control. 

 

Yesterday it was said in this Assembly that the agricultural production and income of this Province was 

improving; that in fact, is true. But we find when farmers are aware of this rising income situation over 

the past few months and then when they are confronted by a reverse in this trend that the farms can do 

nothing about it. Neither can the Provincial Legislature nor the Provincial Government, though it is 

assumed they have a responsibility. But it is really the responsibility of the 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

14 

Federal Government and the railroads for the handling of grains produced in this Province, thus 

affecting the trends in the farmers’ income. It is not to say here that we do not have recommendations 

and policies and legislation in mind that will contribute to correcting these kinds of problems in a 

long-term nature and in the field that the Provincial government has the opportunity to act in. Those 

kinds of recommendations will be made later during this Session and they will be debated by this 

Assembly. But now it is most urgent that action is taken to resolve the crisis that grain growers in this 

province and their two sister provinces are confronted with so that they will not suffer further reductions 

in their gross and net incomes. 

 

I think it worthwhile to review briefly the calendar of events. This is not the first time that the farmers in 

the Prairie Provinces have been confronted with similar problems. I think the biggest problem similar to 

this started several years ago when we found prairie farmers continuing to produce bumper crops but 

were unable to sell those crops and what crop they were able to sell were at depressed prices and that in 

itself was a very, very serious situation. 

 

Some corrective measures have been taken in the past few months to rectify that situation. We have 

increased our grain sales and the price of grain has increased modestly. But now when we have an 

opportunity to sell that grain at increased prices we find that those people who are responsible for 

moving grain from farms to ports did not have the foresight to take into consideration the need to 

improve their system in order to move the volume of grain. And the farmers are again paying to move 

the volume of grain. And the farmers are again paying for that inadequate handling and transportation 

problem we are confronted with. They are paying for the negligence of the Federal Government and of 

those people who are responsible for the movement of grain. I know that presently there are several 

committees that are looking into the problem of grain rationalization and transportation and the Federal 

Government is involved in those committees. But those committees neither recognize the urgency for 

the solution, nor are they moving fast enough in order to provide the kinds of answers that we need now 

and not sometime in the years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer:  As has been pointed out by the Premier, I know that my colleague, the Hon. Attorney 

General (Mr. Romanow) has some route so that we can improve the delivery of grain to the Western 

ports. I assume that he will be saying something further about that later today. I also know that we have 

arranged to go to the Port of Vancouver to discuss some of these problems and survey the bottlenecks 

and problems that we hear are evident there now. 

 

I should like to further enlighten the Assembly in regard to some of the facts pertaining to the situation 

of grain at our Western ports. Since January 1st exports out of Vancouver have averaged less than half 

of what they last summer expected them to be. Shipments out of Vancouver today are at least behind by 

more than a month and a half. That indicates a backlog of some 35 million bushels of grain and there is 

little chance that we are going to be able to regain that lost ground. That means to prairie farmers a loss 

of something in the neighbourhood 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

15 

of $45 to $50 million. It is also obvious that the problem in regard to the movement and the handling of 

grain didn’t start only in January of 1972, it started before that. There was, week after week after week, 

evidence brought forward that the system was not operating to its optimum capacity in the fall of 1971. 

The problem at Vancouver became more serious because of the bad weather and the train derailments 

and the snow slides that they were encountering during the month of January and early February. 

 

Car unloading in Vancouver were down to 300 cars per day for weeks on end during that time, 300 cars 

in comparison to 700 cars per day which had been established as an average. 

 

On February 2, 1972, the Pacific Coast Terminals had stocks in store of some 7,800,000 bushels, or 27.6 

per cent of their capacity. This was the lowest amount in store since the beginning of this crop year. On 

February 9th a week later this figure had risen modestly to something over 8 million bushels but was 

still only 28.9 per cent of capacity. Of that grain that was in store there I think it is interesting to note 

that 3 million bushels of it was wheat. One million bushels of that being red spring wheat, the rest being 

low-grade wheat. The shipping orders which were known to all those concerned in regard to the 

shipping of grain from the West Coast called only for high grade wheat; they could only load boats 

which were in the port with high grade wheat, yet they had at the terminals only slightly above 3 

millions bushels in store. Furthermore, the fact should not be overlooked that these stocks of grains 

weren’t in one terminal, they were distributed in several — seven to be exact — different terminals, thus 

increasing the difficulty of ships loading at these terminals. It meant in most instances moving the ships 

to two or three different terminals in order to receive a shipload of grain. This I think, Mr. Speaker, 

shows gross negligence in operations at the West Coast. 

 

I should like further to compare just how seriously the exports of grain from the West Coast terminals 

have been affected and how seriously the stocks have decreased at that terminal. If we go back to 

January 26, 1971, we find that there were 6.7 million bushels of grain shipped out of that terminal into 

vessels. In January 1972 that had dropped to something under 6 million bushels. February 2nd of 1971 

they had loaded 4.3 million bushels into sea going vessels, this year they shipped less than that, less than 

4 millions bushels. February 9th 1971, 4.4 million bushels went out, in 1972 just slightly over 3 million. 

February 16th 1971, 6.8 million bushels were shipped, in 1972 slightly over 5 million bushels. This 

shows that we are seriously losing the volume of grain that is needed to load ships in order to meet the 

objectives that we have set. 

 

Now the biggest problem in terms of capacity is the capacity of cleaning and drying units at the West 

Coast. The port can only clean grain from 700 cars per day, while its capacity for loading boats is twice 

that much. Mr. Lang said some time ago that the solution to the problem is that they will ship and unload 

800 cars per day at the port, this means about 8 million bushels per week, or 100 per cent efficiency as 

Mr. Lang terms it. Yet the people at the West Coast tell us that the maximum is 700 cars a day. The fact 

is also there that we need twice that much in order to load the sea-going vessels, 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

16 

16 to 18 million bushels per week in order to fill the ships that are waiting in the harbour today. Up until 

just recently, as the Premier pointed out, Lang and his colleagues in the Federal Government and those 

responsible for the shipping and moving of grain were optimistic. On Monday February 21st the Hon. 

Otto Lang stated, in the House of Commons that the grain exports through Vancouver were proceeding 

well enough to allow the grain-handling system to catch up with the heavy export demands. Mr. Lang 

said the absolute physical maximum of grain was being shipped through Vancouver, then he suggested 

that the situation in Vancouver was not in any way constraining the sales effort of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. However, outside of the House of Commons when he was interviewed by reporters Mr. Lang 

hedged somewhat, he said and I quote, “It is clear that we have to be more capable of handling grain in 

Vancouver in the future than we were in the past.” That was Monday February 21st. Next day he flew in 

his jet to Winnipeg, Thunder Bay at least, and he said this, I quote: 

 

The Wheat Board is being forced into a position where either it will have to make sales contracts 

which cannot be delivered on or it will have to cut back its sales efforts. 

 

All of this indicates that Mr. Lang is getting ready for an admission to the effect that the limitations of 

the grain-handling system presently are going to prevent us from taking advantage of market 

opportunities which exist and which could be had for the asking. This is a most serious matter. He was 

optimistic up until Monday and Tuesday of this week, now he is not quite so optimistic because he 

realizes that unless there is some immediate action taken grain sales are going to be lost. Income to 

farmers in the Prairie Provinces are going to be lost. Income to farmers in the Prairie Provinces are 

going to decline drastically. I know he made an announcement not too long ago that we are going to 

have a two-price system. We agree with that and we welcome it. However, the Prairie Provinces only 

stand to gain in the neighbourhood of $55 million from that two-price system in wheat and the Province 

of Saskatchewan stands to gain somewhere in the area of $30 million, yet these grain sale losses will 

more than offset that $30 million that farmers in Saskatchewan are anxiously expecting and anticipating 

by another $15 to $20 million. Meaning what they still go into the hole by $15 to $20 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and Members of this Assembly, for your information I should like to read a telegram 

that I sent to the Hon. Mr. Lang and the Hon. Don Jamieson, Minister of Transport with regard to the 

concern of the Provincial Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am extremely concerned that recent reports of a drastic reduction of flow of export grain, 

particularly through the Port of Vancouver. Statements suggest loss of markets. Farmers are 

concerned about the situation and accordingly I would request the Government of Canada to take 

such immediate steps as are necessary to rectify the problem and suggest provision of alternate rail 

routes, more boxcars and steps to make more efficient the handling of grain at the Port of 

Vancouver. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Members of this Assembly, as the Premier pointed out we bring this to the attention of 

the Legislature today so that we can indicate to the Federal Government and the grain-handlers, the 

seriousness of this problem and how it 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

17 

reflects on farmers and the populace of the Prairie Provinces and the effects it has on the economy of 

these provinces. We bring it to the attention of this Assembly and to the Federal Government so that we 

can show the Provincial Government’s concern. And we ask of the Members of this Assembly for 

unanimous approval in regard to the resolution, so that immediate action can be taken towards correcting 

this most serious problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition: — Mr. Speaker, I got the emergency debate about two 

hours ago and I did a little checking, as much as I could check in a very short time, to look into the 

situation. Let me say right at the outset of my remarks that we on this side of the House agree that 

anything that imperils or impedes the sale or the movement of grain is, of course, an emergency and we 

are prepared to join with the government to take any practical action or any other kind of action that may 

alleviate and help the situation. 

 

Now, having said that, let’s examine this emergency. What is the emergency? The emergency is 

something that can’t wait has to be done now, right now on this quiet Friday afternoon when we 

normally and traditionally pay a little tribute to the Members of this Legislative Assembly who have 

passed on since last we met. We couldn’t do that, w had to stop. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) rises in his place, and he is now going to table a telegram that he sent to Ottawa. I hope that he 

sent one to the West Coast decrying this emergency and asking for immediate action, because it is a 

crisis. When did he send the telegram? Today? Did he send it before the rock and roll dance that we had 

last night? When did this great emergency happen? That is what I want to ask Mr. Blakeney and his 

Government. 

 

We met yesterday at 11:00 o’clock, to do what? To adjourn the last session of the Legislature. So in 

effect, from last August, until yesterday this House was actually in Session. When did this great 

emergency take place? Did it happen yesterday or today? When did this wide-awake, alert, friend of the 

farmer government discover that there was a disruption in the handling of grain and the placing of grain 

in place and in storage ready for shipment to the West Coast? I guess they just discovered it this 

morning about 11:00 o’clock, because I can’t see any alert, concerned government taking time out to 

have a tea party or a rock and roll dance with the crisis that they say today existed, with the whole fate 

of the farmers of this province hanging in the balance. Certainly if they had said, “Would you forego the 

tea party?” I think we would have done that. I think we would have met last night instead of going to the 

dance. We enjoyed it but we would have considered that the needs of the farmers of this province came 

ahead of any dance or any tea party. When did this emergency take place? 

 

Well I have done a little checking and I have read the newspapers and it started not yesterday, not the 

day before, or last month or the month before, it started in fact, in last November 1971. It started to build 

up and it reached crisis proportions in January or early February. Where was the 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

18 

fearless little Premier who stands up and gets almost hysterical in his condemnation of Otto Lang and 

the Federal Government and our former government. Where was he in November or December or 

January? Why, Mr. Blakeney, did you not reconvene on 48 hours notice, this Legislative Assembly, if 

you really believe that any action that we can take here today, in this emergency debate, would have any 

practical bearing to help solve this problem? If you believe this then Mr. Premier you are derelict in your 

duties and you were asleep at the switch for the last three and a half months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Lets take a little look at the chronological events that built up to this so-called crisis 

that we are now stopping everything to debate. I shall tell you what I believe, Mr. Speaker. Oh, I 

recognize this emergency and I am aware that more needs to be done and I am aware that there are many 

practical solutions that we can join in as a Legislative Assembly to try to bring about. But I am 

convinced that this play today is just another in the growing chapter of cheap grandstand plays of that 

Premier and of the Government to try and get a little cheap public publicity. It started the day after they 

were elected and it has continued ever since. He likes to say, “This just isn’t good enough!” I can tell 

you, Mr. Premier, and your great number of Members, that that just isn’t good enough. And the farmers 

of this province and the farm organizations have already contacted some of you before today. Don’t 

think that what you are doing here is just good enough either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now let’s take a look at when this began to happen. I checked with the officials of the 

Wheat Board. As a matter of fact we met with the officials of the Wheat Board in our caucus today and 

we discussed the situation. Yes, they are still talking to us, Roy. As a matter of fact they will be talking 

to you in a little while, I am sure, if you keep up the attitude that you are displaying now. I can tell you 

that if they had the choice of what Minister they would send gallivanting off to Vancouver, I don’t say 

that would be the last but I will tell you that you wouldn’t be in the first ten, Mr. Romanow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, I checked with the officials of the Wheat Board. I checked with the CNR, the 

Palliser Wheat Growers Association. Who are the Palliser Wheat Growers Association? Well, they will 

be glad to hear that. They are a little group representing the farmers, the wheat-growing farmers in the 

southern part of the province, the centre part of the province, and they may ask after the next election, 

“Who are you?” 

 

They told me that they were involved in this crisis and concerned about it last November. It started in 

November and early December when many of the ships that had been expected to come into the Port of 

Vancouver and the West coast didn’t arrive. Then after January 5th they began coming in and they 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

19 

began piling up. Wheat started to move. They attempted and they hoped to move 800 cars a day. The 

month of January was one of the worst months as far as weather is concerned on the Prairies and in the 

mountains on record. I am just going to give you a chronological short history of events that were well 

known to anyone who was watching the situation. That is why I say when the public realizes what 

happened and what took place and when it took place, it will show up your actions today as a cheap 

political trick which they really are, Mr. Premier. 

 

On January 3rd, 24 cars were derailed on the CPR between Field and Golden. On January 4th the CPR 

had only 1,000 cars on hand. The next day they were down to 600. On January 6th there was another 

derailment in Kamloops and the track was closed for three days. January 7th the cars were down to 197. 

January 8th and 9th there were four snow slides in the field and Revelstoke areas that knocked the rail 

line out for two days. January 10th and 11th everything was slowed down due to severe heavy snowfall. 

Severe weather on the prairies slowed down the movement of grain into the mountainous region. 

Seventy mile an hour winds and more snow slides and another Seventy mile an hour winds and more 

snow slides and another derailment on January 16th. Also on January 16th traffic was stopped to Prince 

Rupert for some six days. January 17th, again less than 1,000 boxcars on hand at the Coast. January 18th 

the CPR suffered a derailment and no traffic over that line for over 20 hours. January 18th there was 12 

inches of snow in nine to 10 hours which brought traffic almost to a standstill. January 19th snow slides 

at Revelstoke; January 19th a derailment, one on the CPR and one on the CNR, tracks out for 24 hours. 

January 19th down to 600 cars at the Coast, not even enough for one day’s shipment. Snowploughs 

stuck, snow 12 feet high, 356 inches of snow fell in 36 hours. January 20th CNR out at Boston Bar, 

numerous slides, cars at the Coast down to 311. January 21st below 300. January 24th hardly any cars at 

the Coast. January 24th Alberta and Saskatchewan Wheat Pools and the United Grain Growers laid men 

off at the West Coast terminals due to car shortage. January 25th Prince Rupert, 40 below zero, at Blue 

River almost no movement of traffic into Prince Rupert. January 26th, 55 below zero at Edmonton to 

slow down traffic into the mountain region almost to a standstill. January 26th the CPR lost to a 

snowfall and traffic was closed on that line for 48 hours. 

 

It goes on like that all through January and into February. I am told that this is the worst year on record 

when I asked the question, “How does this compare to other years?” I was told that two out of the last 

three years have been most difficult and for ten years before that they had very little trouble at all. So 

this has been an emergency situation. Bad conditions for two out of the last three years haven’t been 

equalled in the ten years before that. 

 

I mention this to point out that it is all very well to talk about a crisis now. This has been a very 

exceptional difficult year. I also asked the officials of the Wheat Board what the attitude of the railroads 

were, and of the Wheat Pool. I was told very clearly, by Mr. Turner, that the attitudes of the railroads 

and the co-operation of the railroads was excellent, that in fact during this crisis the CPR had put some 

400 diesel locomotives on the grain haul to the West Coast, actually 40 per cent of their total power; that 

the CPR and the CNR both were co-operating and that the situation today and in the last few weeks had 

improved greatly. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

20 

Mr. Turner pointed out to me that he and the Wheat Pool is very concerned and they are looking for 

practical solutions, whether in fact it is more boxcars, and that is one of solutions. Whether in fact, it is 

more practical storage at the West Coast, and that is one of the solutions. The idea of a third rail line, 

they haven’t looked into but they say if it has any practical solution they would, of course, support it. 

 

We also checked with the Palliser Wheat Growers Association. They were informed by Mr. Wright of 

the Wheat Board at their annual convention on January 6th and 7th right here in Regina, a serious 

shortage of grain in Vancouver was developing. We were also informed by the Palliser Wheat Growers 

that as a result of the co-operation between the Wheat Board, the railroads and the co-operation between 

the Wheat Board, the railroads and the grain-handling facilities at the West Coast that the picture was 

improving rapidly especially since February 17th. As a matter of fact on February 17th they unloaded 

817 cars at the West Coast, on February 18th, 800 cars, February 21st, 840 cars and in addition they 

have been advised that shipping for the past two weeks has been 60 cars per day from the government 

terminal at Edmonton of main grain that will go direct into the ships and will bypass most of the grain-

handling facilities. 

 

The Palliser group have also been advised that now that the strike on the West Coast in the United States 

has been settled, ship congestion in Vancouver harbour has been reduced and is clearing up very rapidly 

and this has not helped the situation. 

 

Mr. Wright of the Wheat Board has also informed the Palliser group that the Wheat Board are 

developing arrangements whereby farmers will be allowed to deliver directly to government elevators at 

Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Lethbridge, Calgary and Edmonton. We also checked with the superintendent of 

transportation of the CNR in Saskatoon and were informed that next week in the Saskatoon block they 

will load some 2,343 cars, of which 1,000 will be going to the West Coast. The cars are now coming in 

very well. As a matter of fact, 160 in that block are now loading this weekend for the West Coast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all this proves that while there was a real emergency and crisis and it is still not totally 

solved, it has improved and it has improved measurably. It also proves that while this crisis developed, 

our Premier and his Government did nothing for over three months and are now only bringing it in today 

in an effort to get some political publicity. 

 

Now we on this side of the House recognize that there must continue to be improvement in the handling 

and shipping of our grain from the prairies to the West Coast and to the head of the Lakes. We need 

more storage facilities at the West Coast and if a third railroad is practical then it should be constructed. 

Any or all of these actions have and will receive our support. 

 

I should like to point out to this House, Mr. Speaker, that under the Hon. Otto Lang the sale and the 

price and the movement of grain have all improved, and improved measurably. His efforts in the face of 

actual political sabotage by NDP Members here and in Ottawa have been outstanding. However, much 

more needs to be done. We, on this side of the House will support any legitimate move made by the 

Saskatchewan Government regardless of what we believe their motives to be. Mr. Speaker, this little 

grandstand play on an otherwise quiet Friday to grab 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

21 

the headlines, doesn’t impress us; from what I’ve checked it won’t impress the farmers or the farm 

organizations. Now we wish Mr. Romanow well on his latest jaunt, I’m glad he’s back from London, 

clearing up the insurance problems. Now he is going out to the West Coast. There is one member of the 

Government in British Columbia who isn’t very impressed. Industrial Development Minister, Waldo 

Skillings of British Columbia Government said Wednesday, he will renew proposals for a super port at 

Prince Rupert, British Columbia, when he meets in Vancouver Saturday with representatives of the 

Prairie Provinces. I presume that’s the meeting that the Honourable Attorney General is going to. In an 

interview, Mr. Skillings said, the Saskatchewan delegates suggested the Canadian National Railway 

branch line be built from Kamloops to Lillooet so that shipment of grain, potash and other cargo can be 

rerouted to the Pacific Great Eastern Railroad then to Vancouver. The Minister, that is, Mr. Skillings 

said this would not solve the problem because the congestion occurs in Vancouver itself and he is 

supporting the super port. However, we wish the Attorney General well. I would say, Mr. Premier, that I 

think everyone would have been much more impressed had you sent along with Mr. Romanow, your 

Minister of Agriculture, possibly a Member from this side of the house…Oh, he’s going! You won’t get 

lonesome Roy. Pleased to hear that. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I tried to say that earlier. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That certainly will strengthen the delegation. Now if you would get one of the farm 

Members from this side to put a little intelligence into the delegation then you could sit down with some 

of the farm organizations and ask them, like the Palliser group and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, I 

think that you would have a delegation that has some hope of achieving success. However, we do wish 

you well and I say this, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier and to the Members of the Government. You may 

have a resolution to go forward through the Federal Government or anyone else that in any way will 

bring about a solution, a long-term solution to help the grain-handling facilities here on the prairies, at 

the West Coast or at the head of the Lakes or the Port of Churchill, we on this side will support it. But 

again I say what this proves from the information we got from the railroads, from the Wheat Pool, from 

the Palliser group and the information that has been in the press proves beyond any shadow of a doubt 

that this crisis started not this day or yesterday, not last week but last year in November and December. 

Where was the minister of Agriculture? Where was the Premier? If they, in fact, honestly think that his 

action we are taking today will help, my question to the Premier is, why didn’t he call this House into 

session a week ago, a month ago, or two month ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it always is a pleasure to 

follow the Leader of the Opposition in any debate, in fact, to listen to the Leader of the Opposition in 

any debate. There are so few Liberals over on the opposite side that it is a treat to have the Leader, at 

least liven up the proceedings from the opposite side. But, I must say that some of the logic of the 

Leader of the Opposition in the Liberal Party, I find frankly very confusing. The Leader of the 

Opposition will have 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

22 

the public position made out by the Liberal Party, that he supports the introduction of this matter as an 

emergency matter of debate. That’s what he says publicly. Then he goes on to say this is a so-called 

emergency, you’ll note, Mr. Speaker. Then, in his remarks he said, “What is an emergency?” What is 

this so-called emergency he said. Thirty million bushels behind schedule, thirty million bushels behind 

schedule of shipping of export grain and the Leader of the Opposition said, “What is this so-called 

emergency?” 

 

Mr. Steuart: — When did it happen? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Farm economy threatened by this delay and this shortage, and the Leader of the 

Opposition says, “What is this so-called farm emergency?” The Leader of the Opposition says, “You 

know, Mr. Speaker, I say that this move by the New Democratic Party Government is nothing but a 

cheap grandstand play.” That’s what he says. Well, we all know, Mr. Speaker that the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Liberal Party opposite would not be a party to a cheap grandstand play, would you, 

Mr. Leader of the Opposition? We know, Mr. Leader of the Opposition and Members of the Liberal 

Party, that you wouldn’t want it to be conveyed to the Press that you joined hands with the New 

Democratic Party in a cheap grandstand play thereby lending some credence to what the Government 

has proposed. No! no! not the Leader of the Opposition. We know that he is against cheap grandstand 

plays. At least that is the new Leader of the Opposition. Because I recall when the now Leader of the 

Opposition was sitting over where I was sitting and I want to tell the new Members of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that if there is an expert on cheap grandstand plays it was he. Oh, I know when they were over 

on this side everyone of them the Leader of the Opposition, the Minister of Health, the Member from 

Athabasca, two Members over on the far right sitting over there. I recall very vividly, Mr. Speaker, when 

they got up during the slightest suggestion of labour tie-ups or labour dispute, I mean the slightest of 

suggestions and there was an emergency before this House instigated by the Leader of the Opposition. 

That wasn’t a cheap grandstand play. Oh no, as far as the Leader of the Opposition was concerned, that 

was acting in the public interest. But when the government comes in to pinpoint the crisis in 

transportation today, to highlight this, the first debating session, the Leader of the Opposition turns 

around with his new image. He says now that’s a cheap grandstand play. Mr. Speaker, he says, that we 

recognize there is an emergency. We recognize there is an emergency, but when did the emergency 

arise. He then gets up and he recites facts and figures that he says he obtained, I’m not sure, from either 

the Wheat Board or the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And if you listen to the recitation of all of that 

calendar of events starting at about December, January, February you will notice that they didn’t start in 

November when there wasn’t even any snow on the line as the Leader of the Opposition says but only 

after heavy winter falls in December and in January and in February. He says when did the government 

realize there was a crisis. Why didn’t you cancel the tea yesterday? Why didn’t you cannel the dance 

yesterday, and bring in the resolution yesterday? I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition what the 

Government did do. The Government wrote to his colleague, his Liberal confrere, the Minister in 

Charge of Transportation, Mr. Jamieson, pinpointing on February 2nd — we didn’t realize suddenly on 

February 2nd there was an emergency, as the Leader of the Opposition would have this House believe, 

because of the 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

23 

gathering of the evidence. In the telegram to Mr. Jamieson, at that time we pinpointed to Mr. Jamieson, 

a serious crisis. We said to him, look you’re the Minister of Transportation, you’re the man who has the 

influence over the National Harbour authority. You are the man who has the influence and control over 

the CTC. You are the man who has some interest over the railway companies. We said, take some 

action. And we made a specific suggestion in addition to the generalities with respect to the Pacific 

Great Eastern. That’s what we did on February 2nd. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Will the Hon. Minister… 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Then, we waited. We waited until February 17th for a response. February 17th, 

fifteen days later after the telegram, the Honourable Mr. Jamieson replies and he says this: 

 

This is in reply to your telex of February 1, urging that a third rail route be established into 

Vancouver to expedite grain. 

 

We mentioned in there also potash and sulphur movements because of the general economic problem. 

He said this: 

 

I have had this matter investigated by the Canadian Transport Commission, and I enclose two 

situation reports. One dealing with export commodity requirements in Vancouver and the second 

projections of rail transportation capability in meeting export commodity demands. Briefly, both 

railways have made giant strides toward restoring their lines to normalcy. And if they are fortunate 

enough to enjoy reasonable weather for the rest of the month, they will meet demands in specific 

areas while in others there will be a shortfall. 

 

Now here is the Minister of Transportation, he says you know there is a terrific problem here we 

recognize. He said all the railways have done quite a good job in cleaning up the problem and we’ll 

cross our fingers and we’ll cross our toes and we’ll cross our legs and we’ll hope that everything returns 

to normalcy and if there is normalcy forgetting about the fact that as spring comes closer in late 

February and March there are more and more slides and more and more difficulties in transportation. As 

far as the Minister says if things are given a break weather wise why he said everything will work out all 

to the good. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I wonder if the Minister would table those telegrams he is purporting to read from. He 

read one that sounds as if it’s forty-seven pages long. Would you mind tabling it. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, it’s not forty-seven pages long. It happens to be just one page. I’ll table it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Would you read back to where he crossed his toes and his legs. Where does it say that? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That’s my proper conclusion as a result of Mr. Jamieson’s letter. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

24 

Mr. Steuart: — Will you table it? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll table it, I’ll table the telegrams as soon as I finish the speech. I’ll table the 

telegrams and I’ll table the letter. I wanted to ask the Leader of the Opposition whether or not he really 

believes seriously that there could be any other conclusion reached from the letter of Mr. Jamieson, the 

portions of which I read, other than to hope and to keep their fingers crossed as I have said. Have they 

offered any other solution or any other conclusion that can be drawn from this? Absolutely none! I 

haven’t finished reading from it yet Mr. Leader of the Opposition. As soon as I finish reading it I’ll table 

it. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the first thing that the Minister of Transport said. Then he said this. 

 

However there are two factors which must be considered in comparing demand and capability. The 

first is that the vessels’ arrivals are for the most part estimated time of arrival and experience has 

shown that very frequently such estimated time of arrivals are not met. 

 

That’s what the Minister of Transport said on February 17th, when there is something like fifteen ships 

not estimated but in the harbour waiting for the grain. The Minister of Transportation says that such 

things are estimated times of arrivals. And he said the second factor – this is strange Liberal logic – the 

second factor is that line capability is not necessarily the definitive criterion in meeting demand since if 

terminal capability is exceeded it leads to congestion and delays. What he does say is the very thing the 

Premier talked about in his remarks. He said if we can ever get the tracks cleared and if we’re ever 

moving the grain that we think can be moved then we shall have a problem at the other end. He says we 

can get the operation moved out of the terminals. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I wonder if he is quoting now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think he has a paper in his hands. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say, to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that he isn’t listening these days and I 

can further tell him, Mr. Speaker, because he is not listening, come the next election in 1975 or 

whatever, the people of Saskatchewan will give him the same rebuke that they did about seven months 

ago. So I implore you again, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, please listen to way we say. You may have 

difficulty in understanding but listen anyway. Mr. Speaker, the last paragraph with respect to Mr. 

Jamieson’s letter goes on to say that the CPR and CNR are very worried that if they open up a third line 

to the PGE that there are going to be some additional problems with respect to the CP and the CN but I 

don’t think it would contribute much to this particular aspect of the debate. The point that I’m getting at 

there is that the Liberal Party opposite keeps on asking through their official spokesman, Leader of the 

Opposition, when it is an emergency, what is an emergency. They don’t understand the emergency that 

everybody clearly has pointed out to them through all the Western Producer papers, commodity papers 

and through the people throughout the Dominion of Canada. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

25 

The Leader of the Opposition sys that there is excellent co-operation now existing between the railway 

companies and others. That may very well be the case but if there is excellent co-operation it’s 

inadequate to do the job. This motion does not say that there isn’t excellent co-operation. This motion 

doesn’t say that there has been some additional wheat moved. What it says, as the Premier has said, that 

the capability isn’t there to have a margin of error such as exists now creating the crisis in Western 

Canada. That there isn’t that margin of error built into the entire transportation system, for example, in 

the case of a stroke, so that we can carry that, but there is a first class emergency and as spring comes 

closer to us it is likely to increase rather than to improve, no matter what the motivations and the degree 

of co-operation that exists among the railways and the like. We didn’t suggest this to be an overall 

solution to this problem. 

 

I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition in the House when he asks us what did we do, we inherited a 

government on June 23, 1971, which put so much importance on rail transportation problems that they 

had only one official giving advice, my predecessor, the then Hon. Attorney General, Mr. Heald, one 

person, no studies with respect to grain delivery systems, none whatsoever. They didn’t know about the 

grains group study report that has come to this table now. They knew nothing about it, they had no 

concern about it. They had no studies about this capability of delivering which the Leader says has 

problems three years out of four. No information or statistical data. They had nothing about the 

capabilities with respect to the Port of Vancouver. They couldn’t because the one man worked as hard as 

he could and he couldn’t meet the demands that were before him. Here is the Liberal Government of the 

day saying when did we realize, all you had to realize as soon as we took office on June 23rd that there 

wasn’t enough ability in the hands of the Government to analyse the problem as it should be and we’re 

taking steps to rectify that immediately. Now, Mr. Speaker the Liberal Party like in so many other things 

has left the Province of Saskatchewan in the lurch, by its lack of planning and its lack of concern for the 

farmers of Saskatchewan in this area of rail transportation. We’re going out to Vancouver tonight, my 

colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, and myself. There are two reasons for it. Basically, the first 

reason is the quotation which the Leader of the Opposition gave in the course of his remarks with 

respect to the Advisory Council on the question of port authority. Secondly, I’ll be meeting with 

officials from the PGE to discuss the possibility of this third rail route. By and large, statistically this 

looks like an interesting avenue of opportunity open to the people and to the farmers of our particular 

area. The PGE themselves, notwithstanding Mr. Skillings, is excited about the idea. It’s not the only 

solution, the third rail line, it’s not the only solution by a long shot. But the PGE does have the 

capability. They can move up to 400 boxcars per day. The rail lines, the ties and the like are absolutely 

strong enough to carry the lad. Just imagine, Mr. Speaker, what wonderful opportunity there would have 

been, in this period of crisis, if we had simply gotten the railroads and the Federal Government together 

to open up a third rail line. Maybe we wouldn’t have had this debate today. That’s what we are going to 

meet about tomorrow, to see how far we can pursue the idea. Maybe there is some economic or other 

reason that’s not open to the knowledge of the Government that may kill it. I don’t know, I hope not. 

We’re going there with a view to exploring 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

26 

it as a possibility. We want to see how many ships are in harbour, what type of problems the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and Neptune Terminals and all the others have with respect to the situation, 

in order to be able to advise the Government and the farmers, the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan as a result of this first-hand look. 

 

We come to this House, and I close on this theme, Mr. Speaker. We come to the House saying that there 

is an emergency. If there is any evidence or any fact needed to prove the emergency it was done by the 

Leader of the Opposition himself, when he went on with that long recitation of delays, of facts provided 

to him by the Canadian Wheat Board. I am disappointed that the Leader of the Opposition couldn’t rise 

above his political partisanship, that he couldn’t see fit to endorse, not with a so-called crisis comment, 

to endorse, not with any strings or any reluctance but to endorse and to join hands with the Government 

and the people of Saskatchewan to try to work to start solving this problem. I’m very sorry that the 

Liberals opposite didn’t take that position and that posture. I hope they vote for the motion, I hope they 

vote for the subsequent motion which will be tendered subsequently in this debate which I hope will 

offer some form of a solution. I think they’ll do it, Mr. Speaker. Not because they believe there’s a crisis 

but because they know that if they fail to do it, then they wouldn’t have a change politically, ever, in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I’m very sorry to say that it closes the debate not on a note of one of 

statesmanlike concern for the needs of our people but of petty political concerns of the new leader, the 

Leader of the Opposition and the Liberal Party sitting opposite. I urge all Members of the House to 

support the emergency debate. 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Yes, I am a farmer and I have always been a farmer and 

that’s where I came from and so the remarks from across the way are not entirely called for. I want to 

thank the Hon. Premier for the length of notice that we’ve been given in this debate. I was here all 

morning, in the Legislature, in this building. I had lunch downstairs and I didn’t leave this building until 

1:30 pm and I did not know at that time that this debate, that this crisis debate with respect to which 

priority was to be given by this House was to be dealt with this after. And it’s very obvious to me that 

while a crisis in the minds of the Members opposite has been building now for anywhere up to one or 

two or three months, it was their intention to spring this kind of a debate on us, entirely without advance 

notice or with the minimum advance notice. If they intended to do it they could, at least, have let us 

know yesterday, a little note across the way would not have been out of place at all. So I want to thank 

them for al the length of notice we’ve had. 

 

But it does appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that what has happened is that they didn’t know there was a crisis 

at all. The Wheat Pool tells us that this crisis and this problem to whatever extent it was building up, was 

building up before Christmas and has built up in January, particularly because of the unusual snows 

we’ve had this year and they have been concerned and so has the Federal Department of Transport and 

Mr. Otto Lang. But this Government reminds me of the lady in the last war. I am told that when they 

came to evacuate her house about a month or two after the war began, she wasn’t 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

27 

aware that a war had begun. I think that what happened here, Mr. Speaker, is that these people weren’t 

aware that there was a crisis until they had to find something to highlight Mr. Romanow’s trip to 

Vancouver. I do think they are alarmed. They are alarmed because Mr. Romanow may end up in 

Vancouver without anybody knowing about it, or they’re afraid the problem might be solved before they 

had time to become alarmed about it. I am told that Mr. Romanow went down to Ottawa to the National 

Conference on Law and he left Regina and went to Ottawa and came back with a very small amount of 

publicity and this is something which the Hon. Minister can’t stand at all. I was just noticing a piece in 

the paper the other day, Mr. Speaker, “Snowmobile Operators Warned”, this was January 19. The 

Attorney General warned about the Arctic Cat Snowmobile and the very defective manufacture of one 

of these pieces of equipment. Now this wasn’t the first time that he dealt with this. It was repeated on 

two occasions, the seriousness of this demanded that he bring it to the attention of the people. Then what 

happened, Mr. Speaker, is finally the distributor of this machine came to his own defence and said none 

of these were in this province here at all. He is very concerned. There wasn’t a single on of those 

defective machines in the Province of Saskatchewan. There is fearless Roy! Now one phone call would 

have discovered this. Well…goodness sakes…it’s quote obvious, Mr. Speaker, that he missed the mark 

by a mile and he’s got to get something else to highlight the jaunt of the Attorney General and the Hon. 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

What has happened, Mr. Speaker, with respect to this Vancouver trip is very simple. They’ve got to 

have some brass band to let everybody know they’re going to Vancouver. Now, I wondered about the 

brass band. Perhaps they could have done it that way. Obviously they would like to hit the weekend 

papers. Mr. Romanow and Mr. Messer are going to board a train or a plane and head for Vancouver 

tonight. Away they go! They’ve got to have the maximum publicity and therefore they save the crisis 

which has been occurring since December for today. Not because it’s a crisis but because they want the 

people to know that they are going to Vancouver. This hero, who was not able to pinpoint a problem in a 

snowmobile, thinks he has found one out in Vancouver. I recommend that he hire a brass band to meet 

him at the plane or the train, but the brass band approach isn’t one that we like. I understand that we’ll 

hear more about this brass band, but the brass band approach is something that this Opposition 

condemns, in the handling of the affairs of this province by the Government across the way. Surely to 

goodness this isn’t the way to handle the affairs of the Province. This forum is not a forum for the 

personal aggrandizement of the people across the way or to be used merely to publicize their jaunts 

around the country. 

 

One think about it they have done a grand job of avoiding to give any credit whatsoever where credit is 

due. They say, “We have increased our grain sales.” Where does the Hon. Minister of Agriculture get 

off with this ‘we’ business. They didn’t increase anybody’s sales of grain. It was the Federal 

Government and the Hon. Mr. Otto Lang who made more grain sales in the past four years than any 

NDP Government would ever have done in 24 years. All I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is that 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

28 

once in a while I should like to hear from across the way a little credit where credit is due. You become 

very, very conscious after you have been in the House a while of the way they approach things. If 

something goes well, “We did it, we made grain sales.” Then to take the limelight off the man who is 

making an astounding success of grain sales, they want to point up some critical mistake, but it wasn’t 

so critical that they could call the House in at a regular and earlier time in February. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I condemn them for the kind of grandstand, brass band approach that this thing is. I commend 

the approach, the calm, reasoning, intelligent approach of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Palliser 

group. I condemn the hysterical brass band approach of the NDP and the Saskatchewan Farmer Union. 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, like the former speaker, I wasn’t aware that there was 

going to be a debate on this and I’ve been waiting very patiently to hear from some of the farm Members 

opposite. We haven’t got all the backbenchers over there sorted out yet, but surely there are some 

farmers back there someplace., I don’t think they are all school teachers and clergymen and we’ve been 

a bit surprised that we’ve only had three of the front Ministers say anything in this particular debate. I 

was prompted to get up, chiefly by the remarks from the Members opposite about the Palliser Group. 

They said, “Who are the Palliser Group?” This is a rather odd way to talk about a group of dedicated 

farm people trying to improve the lot of the grain grower in this province. They have formed an 

organization and they have several thousand members. They’ve had a successful convention here. I’m 

just telling you this for your information because apparently you don’t know who the Palliser Group are 

and I think that perhaps in the next few years you may find out. 

 

It seems to me that the Members opposite have perhaps forgotten that they are now the Government. 

Now this may be understandable because this is only the second day of the Session and we can realize 

that it is quite possible that they have forgotten this. But people are going to start saying now, “What are 

you going to do?” I think that the Premier, for example, called for more storage. He called for a new rail 

line, he called for action from someone else. The Attorney General and the Minister of Agriculture 

echoed his words. We must be realistic, Mr. Speaker, and realize that really nobody is going to listen to 

you people calling for some action. You can’t spend the next three years just calling for somebody else 

to do something. People are going to want you to do something yourself. Mr. the Attorney General got 

up and entertained us for ten or fifteen minutes and I always enjoy his speeches, but really he didn’t tell 

us wheat the Government was going to do, he didn’t even tell us what he was going to do when he goes 

to the Coast. He appeared to have no plans for any action. We know for example that there is a shortage 

of storage and cleaning facilities on the Prairies and in Saskatchewan. We also should like to know from 

this Government if they plan on constructing some storage and cleaning facilities. There’s certainly a 

shortage of rolling stock. We need the new hopper-type of cars. Now we have a steel mill in this 

Province and you people say we have some unemployed people, and I’m sure you are right. I should like 

to know from the Government if they have any plans for constructing some of this rolling stock. 

Anything that is practical and concrete. They are going to find out that the people of this 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

29 

Province are not going to be satisfied with telegrams to Ottawa, they’re not going to be satisfied with 

you calling on somebody else to do something, they’re not going to be satisfied with incompetent 

delegations to Ottawa and to the West Coast, they want something practical done, not speeches in here 

in righteous indignation. They’re going to say, you’re the Government; you were voted in last June; you 

have a good majority, and what are you going to do besides howling to Ottawa or to someone else. This 

is the question the people of the Province and us as an Opposition are going to want answered in this 

House. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — I really shouldn’t rise today because I’ve got a bad cold and I 

apologize for it. I really hadn’t decided what I’d speak on until I listened to the Leader of the 

Opposition. As usual he put on a very good show. He reminds me of a hen on a hot stove – really 

bouncing around. You know, one of the questions he asked was, “When did the emergency happen?” 

Well the emergency happened, but don’t forget, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, that even a week ago the 

Hon. Otto Lang was still saying everything was going to be fine. He was saying this in the statements 

which the Premier read out. 

 

If you had been listening to the Attorney General he spelled out exactly what the Government had been 

doing in the last three or four months. And after all, Mr. speaker, today was really the first day in which 

this Legislature had met, where this could be discussed. 

 

I want to compliment the Premier for acting in the way he did in bringing forth this motion so that we 

could express the opinions of the House, in no uncertain terms, and I was glad to hear the Leader of the 

Opposition say that he and the Liberals are going to support it. It was very noticeable that neither the 

Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) nor the Hon. Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) 

said they were going to support it. I’m still wondering what they are going to do. It was interesting to 

note that neither one of them mentioned the crisis, they never talked about the need of doing something, 

all they talked about was what had been said from this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Stick together… 

 

Mr. Meakes: — You will eh! Well…There aren’t many of you to stick together with any more. After 

the next election there’ll be less. I’m only going to speak for another minute or so. I rise as a person who 

has spent my full lifetime on the far, and I know this, I’m sure that the Hon. Members from the farm 

seats over there know as well as I do that our farmers are in dire need of cash. Even though sales look 

better and we’re all a bit more optimistic, once more the railways consider only themselves, they do 

nothing until they have to and then often it’s too late. Thirty years ago when I rode boxcars through the 

mountains there were snow sheds there at that time, but not enough and they still haven’t built them. My 

memory goes back to the 1950s when in this House certain Members moved motions and the Liberal 

Opposition that was over there at that time opposed those motions asking for the Federal Government to 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

30 

put in a boxcar controller who would have authority to tell the railways that the cars should be moved 

and nothing was done about it. When one looks at the report by a Federal House of Commons 

Committee, a report of 1966, there were a good many recommendations in there that would have helped 

some of the problems that we are facing today, but nothing was done. Consistently, the Liberal Party, 

whether it was under St. Laurent or under Pearson or now under Trudeau, thinks little of what happens 

to the western farmer. So I want to throw my support completely behind this emergency action that we 

are suggesting today and I certainly hope that all other Members will also do so. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, unlike the Members opposite I intend to deal with the 

subject of this debate, which is, grain transportation and storage. Surge capacity at the West Coast Ports 

has become a matter of urgency in the past weeks, not only because of the reasons that have been 

already cited in this Legislature but also because of President Nixon’s visit to China. That visit should 

serve notice that the United States will soon be making moves to enter the Chinese grain market. The 

situation will become increasingly competitive. Now is no time to lose grain sales because of an 

inability to deliver upon demand. There must be a comprehensive approach to ensure surge capacity. 

The Federal Government has failed miserably in providing the flexibility in transportation and storage 

facilities to provide this surge capacity. 

 

There are at least three alternatives that should be examined. Firstly the most serious problem at present 

is the inability of railroads to move grain in the winter. Slides occur regularly in the winter and in the 

spring in the Fraser Canyon. They have always occurred and they will continue to occur. The possibility 

of a 40-mile rail link with the PGE, which is virtually slide free, would assure that grain could reach the 

point of export. 

 

Secondly, further to solving the transportation problem, there should be immediate meaningful study of 

the usefulness of the unit train bulk loading system. It could well be the case that if the railroads were 

required to restructure their charges at government terminals in the prairies this system could be less 

costly. While it is apparently the case at present the unit train system is more costly than the 

conventional system. It has real possibilities in terms of overcoming the lack of surge capacity. 

 

Thirdly, at present the responsibility of storage capacity at the West Coast has been left with the grain 

companies to be paid for by farmers. The fact is, however, that grain is a national resource; when 

farmers suffer from the loss of sales, we all suffer. Grain storage costs should be shared by the National 

Government. We all know that the Members opposite, along with the National Government are quite 

anxious to take away what little support there is for grain storage under the Temporary Wheat Reserves 

Act. While that Act is imperfect it is at least something. The Federal Government should immediately 

offer the farmer-owned grain companies financial assistance to build the necessary surge capacity. It is 

time for action now. I support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

31 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move pursuant to Rule 17, paragraph 11(b), which, if I may 

paraphrase a moment, provides that if the prior motion which we just passed is carried in the affirmative, 

a motion without notice strictly relevant to the subject matter shall be in order. I move pursuant to that 

paragraph 11(b) of Rule 17 of the following motion, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Messer, which I contend 

to be strictly in order: 

 

That this Assembly record its extreme anxiety at the drastic reduction in the export of grain 

particularly through the West Coast Port of Vancouver and requests the Government of Canada and 

its appropriate agencies, particularly the Minister of Transport and the Minister in Charge of the 

Canadian Wheat Board, to take such immediate steps as are necessary, in concert with the railway 

companies and others, to provide alternative routes, more boxcars, and more efficient handling of 

grain at Vancouver in order that grain for export flow freely and further, that this resolution be 

conveyed immediately by the Speaker of the Assembly to the appropriate Ministers, aforesaid, and 

the Prime Minister of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have given a copy of that a few moments ago, to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart). I think no large amount of debate is necessary at this time since I think we have had debate and 

accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just before we think has been fairly thoroughly discussed 

by Members on both sides of the House here, there is one point that has been made and it seems to me it 

bears repeating and emphasizing in a stronger manner than perhaps has been made and perhaps is 

embodied in the current resolution. That is the fact that this is not indeed a crisis that has arisen last 

night or this morning, it is a crisis that has been building up. It is a situation that the Government must 

have been aware of. We did learn a little bit in the course of this debate that perhaps one reason why this 

matter came to the attention of the House today was because of the proposed trip of the Attorney 

General (Mr. Romanow) and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). I don’t say that is the sole 

reason, I wouldn’t be so naïve as to suppose that as the only motive of the Government in this regard. To 

put the aspect of this that represents the thinking of some Members certainly on this side, I should like to 

propose an amendment to that motion. It is as follows: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding after the word “Canada” in the last line the following words: 

 

And that this Assembly record its regret that the Government of Saskatchewan took so long to 

recognize the grain-handling situation and failed to take any action until today. 

 

The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Blakeley: — Mr. Speaker, may I just add a word to that. First, the previous debate made it perfectly 

clear that the Attorney General had been in tough with the Minister of Transport. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

32 

Perhaps he should have been alarmed that the Minister of Transport ignored a wire for two weeks, 

perhaps he should have insisted that he get some quicker reply to a wire dated February 1st than a letter 

dated February 17th. Perhaps he should have done that. You have a letter dated February 17th, Sire, in 

reply to a wire dated February 1st, Sir. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s Pickersgill! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is perfectly clear I think that perhaps the fault lies in thinking that Mr. Jamieson 

would do something. Perhaps the fault lies in relying upon the word of the Hon. Mr. Lang. May I quote 

from the Leader-Post of February 22nd quoting the Hon. Mr. Lang on February 21st: 

 

Severe winter conditions, large sales abroad and last arrival of ships on the West Coast have 

created some shipping problems, Mr. Lang said, but the situation is in hand. 

 

On February 21st, Mr. Lang says, “The situation is in hand,” so perhaps we made a mistake by believing 

Otto Lang. We’ll not make that mistake again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Otto Lang was not aware that there was a crisis on February 21st and one would 

have thought that he might be aware of it. As I say, we will not make that mistake again. On February 

23rd, Mr. Lang became aware that there might be some sort of a problem. On February 25th, and that’s 

this morning, the Manager of the Port of Vancouver says it’s a catastrophe! Now that really didn’t come 

as a surprise but I didn’t realize it was that bad until this morning. I had thought that what Mr. Lang said 

on Monday of this week was possibly reliable. I began to doubt it on Wednesday when he began to 

hedge. I now doubt it totally on Friday because of the comments of Mr. Duncan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — So it was this series of events that led to this Resolution today. We were aware, of 

course, as everybody was aware who can read that there were snow slides and problems. We didn’t 

know the extent of the problem until today. We were lulled into the belief that things were in hand by 

statements by Federal Ministers who said that things were in hand. We know they were wrong, we know 

that in fact there were erroneous, we are not asking this House to join with us in asserting that things are 

not ‘in hand’ and join with us in asking the Federal Government that for heaven’s sakes let’s get things 

‘in hand’. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I want to keep my remarks brief. I came to this 

Session ready to do a lot of hard work and I thought that after last year when we had such a politically 

active year preceding the Provincial election, by-elections, Federal elections and so forth, that we may 

be really ready to get down to some very hard serious work, particularly with the 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

33 

Government suggesting the many programs which they had. But I guess again this year the NDP 

Government has decided to devote this Session of the Legislature to the Federal election campaign. Last 

year it was to the Provincial campaign so this year we shall devote this one to the Federal election 

campaign and we have got underway this afternoon which is pretty obvious. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say one thing to the Premier because he makes a great to-do about no 

answer to the letter, I might answer him this way if I concluded from all the answers I’ve got to letters I 

have written the present Government, that there was no action being taken because I didn’t hear from 

them very promptly. I should conclude that there is a very inactive group of people sitting opposite. For 

answers I have awaited replies extending up to two months. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that I have not 

concluded, simply because I didn’t receive a reply the next day, that they weren’t doing anything about 

it. I might say also that after two or three months have elapsed I usually have received a reply and I 

appreciate that very much. So I think the Premier is simply treading on some pretty thin ice in saying 

that they didn’t get a reply to the letter and that this means they weren’t doing anything. Now I think 

anybody who applies any type of logic would be able to determine that the fact he didn’t get a letter the 

day after he sent one didn’t mean they didn’t really mean that nobody was doing anything. It just meant 

that they didn’t happen to write him, that’s the only thing, Mr. Speaker. So I think for a person in his 

position to try to construe that nothing is happening is illogical. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the only thing that I have been enlightened about today and which has been 

overlooked, I think, at least so far in this debate is what the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) said. 

The one positive thing he said is that he is in favour of substantial changes in the grain-handling system 

in Saskatchewan and they will be most interested to find out what those changes should be. I think that 

that will be a topic for discussion. He has made his position clear today in favouring change and most of 

us agree. I, as a farmer, shall be most happy to find out what those changes are in the very near future. 

So we shall be looking forward and in fact pressing him to find out what his ideas really are in that 

particular subject. 

 

Now I am not against the Attorney General and the Minister of Agriculture going out to Vancouver. It 

will be a nice trip for them and if they can do us some good so much the better. They are gaining a 

reputation for being a very well travelled group. The Minister went to Romania for a month. I don’t 

know whether it took him that long to see that tractor factory or not but I think he was gone for about a 

month and we shall ask him about what he did learn over there… 

 

Mr. Messer: — …conference. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, that’s good. The Attorney General went to see Lloyds of London for a while, 

I think it took him three weeks or so to talk to Lloyds. The Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson) went to 

Washington for a week. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

34 

An Hon. Member: — …he went to organize SGIO. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — No, no, he went to London. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You can ask me all the questions you want. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We’ll be asking you what you did over there. You’ll get a chance… 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think under Rule 17 of an emergency debate like we are having, it is a very 

restricted debate and I know that I have allowed a lot of latitude on both sides but I think some of the 

other actions can be taken under consideration at a later date. I would ask that you kindly stay closer to 

the motions which are before us. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I am just pointing out that the Member for Yorkton went to 

Washington for a week, and the Attorney General went to London, the Minister of Agriculture went to 

Romania and all of these trips we should like to know what good they did and after a while we shall find 

out, hopefully, after the Estimates come out. We know we shall send them to Vancouver and we hope 

they come back with great results because if they can do some good, that is exactly what we want. 

Personally, I am very doubtful. I think the attempt is mostly for publicity, to a large extent, as has been 

suggested by my colleague but I am sure that if they can do any good out there they can help the grain-

handling system. If they can come back with one concrete idea we shall be glad to hear from them on 

Monday morning when they get here. They can then tell us what they did and what they learned, and 

what they are going to do about it. We shall be most delighted, Mr. Speaker, because as we all know we 

are a grain-producing province and anything that we can do to put more grain through is good. That is 

what we all want. If they get a free trip out of it and don’t come back with much, well, and at the 

taxpayers’ expense, well I guess it is all right too. 

 

I second the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I think that the first thing that we should have in this House 

is a ruling from the Chair as to what constitutes an emergency. Here we have an emergency debate 

called this afternoon on a question of great urgency.  

 

The problems that have been set out by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) earlier in this so-

called emergency that has led up to this debate today, have existed for over three months and the 

Government has not acted. The Hon. Premier (Mr. Blakeney) has stood up before this House and has 

blamed the Minister of Transport for the reason for this delay and why the debate had to be called today. 

 

First of all we have a letter, a telex, from the Attorney General, Mr. Romanow, to the Minister of 

Transport dated 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

35 

February 2nd and which has been tabled in the House suggesting linking the CNR and the CPR west of 

Kamloops with the Pacific Great Eastern Railway. It is not a simple little problem that is going to be 

decided in a day. There was an immediate reply on February 2nd that this matter would be raised and 

brought to the attention of the Minister of Transport. The Minister of Transport in a little more than two 

weeks, Mr. Speaker, has had the matter investigated by the Canadian Transport Commission and has 

enclosed in his letter to the Attorney General, which was filed by the Attorney General, two situation 

reports. One deals with the export commodity requirements in Vancouver and the second, projections of 

commodity demand. And this means, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Premier that the Minister of Transport was 

doing something in those two weeks and that this Government has had ample time to deal with this 

problem. 

 

We sat in this House, and I am sorry that I was absent — but the other Members sat in this Assembly 

yesterday morning, Mr. Speaker, to prorogue the first Session of the Seventeenth Legislature of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. Did we discuss the emergency at that time? No, it wasn’t mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker. What happened yesterday afternoon? We had the formal opening of the Second Session. Was 

there any debate at that time? No there wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. What happened? After a night of drinking 

and dancing and celebration, then we have the emergency. Then it came to the attention of the 

Government that there were now problems, now it is the time to be debated. Three months after the 

problem arises! After a big party, then they decide there is an emergency. The Government has been 

asleep at the switch, Mr. Speaker. Three months after the problem arises this House then has to debate 

the problem. 

 

We all agree, Mr. Speaker, that the problems of transportation of grain is a very serious one for this 

province and I can assure the Members opposite that the Members of the Opposition will support every 

constructive means to try to improve the transportation problems of Saskatchewan. These problems have 

existed since 1905 and a strip to Vancouver by the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) isn’t going to 

solve them overnight. 

 

We shall be watching, with interest, the results of the talks of the Attorney General with the Pacific 

Great Eastern. We shall be interested to know whether or not grain will be shipped by Pacific Great 

Eastern at the Crows Nest Pass rates. We shall watch, with interest the results of the talks, especially in 

light of the remarks of the Government opposite when they ask, who is the Palliser Wheat Growers’ 

Association? For the information of the House, Mr. speaker, for the information of the Premier, it is an 

organization of approximately 3,800 farmers, who are very, very concerned. They are primarily wheat 

growers and they are very, very much concerned with the transportation of wheat. 

 

We note that the Attorney General is going on this trip, Mr. Speaker, to get out of the heat of the kitchen 

from the body shop operators, the SGIO agents. They are sending him on a little trip, that is what they 

are doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I want the Members to stay to the motion. We have debated one motion 

and have passed it already. Now we are on another motion with an amendment before us and I wish we 

would stay to the motor or the amendment, because 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

36 

we have already passed the one motion. This is a restricted debate. 

 

Mr. Lane: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. But as I have stated, Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of the 

Opposition to support all constructive and I emphasize the word constructive means to try and solve the 

grain transportation problems in this province. If any constructive proposals will come out of this 

meeting in Vancouver, we shall certainly be prepared to consider them and support them, I can assure 

this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the delay of the Government in acting on this problem when we were in session since last 

summer, is to be severely condemned and I support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have just now looked at some of the 

material filed by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow). I think, briefly, it is worth noticing that the 

telegram was dated February 2, 1972, and it is addressed to the Hon. Don Jamieson. It is a very brief 

telegram. It says: 

 

Urge third railroad into Vancouver be considered immediately to overcome future Fraser Canyon slide 

problems. 

Suggest linking CN-CP west of Kamloops. 

This will expedite grain, potash and sulphur movements into Vancouver harbour, also eastbound PGE 

movements by CPR. 

Roy Romanow, Attorney General. 

 

The only problem that comes to my attention is the fact that the motion was moved today by the Hon. 

Premier, and we had on the 2nd of February a telegram dealing with one of the most complex problems 

that we could ever have, the very serious matter of rail line development and alteration. And they deal 

with it by telegram. Of course they don’t deal with it by a long letter, because that wouldn’t make it 

seem quite as urgent as it really is in their minds. They don’t deal with it by telephone because it is hard 

to file a telephone call. So the Hon. Attorney General picked the very method which would give the least 

information while manufacturing the maximum amount of crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the crisis, to the extent that it exists, is caused by two particular events. First of all, the 

unprecedented snow falls and snow slides in the British Columbia area during the past two months, and 

secondly, by the unprecedented success of the Hon. Otto Lang in selling grain to foreign markets. I 

conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by suggesting that the next time the Government of Saskatchewan 

has a very complicated matter on its mind, I suggest that they solve it some other way than by a brief 

quick telegram that suggests no solutions, other than a very brief one. They tell you, ‘build a line’, but 

they don’t tell you how or how much it is going to cost. I am glad to see that it was the Hon. Attorney 

General (Mr. Romanow) that sent that telegram because I should have a great deal of concern if the 

Premier had done so. All I can say is this: That is this is the way the Hon. Premier is going to handle his 

affairs, I am very sorry that he is also the Provincial Treasurer because I imagine that he will 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

37 

be counting the province’s money by a shovel. The motion is simply, “That this Assembly records its 

extreme anxiety.” I am not sure that extreme anxiety is suitable for a crisis motion, a priority debate. I 

think that they should see a doctor. They request the Government to provide alternate routes and more 

boxcars and more efficient handling of grain at Vancouver. Dealing first with alternate routes: That is an 

extremely complicated matter that can’t be dealt with in a matter of a few weeks. Telegrams aren’t going 

to be of much help at all. Secondly, more boxcars. We have discussed this this morning with the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and they have a very great in-depth study on this matter, and it isn’t 

something that they are prepared to deal with by telegram. And the more efficient handling of grain at 

Vancouver, Mr. Speaker, is if anything, a condemnation of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool because the 

majority of facilities at the ports in British Columbia are handled by the Wheat Pools. And in particular 

these facilities are now under, or most of them are, under the care of the Alberta Wheat Pool. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION 
 

LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could ask the indulgence of the House, 

with leave, to introduce a brief motion. The background is that the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley 

proposes to attend a conference at the invitation of the Federal Department of Health and Welfare on 

Family Planning. In order that his position with respect to indemnities by protected, I should like to 

move, seconded by the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow): 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the Hon. Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley on and from February 

29, 1972 until March 2, 1972, to attend on behalf of this assembly a conference organized in Ottawa 

by the Federal Department of National Health and Welfare on Family Planning. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. speaker, I move seconded by the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. 

Steuart): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of three former 

Members of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions each made 

to his community, his constituency, and to this Province: 

 

William James Boyle, who died on August 14, 1971, was a Member of this Legislature for Kinistino 

from 1944 to 1948. He was born in Cobourg, Ontario in 1887 and came 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

38 

to Crystal Spring, Saskatchewan, in 1910. From 1918 until his retirement, he farmed in the 

Kinistino area. He was the President of Kinistino Co-operative association, Councillor and Reeve 

of the Rural Municipality of Inver Gordon No. 430, Director of the Saskatchewan Livestock 

Association, Member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Chairman of the Local Wheat Board, 

trustee for the Gowanbrae Public School And he sat on the local school board. 

 

Russell Brown, who died on October 17, 1971, was a Member of this Legislature for Last 

Mountain from 1952 to 1964 and for Souris-Estevan from June to October 1971. He was born in 

Fort William, Ontario in 1911. During the 1920s he bought grain in Saskatchewan and was a field 

auditor with the United Services Institute. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. During the Second World 

War, he spent four years with the Canadian army in the King’s Own Rifles of Canada and later 

with the Queen’s Own Cameron Highlanders. After the war, he joined the staff of the Department 

of Co-operation and Co-operative Development and helped organize co-operatives. He was an 

education director for the Regina Labour Council. In July 1956 he became Provincial Secretary 

and Minister in Charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. From April 1957. To April 1960, 

he was the Minister of the Department of Travel and Information and from April 1960 to May 

1964, Minister of the Department of Industry and Information. In 1964 he owned an insurance and 

Real estate business in Regina. In 1966 he bought a hotel in Estevan and later a jewellery store in 

that city. He was elected to the Estevan City Council in 1969 and 1970. He was a member of the 

Canadian Legion and the United Services Institute. 

 

Jesse Pichard Tripp, who died on September 6, 1971, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Souris from 1925 to 1929 and for Souris-Estevan from 1934 to 1938. He was born in Forrest, 

Ontario in 1883. After receiving his primary and secondary education in Forest, he graduated from 

the Toronto College of Pharmacy. He practiced optometry and pharmacy in Oxbow from 1906 to 

1953. In 1924 after having served on Council and as a school trustee, he was elected Mayor of 

Oxbow. He was elected as a Member of Parliament for the Constituency of Assiniboia from 1940 

to 1945 and later serviced on the Board of Broadcast Governors. He was active in sports including 

baseball and curling and was a 50-year Member and a Past Master of the Boscurvis Masonic 

Lodge at Oxbow. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before concluding my remarks, I wonder if I might be permitted to add just a word with 

respect of one of the deceased colleagues whom I know well. 

 

It was my privilege to know Russ Brown for many years as a fellow worker in our Party, as a worker in 

the Legislature and in Cabinet, as a client and as a friend. 

 

To be a politician is not always an easy task. As we all know, citizens hold widely different views and 

hole them strongly. It falls to the person in public life to find a middle way 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

39 

a compromise solution without himself becoming compromised. This requires the elected official to 

combine the qualities of flexibility, integrity and willingness to serve the public. Russ Brown combined 

these qualities to a marked degree. He loved public life at the provincial level and at the civic level. He 

was a cheerful servant to the public and a happy warrior. To many hundreds of people he was a warm 

friend, his untimely death was widely mourned by those who knew him. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — I am pleased to join with the Premier in this motion. I 

didn’t know Mr. Boyle. I did know Russ Brown. I sat with him here for the two years as a Member of 

the Opposition. I first know Russ Brown as a Minister of the Crown. Like the Premier I found him as I 

think did everyone a very friendly, open and affable man and it was with regret that I learned of his 

untimely death. He was still a relatively young man and I join with the Premier in passing on to his 

relatives the condolences of myself and the Members on this side of the House. 

 

I knew Mr. Tripp. He was a man who served his community for a very long time. He knew four levels of 

government. I knew his family and I should like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the 

outstanding work that Mr. Tripp did both for his community, his province and his country, and pass on 

to the surviving members of his family our deepest regrets. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a few words to the Premier’s and the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart). I, too, only knew Russ Brown. I’ve heard of Mr. Boyle. I believe 

you, Mr. speaker, are the only one left in the House who sat with Mr. Boyle. 

 

I do want to express my deepest regret to the Brown family in the loss of a husband and a father. I lost a 

friend. Our friendship, Russ’ and my friendship, dates back many years long before either one of us was 

in the political field. I first knew him in the co-operative movement when he worked for the Wheat Pool 

and in those early years we had become close friends. I knew him then as secretary for the party of 

which we both were members – he came to the House in 1952 and I came in 1956. We sat as MLAs 

sitting not too far from one another and I sat with him for two years as a Cabinet Minister. I knew this 

man as a man who was dedicated to the things that he believed in. He was fearless in making decisions 

that he felt had to be made. He was a fighter for his constituents and for his friends. He was, indeed a 

kind man to those in need. Now I shall remember him in the House, as a man brilliant in rebuttal when 

he got into debate, yet as a very common man with love for his fellow man. I cannot help but think that 

he gave his life to things he believed in. He enjoyed his political like. I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that he 

leaves us an example to copy if we can do it. 

 

Hon. K. Thorson (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to join with those who wish to pay a 

particular tribute to the memory of the past Members of this Assembly who have died since the House 

was last in session. 

 

In particular I want to say something about Mr. Tripp, who represented the constituency of Souris in the 

1920s, Souris-Estevan in the 1930s. It was not my privilege to know him 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

40 

personally, although he and I have many friends in common. He came to southeastern Saskatchewan to 

Oxbow in 1906. that was a time when many of the homesteaders had been there more than 20 years, but 

it was still a pioneering community and like so many people in that part of Saskatchewan, he came from 

Ontario and brought with him many talents which he immediately put to work for the benefit of his 

community and his family. He was well known as a sportsman, in baseball and in curling. He served as a 

school trustee, as mayor of the town of Oxbow and as a Member of this Assembly. Following that, he 

was also a Member of Parliament. I know that his passing was marked with regret by many people 

beyond his own community, in particular by the people of the southeastern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me also add a word to what has been said by the Hon. Member for Touchwood about our friend, 

Russ Brown, who passed away last October. I first met Russ Brown something more than sixteen years 

ago when he was then Member for Last Mountain and also acting as secretary for the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation in the Province of Saskatchewan. He and I sat as Members together between 

the years 1956 and 1960. Russ Brown was a man who never spared himself in working for the causes 

which attracted him and there were many such causes. In co-operatives he was well known for his work 

in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and in the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development. 

During the war years he served as a soldier and rose from private to the commissioned rank of Captain. 

He served as a politician, as a Member of this Assembly and as Member of the Executive Council. In his 

later years he was on City Council of the city of Estevan. 

 

Those who knew him, his friends and those who opposed him, know that he was never a man to 

withdraw from what is sometimes called the rough and tumble of political life. In debate in this 

Assembly, or on a political platform he never asked for any quarter and he seldom gave any. Yet, for all 

of that, though he was vigorous and a hard debater, he had a very wide circle of friends which went 

beyond people in his own political party. 

 

He was a predecessor of mine in many ways, having served the Department of Travel and Information, 

which he helped create in 1957 and was the first minister, which later became the Department of 

Industry and Information and was a predecessor to the present Department of Industry and Commerce. 

He was chairman of the Board of Directors of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. He was the first 

chairman of the Board of the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation. 

 

I know that long after those of us who knew him are gone and even after his memory is less vivid in the 

minds of the people of Saskatchewan the work which he did in many walks of life, in his private life, but 

particularly in his public life, will leave an imprint on the institutions in Saskatchewan and will serve as 

a memorial because they will continue to serve the people of Saskatchewan. Russ Brown had a great 

quality of being able to get along with all kinds of people in his own party and outside his party. People 

who had advantages and people who had disadvantages. I know he loved them and I know he loved this 

Province of Saskatchewan. I know we all join in expressing our condolences to his family. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

41 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words in memory of Mr. 

Jesse Tripp who died in September 1971. Although born in Ontario, Mr. Tripp lived most of his life in 

the West, and certainly took pride in considering himself a Westerner. He was a brilliant student. He 

graduated from high school at the age of 14, from Toronto University in Pharmacy at the age of 19. He 

came West after graduation. He worked briefly for a drug firm in Winnipeg. It was mentioned here that 

he was an ardent sportsman and ball payer. In 1904 he played professional baseball with the Winnipeg 

Maroons. From 1906 until 1953 he owned and operated a drug store in Oxbow. He was a vigorous and 

active man until well into his advanced years. After retiring from active business he relieved in the 

profession of pharmacy until the age of 84 years. In 1955 the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association 

recognized his long and dedicated service and made him a lifetime member of the Association. In 1919 

Mr. Tripp returned to the University in Toronto, took a course in optometry and practiced this profession 

in Oxbow until about 1962. He was active in community affairs and politics at all levels. He served 

terms as Councillor and Mayor of Oxbow in the early years and as late as 1960 was asked again to serve 

a term as Mayor which he did. He was always an active church member. He helped with the planning 

and building of St. Paul’s United Church in Oxbow. He was a steward there for many, many years. 

Incidentally, this was one of the first United Churches in Saskatchewan, and he was active in the 

promotion of this church. He was a member of the IOOF Lodge since the early 1900s and he served in 

various senior offices of that organization. In 1964 he was honoured for 50 years service in the Masonic 

Lodge where he had been a Past Master. 

 

Mr. Tripp’s first venture into provincial politics was in 1925 when he was elected as the Liberal Member 

for Souris. He was re-elected again in 1934 and remained a Member until 1938. At this time Souris and 

Estevan constituencies were combined and Mr. Tripp did not seek the nomination. However, in 1940 he 

was elected as the Liberal MP for Assiniboia and he served at Ottawa until 1945. At this particular time 

the Assiniboia constituency was located in the extreme southeastern part of Saskatchewan. He served 

with distinction on a number of parliamentary committees in Ottawa, and as a Member of Parliament 

during the war, he promoted the idea that aircrew members who had served a tour of operation should be 

returned to Canada and he is remembered by the Air Force for his campaign in this regard. From 1950 to 

1953 he again served his country as a member of the Board of Broadcast Governors. 

 

Throughout his long career Mr. Jesse Tripp maintained his interest in sports. In addition to playing 

baseball in his early years, he became known later as an umpire throughout the southeast part of the 

province. He was an active curler and attended the bonspiel here in Regina and the Briar play downs on 

many, many occasions. He was interested always in promoting sports for young people and often 

coached junior teams. Living near the united States border he was very active in promoting better United 

States-Canadian relations through sports and various social events. 

 

One interesting aspect of his provincial political career was the part he played in promoting the first 

education tax in 1937. That, perhaps, wasn’t a very popular thing to be doing at that time. He was deeply 

concerned about the lack of funds in the 1930s to pay decent salaries to teachers and the 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

42 

imposition of the first education tax for this purpose was one of his favourite projects. 

 

Jesse Tripp served the people of his district, his province, and his country for most of his 88 years, I am 

sure he will be gratefully remembered. I should like to extend my sympathy to the family members who 

I have know for many years. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the memory of Mr. W.J. 

Boyle. Mr. William James Boyle was born in 1887 at Cobourg, Ontario of Scottish and Irish parentage. 

Jim, as he was affectionately called, received his early schooling at Russ, north of Cobourg. After 

finishing public school he worked on the farm for a few years. Later, he attended business college in 

Toronto. His first job was with the McLean Managers for the Harris Abattoir in Toronto. 

 

Mr. Boyle came West in 1909 and took up a homestead near Crystal Springs in the Kinistino 

constituency. He showed a keen interest in public affairs and was immediately looked upon for 

leadership in the community. He served as Councillor and Reeve for his municipality at various times 

since 1914. He was also elected to various school boards and on one he served as Trustee for 24 years 

from which he resigned when he was elected to the Legislature in 1944. He was President of the 

Kinistino Co-op Association for many years. He was also a member of the local Telephone Board, the 

community hall, Secretary of the Kinistino Livestock Shippers Association and also a strong supporter 

of the Wheat Pool and a member of the local school committee. He was a member of the farm 

delegation at Ottawa in 1942. He was also a member of the Roman Catholic Church. He also organized 

the Kinistino Union Hospital. 

 

Mr. Boyle was always interested in the welfare of his neighbours as is clearly shown by the above 

record. Therefore, it was no surprise to those of us who knew him when he announced his decision to 

enter politics where his ability could be used to wider advantage. His allegiance up to this time had been 

with the Liberal Party but he transferred to the Progressive Conservatives when that party was 

organized. He became active in the Farmer Labour Party in 1933. when the CCF was born it natural for 

him to become an active member of that Party. He was nominated as candidate for the Party in 1938 but 

lost to the Liberal John R. Taylor of Birch Hills. In 1944 he ran again and was elected with such a 

majority that both his opponents lost their deposits. That was the first time that the Liberals had failed to 

hold Kinistino. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you are the only one who is sitting in this Assembly who had the pleasure to sit along with 

Mr. Boyle during his term of office in the Legislature and I am sure you will agree with me when I say 

that he was well respected by all Members on both sides of the House. In 1948 he ran again and lost to 

Mr. Woods, Liberal, by a scant 70 votes. He never again entered politics but continued to farm and serve 

his community until retirement in 1956. 

 

In 1914, Mr. Boyle married Mary Fauning also of Cobourg, Ontario. There were nine children born to 

this union, four sons and five daughters. At the time of his death he had 54 grandchildren and one great 

grandchild. His first wife predeceased him in 1949. In 1956 he married Maria Poncelet and 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

43 

they moved out to Victoria where they resided until he moved back to Saskatchewan in 1971 where Jim 

died shortly thereafter. His wife outlived him by only a few months. 

 

Jim was a good friend and a neighbour to all who had the good fortune to know him. He was also a very 

personal and special friend to the Thibault family. He did not go through life unnoticed and his influence 

will be felt for a long time to come. May the memories of this dear friend inspire us all to have more 

dedicated public service and better citizenship. 

 

I also want to bring to the attention of this House and to pay tribute to Mrs. Phyllis Begrand, wife of the 

late Henry Begrand who served in this Legislature from 1952 until his death in 1959. Mrs. Begrand 

passed away on august 12th, 1971. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add to what has been said in 

tribute to the memory of the former Members who have served in this House. The only one of the three 

that I was acquainted with was the Hon. Russ Brown. I have known Russ for approximately 20 years 

and I knew him quite well. I knew him before I was a Member of the House and of his work with the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. He was a man of very good nature, straightforward, outspoken 

and ostensibly abrasive but he carried such a good humour with him that I always found it impossible to 

be angry with him. When I became a rookie Member of this House he told me in no uncertain terms 

what my duties and responsibilities were in the House. I’m afraid I got into the habit of roaring right 

back at him and we had more or less a game of seeing who could verbally slam each other the hardest. 

Sometimes I’m afraid that bystanders might have thought that fisticuffs were just around the corner, but 

I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that nothing was further from the truth. It was simply a matter of sound 

and fury signifying nothing. 

 

I sat with Mr. Brown for two and one half years in the Cabinet when he was the Minister of Industry and 

Information and Minister in Charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and I can assure you that he 

made a valuable contribution to the public and the people of Saskatchewan. His counsel was much 

valued around the table. Russ Brown was a very good friend to me and one who will be greatly missed 

by myself as well as many others. I should like to take this opportunity to express my condolences to 

Mrs. Brown and family. 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, as the Member for Last Mountain constituency, 

I should like to associate myself with the motion paying tribute to the late Members of the Legislature. 

Particularly I wish to speak to the memory of the late Russ Brown. 

 

Russ Brown represented the constituency of Last Mountain for 12 years, eight of them as a Member of 

the CCF Cabinet. Russ was well liked and respected in Last Mountain constituency and around the 

province. He is remembered as an energetic worker on behalf of his constituents and an energetic 

worker on behalf of his party. Russ Brown entered this House by much the same route as I have, for it is 

noted that he was secretary of the Saskatchewan CCF from 1950 to 1952. Underlying that fact was his 

lifelong commitment to the principles and the ideals which he so capably served until his passing last 

fall. 



 

February 25, 1972 

 

 

44 

Mr. Speaker, Russ Brown will long be remembered by friends, by associates, by opponents as a dynamic 

individual but much more important, as a very warm and human individual. His loss is deeply regretted 

by all those who are fortunate to have known him. 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself as well with the Premier, the 

Leader of the Opposition and the other Members of this House in paying tribute to the former Members 

who are no longer with us. I should like to make particular mention of Russ Brown whom I recently got 

to know personally. In the brief time that I had the privilege of knowing Russ Brown I recognized in him 

a great feeling for people. He worked with sincerity and with a keenness to be of help. Associated with 

him many years of public life, one could make up a long list of contributions attributed to Russ Brown’s 

desire and interest to make this community and this province a better place to live in. With knack for 

organizing people and providing leadership Russ Brown met success in almost whatever he undertook. 

He believed and in hard work and co-operation. 

 

With the passing of Russ Brown we lost a find friend and a great citizen. I should like to join with others 

in offering my sincere sympathy to Mrs. Brown and family. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart): 

 

 That the Resolution just pass, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION 
 

LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
 

Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a motion by leave of the Assembly if I 

may: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the Hon. Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) on and 

from Monday the 6th day of March 1972, to attend on behalf of the Assembly a conference organized 

in London by the United Kingdom Branch of the Parliamentary Association. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:34 o’clock pm. 


