



















































Hansard: March 30, 1972


1323 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

26th Day 

Thursday, March 30, 1972. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO WILBERT 4-H CLUB 
 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure and a privilege for me to 

introduce to you and all Hon. Members of this Assembly an excited group of some 28 boys and girls of 

the Wilbert 4-H Club who are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. This is the first time, Mr. Speaker, in the 

four and one half years as an MLA that I have had a group of this size make the long trip from Cut Knife 

constituency to this Legislature and I want to congratulate them heartily on their venture today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wilbert 4-H Club which started some 25 years ago by Mr. Don Ferguson is a beef, 

light horse, junior sportsman and homecraft club and is currently under the leadership of Mr. Lynn 

Biggart. Also accompanying them here today are Mr. and Mrs. Murray Butterwell, Mrs. Rosalee 

Reinbolt and Mr. Ole Veickle. I ask all Members to join with me in extending a friendly welcome to this 

energetic group who travelled some 300 miles to get here. We hope they enjoy their visit to our capital 

city and particularly to this Legislature and we wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude my remarks today I would like to quote the 4-H pledge as it states: 

 

My head to clear thinking 

My heart to greater loyalty 

My lands to larger service 

My health to better living 

For my club, my community and my country. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO NAICAM 4-H CLUB 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce a find group 

of 4-H Club members number in 50 from Naicam district. They are here today led by Mr. Cyril Griffith 

and their general leader Mr. Vern Volding. They are accompanied by some of their parents and I am 

sure that I concur with what the Member from Cut Knife has said. Their trip here I hope will be very 

educational. They have taken in the Centre of the Arts, this evening they are going to the Light Horse 

Show. I know that their trip to the city is going to be very educational and a happy one. I also want to 

wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to add my words to 

the Member for Cut Knife in respect to 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1324 

welcoming the Wilbert 4-H Club, their leaders as well as the 28 members. I’ll say to my Hon. friend 

from Kinistino who just took his seat that I know all of these people very well and I know that 

community very well. It is one of the finest districts in the country and I would stack up those 28 

members against his 50 from Kinistino any day. They are an excellent group, they have done an 

excellent job through the years and we are certainly glad to see them down here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add my welcome and best wishes 

to the multiple 4-H Club from Naicam district. There are some 50 members with the group, members of 

the Club, parents and leaders. They left early this morning and they have come 150 miles and I want to 

add to the comments of the Member from Cut Knife in that I think the Naicam 4-H Club has one better 

over the Wilbert Members’ Club in that they have a history of over 30 years of existence. I know that 

the Members of this House are wishing them a very valuable stay in the House and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GRAND CHAMPION SHORTHORN BULL 
 

Mr. E. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I am pleased to announce to 

the House that a constituent of mine, Mr. Alex Calancie of Calder last night won the grand 

championship for shorthorn bulls at the Regina Winter Fair and sold the bull this morning at a very 

satisfactory price of $5,000. 

 

Another breeder in my constituency, Mr. John Morari of Calder won the best of three bulls. It is very 

interesting to note that all four of these bulls were sired by the same animal. 

 

I am also pleased to report that the Department of Agriculture was on hand to purchase a number of 

these good bulls from these herds and I am sure this will help to improve the quality of the breeding 

stock in our provincial pastures. 

 

I should like this House to join with me in congratulating Mr. Calancie for his success. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL PAYMENTS OUTSIDE OF CANADA 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like 

to direct a question to the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). Recently he announced some changes 

in the rate of payments outside the Province of Saskatchewan. In connection with payments outside of 

Canada for medical services and hospital, will the present Medical Review Committee still be involved 

in assessing these cases before the accounts are actually incurred outside of Canada? 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1325 

Mr. Smishek: — My understanding is that they will. 

 

SCHOOL GRANT ESTIMATES 
 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a question 

to the Government or the Hon. Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla) perhaps. I see we still don’t have the 

school grant estimates that have been asked for for some considerable time. As I pointed out to the 

House yesterday, I know that the Government Members had had them, also school boards, teachers’ 

groups in the province. I wonder, if the Minister hasn’t got his departmental copy ready for us, if he 

would ask the Member for Canora to table the copy he took out of caucus and passed around the 

province. We could at least have that for the weekend. 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Member from Wilkie, 

this has been bothering me, really bothering me. I went through the Journals of the Legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, and I find that the Liberal Government never tabled a list of school grants in seven years of 

office. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege, he better go back and look again, because we 

tabled them every year in this Legislature – the present year Estimates with a comparable table of the 

last year. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I checked this morning and I just couldn’t find them. I 

understand that when a list of school grants was provided it was at the discretion of the Minister, they 

did not present them officially but sometimes they were passed around to the Members a few days 

before the Estimates came up. It has been a tradition in the seven years that the Education Estimates 

have generally come near the last of the session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a good deal of pleasure to table on day number 26 of the sitting the school 

grants for 1972. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — They are estimates only, they are not completely finalized because we are still 

meeting with school boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, after five different attempts, three promises by the Premier and a couple 

by the Hon. Minister I wish to take this opportunity to thank him for his tardiness and we appreciate 

getting them at long last. 

 

CLOSURE OF INDUSTRIES 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1326 

should like to direct a question in the absence of the Minister of Industry to the Premier regarding the 

closure of two industries in Saskatoon. I have been attempting to get hold of the owner and the president 

of Westcore Steel and Saskatoon Iron Works, without success. I have found that their telephone service 

has been discontinued, that the doors are locked and that it has been indicated that there were 30 

employees working in there. I wonder if the Premier can tell me if the Minister of Industry was able to 

obtain any information in this regard? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I know the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) was 

pursuing this. This is a company which has evidently run into financial difficulties. I haven’t had an 

opportunity to check with the Minister of Industry yet as to what the results of his investigations are. So 

far as I am aware Westcore have not approached the Government for any assistance – I can’t remember 

any approach although I may have had one six or eight months ago, I can’t remember that – but I am not 

aware of any approach to the Government and I understand the Minister is looking into it. I shall ask the 

Minister to report to the House as soon as he has an opportunity to do so. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Just a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, I think it might eliminate this kind of 

question day by day in the House just as announcements of new industries are made by the Members 

opposite it might be a good idea in the future to start announcing closures. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — On the point I think this would be very unwise not because there are going to be so 

many now but if it had been followed in the past whole periods of the House would have been taken up 

with the announcements of the many closures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debates on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 

Bill No. 9 – An Act to provide for the appointment of a Person to Investigate Administrative 

decisions or acts of Departments of the Government and certain other Organizations and to define 

the Person’s duties, functions and powers be now read a second time. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Your backbenchers have deserted you. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — My backbenchers may have deserted me but I know that they will be back and that 

can’t be said about yours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I should modify that and say I think they’ll be 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1327 

back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on passing the principle of the establishment of an Ombudsman this Assembly will be 

enacting a Bill which I think will be worthy of all legislators of this Assembly. It will be a law which 

will reflect credit and respect on all Members of this House. I say this will be so because in this 

legislation we are setting up an office the primary objective of which will be to serve the individual, the 

ordinary citizen of the Province of Saskatchewan. Any law enacted by any Parliament that seeks to 

advance the opportunities of projection for our citizens is worthy of everyone’s support. Regrettably in 

Saskatchewan probably unlike anywhere else in any province of Canada where a similar Bill of this 

nature has been introduced for the benefit of the populace, this Bill is being opposed by a small group of 

men who sit opposite us in this Legislature. Mr. Speaker, I never thought that this could have happened 

in 1972 in modern-day Canada. Let me say at the outset that I do not believe this legislation has given 

the Ombudsman any more or less powers than other Ombudsman Bills in other parts of Canada. In fact 

this Ombudsman Bill is one of the finest in all Canada with respect to its powers and its duties. Having 

said that, Mr. Speaker, even if there were major flaws in detail of the Bill, the principle appears to me 

and I might say to human rights associations, civil liberty groups and fair-minded people whom I have 

communicated with, to be absolutely above and beyond debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate the obvious. This Party and this Premier stands 

committed to the advancement of human freedoms and liberties in the Province of Saskatchewan and 

this Bill is but one more arrow for the average person to use for his bow in his protection in today’s 

complex world. When we vote for or against this Bill, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it that we 

shall be voting for or against the principle of advancement of human rights in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s the principle of this Bill. The principle is the establishment of an office to act for 

the little man of Saskatchewan, the ordinary individual, to help him in investigations and 

recommendation against administrative abuses if those should occur by the officials in our Government 

and in any subsequent governments. That is the real principle of this Bill and when you vote either for it 

or against it you are voting either for or against the advancement of human rights in Saskatchewan, 

make no mistake about that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say to the Leader of the Opposition, I’m not going to vote against advancement of 

civil rights and civil freedoms. I am going to vote for it but what will the Liberal Opposition do, Mr. 

Speaker? This is a more difficult question than some might think. As I stand back and objectively try to 

assess the arguments of those who have spoken opposite I am totally confused as to what they, as a 

political party, really believe in the area of human rights. Individually, with respect, I say that some 

positions have been clearly stated by the Liberals opposite. With respect, their Leader, the Member from 

Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) says simply that he is opposed in 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1328 

principle because the area of protection that the Ombudsman would provide can now be handled or will 

be handled, I should put it that way more accurately, by an upgraded and a better MLA. That I think is a 

valid argument. I disagree with that proposition totally but I respect the Leader of the Opposition for 

clearly and concisely stating a philosophical point of view that presents itself as a clear alternative to the 

Bill that is before this House, as a clear alternative to the principle of the establishment of an 

Ombudsman office to investigate administrative actions. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, some Members say 

that I should withdraw the Bill. I want to say that this morning on the front pages of the Leader-Post 

there is a headline that says, “Government Members Applaud Steuart”. I should like to read the article. It 

says this: 

 

The Saskatchewan Legislature Monday was treated to a rare sight of Government Members 

applauding a Liberal who was opposing a Government measure. Dave Steuart, Leader of the 

Opposition, spoke against Government plans to set up an Ombudsman. A similar stand had been 

taken previously by other Opposition Members who had been later chastised by Government 

MLAs. In Mr. Steuart’s case he presented an alternative that won desk-pounding applause from 

all present. 

 

That’s the way the article reads. 

 

When ultimately he adjourned the debate and sat down many Government Members were 

nodding their heads in agreement. 

 

That’s the way the newspaper read. I want to say that I was one of those who applauded the Leader of 

the Opposition for his comment that the MLA should be upgraded. I want to say that I was one of those 

who nodded my head in agreement when he said that the MLAs’ role should be improved and it should 

be given more prestige. But I also want to say that I was not one of those who applauded the suggestion 

concurrent to that which was that we should abolish the Ombudsman Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Although I can’t speak for my colleagues in this House, either from this side or from 

your side, I’ll bet my bottom dollar that those who applauded on this side applauded the remarks about 

upgrading the MLA but did not applaud his remarks which said that we should withdraw the 

Ombudsman Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I regret very much that type of a newspaper report, honest or otherwise, that 

conveyed that impression. But, in fact, I say this to the House that it was left ultimately to their Leader 

to try to focus the main opposition to this Bill and I will say a few words about his argument in a minute 

because I think they deserve some debate. But for the time being, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Association and individuals are confused as to the position of the Liberal 

Party on this vital issue of human rights. They are confused, they will tell you. 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1329 

First we have the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) who, I must say, was also clear in his 

submission. He says that you have 60 MLAs and you don’t need an Ombudsman and I commend him 

for that position. But first of all trying to assess the position overall – here is the Member for 

Cannington, in a clear submission saying that 60 MLAs can do the job. Yet what does the Member from 

Lakeview (Mr. McPherson) his Party Whip say? He says that anybody who says that is speaking 

nonsense, 60 Members can’t do the job and we need an Ombudsman. The Member for Moose Jaw (Mr. 

MacDonald) he says this; “I support the principle of the Bill but only for socialist states.” As for the 

lawyer from Lumsden (Mr. Lane) he states that it is good even for those mildly, if I may call it, Mr. 

Speaker, mildly non-socialist states such as Alberta and Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, just to name a 

few. 

 

One Liberal Member for Moose Jaw says he supports it but only for socialist states. The Member for 

Lumsden says, I support it, I have to support it also for those which are non-socialist states. And the 

Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) who in my view delivered one of the most confusing speeches 

that I have heard in a long time on any subject in this House. He stated that the Ombudsman is needed to 

check the administrative abuses of local government. Yet the Member for Lakeview, when I got up and 

asked my direct question, he said, “Oh, no. The Ombudsman shouldn’t direct and interfere in local 

government.” The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart), the Members for Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald) and from Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) they state that the Ombudsman costs too 

much. 

 

Not so does our magnanimous and outspoken Whip from the Liberal Party. He says cost is no factor in 

an Ombudsman. He says that is not an argument against the principle of the Bill. Then we hear the 

Member from Albert Park say that the Attorney General and his Cabinet colleagues are making the Bill 

apply to everyone but themselves. The Cabinet are the ones who are exempt. “Not so”, says the Member 

for Lakeview. He says the Ombudsman should not investigate the Attorney General and the Members of 

the Cabinet, courts, arbitrations. He said it shouldn’t investigate those things that our Bill says it won’t 

investigate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that hasn’t left you confused and our public breathless as to what the Liberal Party 

position is on this principle of Human Rights, then allow me to remind you, Mr. Speaker, what they 

have to say about the “principle” about this Bill themselves. 

 

The Member from Lakeview (Mr. McPherson) says that he supports the Bill in principle, no ands, buts 

or ifs, but he disapproves of this Bill because there are some bad sections in it. But he agrees with the 

principle of an Ombudsman. The Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) says, “I agree with 

the principle of an Ombudsman, but only for socialist states,” whatever and whoever that covers. The 

Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) says, “I am sympathetic in principle to an Ombudsman Bill, 

but that is all and this is as far as I am going to go.” 

 

The Member from Lumsden (Mr. Lane) he is so confused by the talk of Members on the opposite side 

about the Ombudsman he says that he is not going to vote either one way or the other on the principle of 

the Bill. 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1330 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: He doesn’t know what he is going to do. He is going to abstain. As far as he is 

concerned I think that he is not so confused as he makes out because he is looking three years from now 

when his voting record might hurt his image with that young group 171 that he is thoroughly in favor 

with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And he does not want to be put in that position, I am sure that is running through the 

mind of the Member for Albert Park, unfortunately having put himself on the record the other way. And 

then on the principle of the Bill the Members from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) and Prince Albert 

West (Mr. Steuart), after all of these comments about the principle, they say, “We oppose the Bill, pure 

and simple.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, today I went downstairs to the cafeteria and had a terrific bowl of borsch soup. It 

was terrific. But borsch soup, as all Members will know, has several different varieties of vegetables and 

meat in it. That is how the Liberal Party has approached this Bill. One Member slices something into the 

pot, the other one slices something else into the pot. The problem is that the borsch downstairs tasted 

good because there was one cook. Over there they have 15 confused cooks who don’t know their stand 

on civil rights. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: Who was it that said that the Liberal Party, as a whole, is like the guy who sits on the 

fence but keeps his ear on the ground. Mr. Speaker, only the Liberals can achieve that, anatomically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a Member of our Cabinet and a Party whose voice is clear to all of 

Saskatchewan in our commitment to individual rights. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — On a Point of Order. I didn’t know whether he is going to come around a third time 

to these points or not, but I would like to catch him on one or two of these things as he goes by. 

 

The first thing that he has done is simply misrepresented everything that I said. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I gather that . . . Well I would like to make my position clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! That is not a Point of Order, that is a debating order. If the Member is 

being misquoted he has the right at the end of the Member’s speech to put the records straight. But this 

is not a Point of Order. A Point of Order is when the rules of the House are being broken, this is a 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1331 

debating point. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Okay, but it is great fun for him and if he wants to have sport that way, fine. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to say to the junior Member from Albert Park that it is not 

great fun for me. I am very sorry that he took the type of tactics that he did and made the type of speech 

that he did in opposition to the Bill, because I have greater respect for the Opposition arguments, by the 

Leader, and I will come to them right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said that I wanted to deal with the arguments made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart) in opposing this Bill. In summary he said that it was his view that MLAs, given the opportunity, 

could do the job of an Ombudsman. I agree with the argument that the role of the MLA must be 

generally upgraded by this House, but I say that the error that the Leader of the Opposition makes in this 

argument is to view the role of the Ombudsman and the role of the MLA to be basically incompatible or 

mutually exclusive. They are not. They are highly compatible and desirable in any democratic society. 

We can and must do both, namely to upgrade the role of the MLA while at the same time establishing 

the office of the Ombudsman to investigate administrative abuses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — An MLA has many jobs. I agree with the Leader of the Opposition. One of which is 

to listen to individual grievances and to pursue them to the best of his ability. But that is not his only 

task. The MLA has the duty of presenting political ideas of his constituents in the best interest of the 

province in this Chamber the best he can. That means that he must have more time, better facilities, to 

listen and to debate issues that affect the very lives of the people of this Province. 

 

That means more time and better opportunity to inform himself on the multiplicity and the complexity of 

issues in today’s world. He can no longer come into this Chamber and make an off-the-cuff speech on a 

topic which may be so complex and important that its complexities have defied him. He must have time 

and opportunity to defend his views and to defend the views of his Party. He must have time to develop 

and articulate in speech and in writing and in personal contact, new ideas, new programs which can be 

used to the benefit of government in a society regardless of the political stripe of the government that is 

in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — In other words, Mr. Speaker, in my estimation the MLA is often the catalyst for 

social and economic change that this society is crying out for in the 1970s. 

 

Would Members opposite not agree with me that if we freed the MLA from the job that he is really not 

equipped to do, namely, to process individual grievances to satisfactory 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1332 

conclusion, would Members not agree with me that if we freed them of this chore that this would in 

itself be an upgrading of the role of the MLA. At the same time the Ombudsman can be the prodder, the 

person to better improve the impartial and fair administration of government. 

 

The Ombudsman is not a panacea or a cure-all. He is one who seeks merely to expose and rectify 

administrative abuse. He has to do this task for the little man of Saskatchewan, the one who doesn’t 

sometimes come to his MLA, on either side, the person who doesn’t know what his rights and 

opportunities are. 

 

Professor Rowatt of Carlton University describing the role of the Ombudsman said that the Ombudsman 

has two main strengths, persuasion and the Press. Unlike the MLA the Ombudsman is not a political 

figure. Therefore, unlike the MLA he does not involve himself in the emotional political feelings that the 

MLA must of necessity – he is only a human being – must of necessity relate to, when he receives an 

individual grievance. 

 

The Ombudsman will be a listener, an adviser, a clearing house. In fact, in many ways, he will turn out 

to be an almost free legal adviser to people who have complaints about government. This Ombudsman, 

like any other, will be a watchdog over government’s many complex departments. And that watchdog 

benefit will work to the advantage of all the people in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — His position will be just like that of the Auditor General or even some of the courts 

in the impartiality in the processing of claims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today, more than any other time in history we need to build into our system this extra 

means of seeking restitution and seeking a proper hearing before the Government of Saskatchewan as 

we are doing with the Ombudsman. 

 

The ordinary citizen needs a single channel through which to make sure that the right administration 

decisions of government are always made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat, this Bill applies the principle of impartial adjudication to the areas of 

administrative discretion. This adjudication must be applied uniformly and consistently by one impartial, 

non-political person who builds up a body of precedents around him. I remind the House again that this 

Ombudsman will be a servant of the Legislature and the people, and not of any Cabinet Minister or any 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thus I say to the Leader of the Opposition, that if you see that these roles are 

incompatible you are in error. They are complementary. With a strong MLA and a strong Ombudsman 

nobody loses, only democracy and all of society gains. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Therefore, I cannot 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1333 

recommend to anybody in this House and I can’t in conscience having introduced the Bill, agree to it 

being withdrawn, because I think that would be a weakening of the democratic institutions and a 

weakening of the civil liberties that we all say we are working towards. Only action will tell when we 

vote either against or for this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been two other arguments briefly advanced in this House against the Bill. One 

argument is that the Bill is too restrictive in defining the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman. 

 

The second argument is that the Attorney General has too wide powers as seen in Section 17. Let me 

reiterate – by any parliamentary standards if those arguments should be valid, they are arguments that go 

to details of the Bill and not to the principle. The principle of which the establishment of an office to 

check the administrative abuses by governments, is the principle the Leader of the Opposition disagrees 

with and says the MLA can do better. I have dealt with that argument but he obviously holds his view. 

 

Let me deal briefly with the argument against the Bill, namely, that it is too restrictive. At the outset let 

me say that everywhere in the Western world it has been generally recognized as Professor Rowatt has 

said, that the powers of the Ombudsman basically are persuasion and the Press. The Ombudsman will 

use his persuasive powers in many ways, not the least of which, I remind Members will be the threat of 

reporting any undue or improper action by any Attorney General or Cabinet Minister to this House 

directly. It is in the Bill and I am sure the Members opposite no matter who the Opposition is of the day, 

will raise that for dispute and comment. 

 

I want to say to the Members of the House and to the people of Saskatchewan that, with respect to this 

point, I think our reports and our Pres, although I quarrel with them from time to time and certainly 

editorially, are tough, intelligent people who will do their part on the second arm of the Ombudsman’s 

role with respect to the Press. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say with respect to this Bill and these powers this Bill No. 9 has placed no restrictions at 

all on the Ombudsman as made out by some Members opposite. The main jurisdictional section giving 

the Ombudsman authority is set out in Section 12, subsection (1). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am informed by my law officers, again, that notwithstanding any statements to the 

contrary by some opposite, the powers contained therein, are in terms substantially identical in every 

respect to those contained in the Province of Manitoba, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Alberta and the 

leader in this area, the country of New Zealand. To that general power given in Section 12 there were 

exceptions in our Bill. We admit that. These are specifically set out. In other jurisdictions such as 

Alberta, Newfoundland, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia the exceptions are not specifically 

enumerated as in our Bill, but they are there. They are there by virtue of certain definitions of the word 

‘officer’ because the word officer is defined in a narrow way with respect to official and employee. And 

in those Bills it says the Ombudsman may investigate the administrative act of the officer. 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1334 

And so we have to go back to the definition of ‘officer’, to see what types of conduct he can investigate. 

And in that area a Cabinet Minister is clearly not an officer. To clarify the matter so that it isn’t disputed 

in a court of law, my Department rightly concluded that we should enumerate those exemptions that 

were left out in the other way by definition of ‘officer’, exemptions which are commonly and generally 

accepted to the field and the activity of the Ombudsman. Everybody knows about them! We have 

exempted the Cabinet. No one can realistically argue that a minister in a Cabinet who makes policy and 

does not deal with administrative matters should be included. Not even the Member from Milestone 

(Mr. MacDonald) would disagree that Parliament is supreme. 

 

The former Attorney General, Mr. D.V. Heald, speaking against the Ombudsman Bill in 1965, even he 

recognized this area. He went on to say further that administrative acts only are the ones that can be 

considered. He also went on to say that there is no room for the Ombudsman in a Cabinet, in the courts, 

in the quasi-judicial tribunal, or any decisions of policy made by the minister or otherwise. 

 

We have exempted the deputy minister and persons in that category. If there is not a deputy there has to 

be an acting deputy. There may be an associate deputy who has substantially the same function. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Or anybody else. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll come to that in a moment. What is a deputy in our parliamentary system? I 

remind all Members of this House that the law of this Province, of this land, says in The Interpretation 

Act that a deputy is a person who has in almost every material respect powers similar and identical – not 

obviously all of them because he can’t go to the Cabinet room – but in every other way, substantially 

similar to those powers that the minister has and serves. It is stated as the law of the land. 

 

This person serves as the chief policy adviser to his minister, at the highest level of policy making. He 

makes few, if any, administrative decisions or administrative acts that affects the rights of the individual. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — He’s the chief administrator. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The Hon. Member from Milestone and I am not surprised that he makes the 

across-the-floor comment about the chief administrative officer, but if he used his deputy as a chief 

administrative officer, no wonder the Department of Welfare was in such a mess for seven years . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . because there was no policy coming out of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1335 

Mr. Romanow: — The fact of the matter is that any deputy, any person who knows how government 

operates, knows that the deputy is in a chief policy and chief policy advising role to government. 

 

We have exempted persons also – this is the part that the Leader of the Opposition is referring to – 

exempted persons who by their appointment are directly responsible to the minister. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Or anyone you designate. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll come to that in one minute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in one of the most ludicrous bits of extended logic, by some Members of this House – and 

I must say regretfully – by the Leader-Post editorially, they said this could mean the lowest ranked 

person of any department. I say to the Leader of the Opposition and to Members of this House the key 

words are directly responsible. No deputy minister or anyone beyond the deputy or his category, is 

directly responsible to him. There are departmental lines of authority and responsibility and people 

report to those immediately above them to whom they are directly responsible. I suppose by a grand 

extension of logic, you could find that ultimately the man who is driving a car from the garage to the 

Legislative Buildings from time to time is directly responsible. But that is unreasonable interpretation. 

This is a ludicrous interpretation to be put on by any person of this House. These people do not occupy 

that type of position. What we intend by this section – the key words are ‘directly responsible’ – apart 

from the deputy are those people such as executive assistants and special assistants, people whose main 

job is to assist the minister and the deputy in the formulation of policy and programs. Here it is primarily 

the deputy. These people do not occupy any position similar to any lower officer of a department or 

agency of government. And if the Members say that they do they are simply not playing fair ball with 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — They are directly responsible to and perform functions only as delegated to them by 

the minister. Now lest there be any doubt in anyone’s mind about the effect of this section, this is the 

general section, I state again, that it applies only to those directly responsible to the minister in the 

normal and ordinary meaning of the words it is not fair or accurate for the Press or anyone to 

misinterpret those words. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I do not believe that any one would argue against the exemptions as they relate to 

courts and to tribunals. 

 

Now the second argument relates to the powers of the Attorney General. It was the powers the Leader of 

the Opposition was referring to. I think they can be fairly summarized as in Section 17. Section 17 says 

the Attorney General can certify something not to be in the public interest and the Ombudsman 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1336 

can’t investigate it. So I think basically the argument is generated around that because that is the all 

powerful section to use a word that’s been thrown out in debate. I say again, to the Member from Albert 

Park – he disappointed me personally when he argued that the power in this Bill resides with the 

Attorney General – I tell you why. Let me just briefly describe the role of the Attorney General in any 

government, Liberal, NDP or Conservative. It has been generally stated that an Attorney General 

occupies somewhat of a different position than other Cabinet Ministers. He is at once a politician 

committed to a political belief and advocating certain points of view at the same time he is the chief law 

administration officer in Saskatchewan. Members might be surprised to know that according to The 

Attorney General Act of this Province, an Attorney General acts as the official legal advisor to Cabinet. 

He oversees administration of justice. He advises on statutes, he has the regulation and conduct of all 

litigation. He has a wide multiplicity of powers contained in The Attorney general’s Act. They are 

awesome powers in the Department of Attorney General Act. Awesome for a person who at the same 

time belongs to a government with an obvious political belief whether it is Liberal or NDP or 

Conservative. And I want to say very seriously that I take my responsibilities, political and legal in this 

capacity very seriously. But I, like other Attorney Generals have another power, and that is a power 

conferred on me by virtue of Section 508 of the Federal Criminal Code of Canada. 

 

Members might be surprised to know that I have the power, in any criminal matter, to file what is known 

as a stay of proceedings. And the matter can’t be heard and can’t be adjudicated in a court of law. That 

means as Attorney General I could determine in the public interest whether a charge ought to be stayed. 

I’d have to weigh the use of that power very, very carefully, quite obviously. Former Attorney General 

have done it. I am sure they have done it only after a great deal of concern to make sure they are making 

the right decision. I could determine in the public interest that a criminal proceeding should be stayed by 

filing a certificate of stay. All judicial proceedings come to an immediate halt. That decision cannot be 

questioned by the courts, it can’t be questioned anywhere but here in this Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

The Members from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) and Lumsden (Mr. Lane) both being respected lawyers 

for whom I have respect know these powers of the Attorney General, the power of general stay. Would 

they ever say that those powers in the criminal code of stay should be removed from the Attorney 

General? Would the Member for Albert Park say that? If the answer is o, as it must be, then how in the 

world could it logically be argued that a similar, but lesser legal power, I remind the Members, should 

not similarly reside with the Attorney General in the Ombudsman Bill? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Because you are investigating yourself that’s why. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll tell you why. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Covering up that’s why. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Leader of the Opposition says because we are covering up. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Protection for yourself. 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1337 

Mr. Romanow: — Covering up. What happens if there should be a charge with respect to a criminal 

matter that involves a Member of either this side or that side of the House or a political matter? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Everything the Ombudsman does is for a political matter. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’m asking this question of the Member, supposing there is a charge of a criminal 

matter involving anybody on this side or anybody of that side, do you suggest that they Attorney 

General should not have the power to file the stay if it is deemed proper to do it? Do you say that an 

Attorney General would abuse his power if he didn’t have valid grounds to use this power before 

justice? Do you think that an Attorney General similarly by the Ombudsman Bill would use his power to 

thwart justice in the hearings of the Ombudsman without the biggest ruckus being raised in 

Saskatchewan? If you are saying that then you are being hypocritical and untruthful to the Province of 

Saskatchewan because you don’t believe it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to give you an example of how this type of situation could arise, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition. Suppose the Ombudsman . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Just listen to this, you might learn. Suppose the Ombudsman seeks to investigate an 

administrative act that has come to his attention by virtue of some complainant. Some bureaucrat or 

some official has carried out an administrative act. The man who is offended goes to the Ombudsman 

and concurrently that same administrative act is the subject of criminal investigation leading to possible 

criminal prosecution. Do you mean to tell me that in that situation the Ombudsman should be allowed to 

continue, thereby, possibly endangering the entire operation of the criminal code and the law of this 

country? What is the Attorney General supposed to do in the public interest like that? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Make it narrow. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Right, it is a very narrow power. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Then make it narrow. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’m saying its going to be narrow and I’m saying to you as I am saying to the people 

of Saskatchewan that any Attorney General, I don’t care who it is, Roy Romanow or Liberal Attorney 

General or whoever, any Attorney General who uses this power under Section 17 even with a suspicion 

of abuse of power, has entirely brought the Bill into disrepute and himself into disrepute as he would if 

he did the same thing with a stay of proceedings criminally. And no man who acts honestly and 

intelligently wouldn’t believe that. 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1338 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, he says to me, define it narrowly. I should like to define it narrowly. We 

worked on the Bill for months and we can’t define it narrowly. The best Bill that we could seek couldn’t 

define it narrowly. Now some Members of the Press on the editorial page will realize that because I am 

afraid some of them have also misconstrued this editorially. And while I am on my feet I may say I am 

also disappointed with respect to the editorial in the Leader-Post. They hold inconsistent points of view. 

For four years that I have been an MLA in opposition, I stand to be corrected, there should have been at 

least one editorial on human rights coming forth from the Leader-Post, but I never saw it when I was in 

opposition. Now all of a sudden we come in with a Human Rights Bill and they say you have got too 

much power with the Human Rights Commission. We come in with the Ombudsman Bill they say you 

don’t give them enough power. What in the world do they want? Mr. Speaker, I say those who have 

criticized Section 17 were either ignorant of the law or they had motivations purely for political reasons 

to destroy the credibility of the Ombudsman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — One or the other. One thing that I will not say of the Member from Albert Park is 

that he was ignorant of law, because he isn’t. He is a good lawyer. That is what I repeat openly again the 

arguments of the learned gentlemen opposite from Albert Park and Lumsden have been nothing short, 

nothing short of political and intellectual dishonesty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been discussed with the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Association and other interested persons, interested in the advancement of human rights. I haven’t heard 

them criticize the Bill and neither have you gentlemen opposite. I believe they applaud the actions of the 

Government as do all fair minded persons. Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate from the people to 

implement human rights legislation, legislation which was denied and thwarted for seven long years by 

the Liberal Party opposite. Mr. Speaker, we want this Bill to work. In that regard I urge all MLAs to lay 

aside deeply felt political prejudices and support the Government in this endeavor. I’ll try to lay aside 

mine. Although Section 17 is totally justifiable, and may yet be proven necessary when the situation 

arises, I think there is a more important principle involved here and that is that we try to get the support 

of the Members opposite who are I think basically the only group opposed to this Bill in Saskatchewan. 

I can’t see any other opposition. I have no letters opposing the Bill, I have no letters condemning Section 

17. I have a letter suggesting something with Section 17. I’m going to deal with it in just one-half 

second, but nothing opposing the principle of the Bill. I say we are dealing with a higher principle here. I 

think it is important that we try once more to get the support of the Members opposite so that 

Saskatchewan’s Ombudsman will have their confidence too as it has the confidence of the people of the 

Province. And for that reason, I’m going to advise the House that I will propose a House amendment to 

delete Section 17 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1339 

and invite the Liberals to join us in supporting the Bill on second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Let us all get behind this Bill, Mr. Speaker. Let us all get behind this Bill, let’s make 

this office work. With experience and knowledge we will be able to further and to strengthen it. That’s 

going to be our honest intention. Mr. Speaker, we can make this an advancement and as I said at the 

beginning a credit to our society and a credit to all Members of the House if we will co-operate. I urge 

you again to join us. Mr. Speaker, I am honored to have been a Member of a Government who has seen 

fit to introduce this Bill and it is a personal privilege for me to move second reading of this historical 

Bill, Bill 9. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following Recorded Division: 

 

YEAS – 40 

Messieurs 
Blakeney Dyck Meakes 

Smishek Wood Romanow 

Messer Snyder Kramer 

Thibault Larson Baker 

Brockelbank MacMurchy Pepper 

Byers Thorson Kwasnica 

Carlson Engel Tchorzewski 

Richards Owens Matsalla 

Cowley Taylor Faris 

Cody Gross Feduniak 

Mostoway Comer Rolfes 

Lange Hanson Oliver 

Feschuk Kaeding Flasch 

MacLeod   

 

NAYS – 11 

Messieurs 
Steuart Loken Grant 

Boldt MacDonald (Milestone) McIsaac 

Gardner Weatherald McPherson 

MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) Wiebe  

 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 3:37 o’clock His Honour the Lieutenant Governor having entered the Chamber, took his seat upon 

the Throne and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 

MOTION FOR FURTHER SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

Mr. Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: This Legislative Assembly has voted supplies required to 

enable the Government to defray 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1340 

the expenses of the Public Service. In the name of the Assembly I present Your Honour the following 

Bill: 

 

An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 

Year ending the Thirty-first day of March, 1973, to which Bill I respectfully request Your 

Honour’s Assent: 

 

Royal Assent was then given to this Bill and His Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:41 o’clock p.m. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Snyder that Bill No. 26 – 

An Act to amend The Pension Benefits Act, 1967 – be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, in connection with this Bill I asked that it 

stand while I got some additional information. I am not sure yet whether I have it or not, possibly the 

Hon. Minister (Mr. Snyder) in closing the debate can tell me the answer to it. 

 

In Section 17A reference is made to the discontinuance of part or all of the business and I should like to 

know what constitutes a part, is it 50 per cent of the employees, 50 per cent of the sales, or just what is it 

that constitutes that part? Also what constitutes ‘winding up in part’? 

 

Another thing that bothered me a bit was that in some union agreements I believe and I was trying to 

ascertain this, there is provision for severance pay, separation or severance pay to individuals and this is 

negotiated with unions the same time as their other agreements. This could be construed as being part or 

in whole compensation for the loss of the employer’s share of the contributions to a pension scheme. I 

should like to know the application of this Bill when such agreements might exist in union agreements? 

 

The other question I have is, there is quite a difference looking at it from the employer’s viewpoint as to 

whether the individual is going to withdraw his deposits and also take the employer’s deposits, or 

whether he takes a paid-up annuity. I should like some enlightenment on this particular section. If we 

can have a further elaboration on these two questions I feel we can support the Bill. 

 

Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I think perhaps it might have been as well to 

get into the particulars of the Act in Committee, but perhaps I can give the Member from Whitmore Park 

my impression of what is intended by 17A or that portion of the Act which refers to the winding up of a 

portion of the operation. I think the idea that occurs to me at the moment would be the case of the Burns 

and Company operation which is being phased out when the Regina operation is part of a larger portion 

of the operation that is situated elsewhere. To all intents and purposes a portion of the operation is 

wound up and under those circumstances the employees could expect then upon the winding 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1341 

up of the operation and the winding up of the pension fund, that they should receive the contribution 

which they have made and the contribution which the employer has made on their behalf, which is 

regarded as a wage, as a deferred wage, which has in essence been earned but placed into that retirement 

fund. 

 

I think the Member from Whitmore Park also directed attention to the problem of a paid-up annuity and 

the manner in which this would be applied. I believe in that case, provided the date of termination 

occurred after the date the superintendent declared the pension plan wound up, then he would be entitled 

to his vested interest in the employer’s contribution just as though the pension plan had been wound up 

on the date upon which his employment was terminated. If the vested employer contribution under those 

circumstances will not purchase an annuity of $10 or more then he would be entitled to a lump-sum 

refund of the employer’s vested contributions. 

 

The Member also raised a question with respect to severance pay and how severance pay might affect 

this particular provision. I think they have to be regarded as two separate functions. Severance pay is 

generally, as the Member suggested, a matter which is negotiated in the event of termination, so many 

weeks of wages are determined to be paid on the basis of the number of years worked. I think that they 

stand separately. The pension contribution and severance pay have to be regarded as being two different 

and separate privileges that are enjoyed by those who are unfortunate, I would say, to be laid off before 

the time of normal retirement. 

 

To wind up, Mr. Speaker, I think the legislation is good legislation. Experience has shown that most 

employers when they are in the process of winding up their operation begin at a point somewhat 

previous to the winding up date to reduce their staff over a period of time and it means that those 

employees who are terminated previous to the actual winding up are placed in a position of 

disadvantage, while those who are around when the pension plan and the operation is finally concluded 

receive the benefits not only of their own contribution but also of the employers. So I think in basic 

terms it solves one of the problems that came upon us somewhat by accident but there have been 

deliberate attempts on the part of some employers to avoid an obligation by progressively laying off 

their employees over a fairly long period of time in order to escape an obligation. This legislation which 

is also in effect in other jurisdictions, I believe, is a progressive step and one which will be I think 

generally accepted in all of the pension plans in the near future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 76 – An Act to 

amend The Cancer Control Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains only one amendment. For many years a trust fund has 

been maintained for each of the two cancer clinics in Regina and Saskatoon. Donations and bequest 

from interested patients and relatives are placed 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1342 

in these funds and are used for the betterment of the clinics. There is no specific legislation or legislative 

authority for these funds to be maintained. The proposed amendment, therefore, authorizes the 

establishment and maintenance of these trust funds. It is also provided that these trust funds will be 

administered in accordance with the regulations made by the Treasury Board and will be audited by the 

Provincial Auditor. These two provisions are in accordance with the existing practice and are standard 

functions for the Treasury Board and the Provincial Auditor. I am pleased to recommend this 

amendment for the approval of the Members of the Legislature and, therefore, move second reading of 

Bill No. 76. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 77 – An Act to 

provide for The education of Ancillary Dental Personnel. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, last June when the New Democratic Party sought its mandate for the people 

of Saskatchewan we promised to provide dental care for children under the age of 12. Mr. Speaker, quite 

clearly the people of Saskatchewan needed and wanted a dental care program for their children. The 

Ancillary Dental Personnel Education Bill which we have introduced provides the function upon which 

to develop a dental program. This Bill provides for the education of people who are needed in large 

numbers to staff the children’s dental care program which we are now developing. This new legislation 

for the education of ancillary dental personnel is a landmark in Saskatchewan health care. It is clear 

evidence that the NDP Government is moving quickly to fulfil its promises and commitments to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Party introduced a comprehensive Hospitalization Program in the late 1940s and early 

1950s. In the 1960s we introduced comprehensive Medical Care coverage and now in the 1970s the 

NDP Government will introduce dental care. It is a solid list of firsts which is recognized and accepted 

throughout North America. When we introduced our hospitalization program in the 1940s we were told 

that it would not be financially possible. We were told that a government could never offer a 

hospitalization program. But, a CCF Government could not ignore the terrible suffering of people who 

did not have access to hospital services and would never receive hospital services if the Government did 

not intervene. We provided hospitalization for Saskatchewan. We proved that people working together 

through their government could provide good hospital care at reasonable costs. Eventually all provinces 

in Canada followed the lead of Saskatchewan to ensure that all people could obtain hospital services. 

Our experience with medical care was no different. We pioneered a great program which provided the 

people with a service they wanted and that they deserved. We faced great problems when we introduced 

the Medical Care Insurance Program but our program has been a proven success. So great a success that 

it was demanded by other people in other provinces right across Canada. The success of these two 

programs is indicative of what a government can do if it wants to. But it is clear that most governments 

are unable to accomplish what an NDP Government can do, because the NDP Government provides 

positive leadership, it is socially aware, it responds to the wishes of the people, it is not 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1343 

frightened to fight the vested interest groups on behalf of its citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government knows that one of the important unmet health needs today is dental care. I 

should like the Members of this Assembly to know some of the facts about the present state of dental 

care in the Province of Saskatchewan. A survey conducted shows that children ages 7 to 17 in 

Saskatchewan indicated that fully 75 per cent of the seven-year-old children in the province had suffered 

tooth decay, most of these young children, in fact, 58 per cent were in need of dental treatment. Allow 

me, Mr. Speaker, to repeat, 58 per cent of the tooth decay in seven-year-old children in Saskatchewan 

needed treatment. This is an alarming situation. For the older age group, the situation is even worse. Of 

the 11-year-old children 80 per cent, that is four out of five children, have suffered tooth decay. By the 

time we get to the 17-year-olds almost all children have had tooth decay, 98 per cent to be exact. Not 

only are 98 per cent of the 17 year old children affected by tooth decay but on the average these young 

adults have nine teeth either missing or affected by decay seriously. This is almost unbelievable. 

 

If dental problems are not treated additional problems develop over a period of time. Why do these 

dreadful conditions exist, Mr. Speaker? To answer this question we must look at the existing dental 

service system and determine why the system fails so badly. The present system of providing dental care 

relies extensively on treatment being provided by dentists in private practice. I believe that the failure is 

that we have placed too much emphasis on treatment of dental disease and not sufficient emphasis on 

prevention. Also we have relied on highly trained personnel, the professional dentists to provide many 

of the services which could be provided equally as effectively by persons with lesser training. This 

heavy reliance on dentists is particularly inappropriate in Saskatchewan for two reasons. First there are 

not enough dentists to do the job and there is reason to believe the situation is not going to improve over 

the next fifteen years. Secondly the dentists we do have are badly distributed throughout the province. 

At the present there is very little anyone can do about this. In Saskatchewan at the end of the last year 

we had 185 active private practice dentists or one dentist for about every 5,000 people. If we counted all 

the dentists registered in the province, we had 215, or about one dentist for every 4,400 residents. This 

compares to a ratio of one dentist to every 2,000 people in Canada as a whole. 

 

A survey by the Canadian Dental Association in 1968 revealed that in Saskatchewan only 7 per cent of 

the dentists thought they could handle more work. At the same time 58.3 per cent of Saskatchewan 

dentists thought they were too busy. This means that most dentists in Saskatchewan feel they are 

overworked now. Yet let me remind you that we face a terrible backlog of dental disease in the province. 

A related problem in the distribution of dentists within the province is this. We have over 20 

communities in Saskatchewan with 1,000 or more population which do not have a resident dentist. In no 

place is there poorer distribution of dentists more clearly evident than in the northern part of the 

province. Over half of all dentists in Saskatchewan are located in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. We 

would have thought that the new Dental School in Saskatchewan would have enabled the province to 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1344 

overcome some of the shortage of dentists and this would have improved the situation of dentists in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I have discovered that this is not the case. The new graduates from the 

Saskatchewan Dental School will have little impact in Saskatchewan until some time in the 1980s. The 

number of dentists trained in Saskatchewan’s Dental School is so small that it will barely replace the 

number of dentists who will retire, die or move out of the province in the next 10 years. Mr. Speaker, 

under the present system there is no reason to suspect that any new dentists establishing practices in 

Saskatchewan will locate in the smaller populated centres in the province or in rural practice. The 

attraction of the large cities seems to be too great for the dentists. This observation has been found to be 

true in other parts of Canada where governments have given substantial incentives to dentists if they will 

locate in rural and out-of-the-way centres. 

 

I have been told by my colleagues in other provinces that some of these very generous incentive grants 

have received very few applicants. Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the costs of dental service for the 

average citizen often amount to a real financial burden even though they can find a dentist who will 

serve them. The cost of paying a dentist to provide preventive services seems a luxury one can ill afford 

after paying for emergency needs. In light of the serious state of our dental health in Saskatchewan and 

the existing financial burden in paying for dental services I was disappointed, Mr. Speaker, when the 

Dental Association raised its fees by 20 per cent very recently. In the case of the social service 

beneficiaries they are asking the Department for an increase of 35 per cent. This kind of unilateral action 

is very difficult for the public to understand. I believe that many of the health professional groups who 

bill the government or individual citizens for their services are charging or requesting unreasonable fees 

when one looks at their overall total income. 

 

Members of the Legislature may also be interested in knowing that the optometrists want a very large 

increase in what we have been paying on behalf of the social assistance cases. We have been paying 

them 30 per cent of their fee schedule for ophthalmic dispensing, now they want 85 per cent, an increase 

of 183 per cent in one year is their request, Mr. Speaker. I can assure you that we cannot afford to meet 

these kinds of demands. 

 

Because of these problems and other failures in the dental system in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we 

intend to introduce a different type of dental service for children. The new program will make use of 

new types of dental personnel. The dental care program for children will emphasize prevention and early 

treatment. Services will largely be provided through dental therapists whose training will be made 

possible by passing the legislation before you. The dental therapists and other ancillary dental personnel 

will be sufficiently trained to provide most preventive dental services and some of the simpler 

restorative services. These restorative services would include filling teeth and extracting teeth in certain 

circumstances. This is not a completely new program, Mr. Speaker. Other countries such as New 

Zealand, Denmark and Great Britain have been using ancillary dental personnel in this role for many 

years, I understand in case of New Zealand for almost 50 years. The success of these programs has been 

well documented. In Saskatchewan, we have for over one year been operating in the Oxbow district an 

experimental dental program for school children. As the Hon. Members know the program is financed 

by the 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1345 

Government of Canada, it is a pilot project which has been worked out between the Department of 

Health, the dentists and the dental school. The Oxbow School Dental Program has met with great 

success and is well accepted by the residents of the area. Our experience with this program will be most 

valuable in establishing a province-wide dental program for children. In the Swift Current Health 

Region a publicly financed dental program has been operating for many years. This program has 

demonstrated that administratively it is possible for the Government to operate a dental service. The 

most important part of a dental program is the preventive aspect. I have said on many occasions that I 

believe that our health programs are oriented to sickness and are primarily sickness programs. This is 

also true in case of the dental health, too much of our emphasis and primarily all of our emphasis is 

concentrated on curing the measure not preventing the measure. 

 

We must improve the dental education information which our citizens receive so that they can more 

effectively maintain their dental health. The Government can assist communities in a number of other 

ways. The assistance of the fluoridation program is one which in many parts of this Province is one area 

where I believe the public sector is failing its responsibility. We must quit taking a casual attitude 

towards what is a very serious health problem. Mr. Speaker, I might point out that in the case of the 

northern part of the province our health officers tell me that in the native communities, on the reserves, 

we have children that all that they left is the roots and the stumps in their mouth, all the teeth have been 

decayed because of diet and because of lack of provision of dental care. Mr. Speaker, Dr. George 

Mitchell in an article, The False Economy of Dental Neglect pointed out and I quote: 

 

Preventive measures would reduce the cost to the public substantially in terms of money saved, 

time saved, pain and discomfort avoided and prevention of personal appearance. 

 

In other article he had this to say about the various types of dental disease and have one thing in 

common, namely: 

 

They are progressive and permanent in each condition which requires individual treatment on the 

basis of adequate examination and diagnosis. For these diseases there are no known cures, they 

are not self-correcting. Once they begin to attack they can be controlled only through regular, 

continual, and costly treatment. 

 

By careful planning and through active consultation with the School of Dentistry at the University and 

the College of Dental Surgeons we are confident that we will provide a dental program which 

adequately meets the needs of the residents of the Province of Saskatchewan. A dental program which 

can be accomplished within the financial capacity of the Government of Saskatchewan. Planning for the 

dental program is continuing but we intend to depend mainly upon the ancillary personnel whose 

training will be provided for under this legislation. We hope to enrol, Mr. Speaker, at least 50 students in 

a new program to begin training these ancillary dental personnel in the fall of 1972. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1346 

Mr. Smishek: — As students from these two-year training programs graduate we will introduce our 

dental program. The children’s dental program is based on Saskatchewan people, serving Saskatchewan 

people. This program will provide many opportunities for the young people of Saskatchewan to find 

satisfying and rewarding employment in the Province of Saskatchewan. I have no doubts that in the 

years ahead this dental program will meet the same success as did the hospitalization and the medical 

care programs and will be copied by other provinces in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, The Ancillary Dental Personnel Education Act is the beginning of a 

major new health program for the people of Saskatchewan. It gives me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 

move second reading of Bill No. 77, An Act to provide The education of Ancillary Dental Personnel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, once again the Minister of Health has 

spoiled an otherwise good speech and a good program by his references to political implications. One 

would feel from listening to the first parts of his observations that little or nothing was done by the 

previous Government, that all the goodies emanate from the powers who are opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — I was amazed, Mr. Speaker, to find him saying that he and his associates don’t mind 

challenging the vested interests. Then in the next breath he pointed out that the pilot scheme now in 

successful operation in the Oxbow area was brought about to a large extent by the co-operation of the 

Dental College and the dentists of the province. I think he gave credit earlier in the House to our 

Government for initiating this project with the financial backing of the Federal Government. This was 

certainly not initiated by the NDP. 

 

Now I’m not going to beat the drums for the dentists, they are quite able to do that themselves, but I 

would point out to the Hon. Member that not too many years ago the co-operation on the part of the 

dentists for the use of ancillaries was not forthcoming. I give credit for the success of the establishment 

of the Oxbow unit to a man who is sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery today, Dr. Currie, the Director of the 

Dental Branch of the Department of Health. I also give credit to Dr. Currie for his role in convincing the 

dentists of this Province that they should be receptive to the role of the ancillary and it was his work that 

brought this about. I believe the dental profession is very receptive to this now, although I’m a little 

puzzled when the Minister says that he has made the Bill available to the Dental College and as yet has 

not heard from them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have more that I should like to comment on in connection, with this Bill, I ask leave to 

adjourn the debate. 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1347 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 71 – An Act to amend 

The Power Corporation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to enlighten the Members with reference to the amendment to The 

Power Corporation Bill the reason for the amendment is related to the understanding of the term ‘net 

sum borrowed’. If I may give an example to illustrate, if the Province were to borrow $20 million for 

which the lender pays say $99 per $100, has the Province really in fact borrowed $20 million or 

$19,800,000? The lawyers tell us that there could be confusion and accordingly suggest the alternative 

wording which includes the phrase ‘principal amount of outstanding bonds’. The word ‘principal’ 

clearly refers to the $20 million in the foregoing illustration. Therefore, the last part of subsection (1) 

Section 42 which now reads – ‘except where the borrowing is for the purpose of paying in whole or in 

part any indebtedness previously incurred for the purposes of this Act’, has been amended to say ‘unless 

the borrowing is for the purpose of paying in whole or in part any indebtedness previously incurred for 

the purpose of this Act’. 

 

This, I believe, covers the situation also where if we were to have $640 million or of the authority which 

has been used and $20 million of it matures and has to be repaid by borrowing, an example would be 

refunding operations, in this case the $650 million would be exceeded if the $20 million was added, but 

inasmuch as the borrowing is to repay the original $20 million it will not have to be added to the $640 

million and thereby causing the excess of the $650 million’s ceiling. 

 

The amendment to Section 3 I think is self-explanatory in regard to the valuation of Canadian dollars as 

par with United States dollars. 

 

Having made these few remarks in regard to what I term a housekeeping amendment, Mr. Speaker, I 

move that a Bill, An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act be given second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 74 – An Act to 

amend The Trade Schools Regulation Act. 

 

He said: The amendment to Bill No. 74, The Trade Schools Regulation Act, is being made to 

dovetail with a Bill introduced by the Attorney General on sales of training courses, Bill No. 66 which is 

now in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Courses that are handled by correspondence will no longer be covered by this Act and reference to them 

is being deleted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is merely a housekeeping amendment and I would be very pleased to move that it now 

be read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 

March 30, 1972 

 

1348 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 75 – An Act to amend 

The Veterinary Services Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is also a housekeeping amendment. As Hon. Members will know we 

announced in the Budget Speech that we would be providing more money for the establishment of 

veterinary clinics throughout the Province of Saskatchewan. The Veterinary Services Act as it now reads 

allows a maximum $8,000 to be made available to those districts from the Government at the present 

time. In order for us to provide the $15,000 that we said we would make available for the establishment 

of veterinary clinics in districts or regions we have to amend Section 9, subsection (2) to raise the ceiling 

to something higher than the $8,000 limit which it now restricts us to. Therefore, we are asking that we 

amend that sum of money to a higher amount, to the amount of $30,000 so we shall have the opportunity 

to provide the $15,000 for the establishment of the veterinary clinics, also giving us some further leeway 

in regard to providing other money to provide better and extended service to those districts. 

 

I hope by doing this, Mr. Speaker, we shall not only increase the number of veterinary clinics in the 

Province of Saskatchewan but it may make it more desirable for those who are graduating from our 

College in Saskatoon to look at practices in Saskatchewan rather than at smaller animal practices in 

other provinces, such as Manitoba and Alberta. 

 

Having made these few brief remarks to what I refer as a housekeeping amendment, Mr. Speaker, I 

move second reading of an Act to amend The Veterinary Services Act. 

 

Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I think that there are implications in this 

Bill that certainly might be considered more than housekeeping. There is some considerable problem 

with the construction of veterinary clinics and my colleague the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) has 

some considerable remarks to make about this and I beg leave to adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 o’clock p.m. 

 

 


