



















































Hansard: April 04, 1972


1393 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Tuesday, April 4, 1972. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. J.K. Comer (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture, the 

Member for Tisdale-Kelsey who couldn’t be with us today to introduce a group of 100 students from the 

Tisdale School, they are accompanied here today by their teachers John Wink, Bob Burgess, Earl 

McNair and their bus drivers Kelvin Hayward and Paul Salisbury. I am sure that all Members of the 

Assembly will join with me in hoping that they have an educational stay here this afternoon and that 

they have a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself with those 

remarks. Tisdale is the old home town and I always love to see some fine people from Tisdale. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 20 Grade Seven 

and Eight students from the Marieval Day School. This school is located on the Cowesses Indian 

Reserve north of Broadview. They are accompanied here today by their principal, Mr. Land and Teacher 

Mrs. Garrett and the driver, Mr. Harold Larat. An interesting thing about this, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

young ladies in the group mentioned that in touring the building at noon that she had seen a picture of 

her great great grandfather in the gallery downstairs. It is not very often that this happens to a student 

who comes in here. We hope these students have an enjoyable day in the city and that they have a safe 

journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to welcome a group of students 

from Marian High School. I noticed the name of Mr. MacDonald was under the name outside here on 

the bulletin board as the one to greet them. I believe he is here accompanying them, is that right, Mr. 

MacDonald. I think he should be upstairs, it’s one way of getting him out of his seat. I want to welcome 

them because of them or a good number of them live in Regina Wascana. The school is just on the 

fringe of my area and I don’t know who the teacher is, the teacher’s name is not listed on the bulletin 

board, but we do welcome this class of 150 girls in the east gallery. A very fine group I assure you. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — All Liberals . . . 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1394 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join my favorite Member from Wascana 

in also extending a sincere greeting to the students from Marian High School. They are a very special 

group of students. They are the students that have to put up with me from 8:30 a.m. until 2:00 p.m. I do 

want to say that I hope the Government Members will be on their best behavior and give them a good 

example this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

SASKATCHEWAN YOUTH BAND 
 

Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I noticed in the 

paper that the Saskatchewan Youth Band may have played its last concert because of the withdrawal of 

financial support by the Department of Education. I should like to ask the Premier if he would consider 

some other means of financial support is some manner or through some other Department. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the Minister of Education to answer that. The 

answer is, briefly put, that the support is being provided through another agency. 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in an attempt to reorganize the grants 

program it was lifted from the Department of Education and it will be provided under the Arts Board for 

this year. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — An addendum to that, Mr. Speaker. There seems to be some confusion on behalf of 

the band itself, of the organization. I wonder if the Minister has made this plain to them so that they are 

not interrupting their program. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — I think there was some confusion, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Jeffrey in our Department 

who usually handles this area for us was not aware of the circumstances of transfer to the Arts Board. 

We have brought this to his attention and he will be getting in touch with the Youth Band, it is an 

excellent program and certainly this Government is prepared to support it, as it has in the past. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF LAND BANK BILL 
 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, today being the 28th sitting day of this Session 

of the Legislature and the normal length for a session is approximately 42 days, we are concerned that 

the Government has not yet presented its Land Bank legislation. It is obvious that once it is presented 

there will be requirement of a little bit of time for farm organizations to look at it and considering 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1395 

that an average length of time would only be slightly less than three more weeks we should like to know 

when the Government does anticipate presenting this legislation. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation has taken a good bit of time to draft. It has now been 

drafted in a form where it is now at the Legislative Counsel stage, it is certainly through the first draft 

stage. We anticipate that it will be available for tabling in the House before many days. I want just to 

comment on one other aspect of the question. I think that it should not necessarily be assumed that the 

length of the Session this year will be normal in any sense of the word. There is a heavy volume of 

legislation and it is entirely possible that the Session will be over, in fact I think it is almost certain that 

the Session will go over an ordinary length and it may go over substantially. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I might comment to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, that the record I think is 55 days, 

which is only slightly longer. My first original remark would still apply that it is necessary to give the 

public a chance to look at it. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I concede the force of the comment made by the Member for Cannington, and we are 

certainly going to try to get the legislation before the Legislature just as soon as we can. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF SUCCESSION DUTY BILL 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just as a supplemental to the question from the 

Member for Cannington. There is another very important piece of legislation that has not been tabled in 

the House and that is, succession duties. Certainly if we intend to proceed with the business order of the 

House we should like to see the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer table this at an early date. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I am able to give the Member assurance that that will in fact 

be the case. I think this Bill is further along than the Land Bank one by a good bit. I know that we shall 

have it very soon. 

 

If I may observe in passing that a number of the Bills which have been here have been adjourned a good 

number of times by the Members opposite. I would urge us all, and I speak for both sides of the House, 

to get rid of as much business as we can which is on the Order Paper so that when some of this other 

legislation comes along which has been held up because of the elaborate nature of the drafting we will 

be able to give it relatively undivided attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 72 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1396 

Return No. 72 showing: 

 

Locations, dates and oxygen and mercury levels of any tests made during 1971 of water in the 

North Saskatchewan River between the Alberta border and the junction with the South 

Saskatchewan River. 

 

Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Minister of Indian and Metis): — Mr. Speaker, we want to provide the 

information which the Member has requested but we want to provide additionally some comparative 

analysis in order that the information which is provided will be of more benefit than that which has been 

asked for. I want therefore to suggest to the House that an amendment be made to the motion in the 

following manner, seconded by Hon. Mr. Kramer: 

 

That all the words after the word “dates” in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

oxygen and mercury levels of any tests made by the Government of Saskatchewan during 1970 

and 1971 of water in the North Saskatchewan River between the Alberta border and the junction 

with the South Saskatchewan River. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that this will provide the information which the Member is seeking and will 

also provide as I have already indicated, additional information which will be comparative in order to 

make a proper comparison therewith. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, I have no objection to this amendment, although the information was 

supplied last year, it is a repeat of information that was supplied last year. I believe it will probably show 

up the effects of the sewage equipment that was installed in Saskatoon, I hope it does anyway. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 6 – FULL EMPLOYMENT IN CANADA BY FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) moved, seconded by Mr. Matsalla (Canora): 

 

That this Assembly urges in the strongest possible terms that the Federal Government mobilize 

all its resources to create jobs and achieve full employment in Canada. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we have had considerable discussion in this House during the present sitting 

of the Legislature related to the unemployment problem. I propose at the end of my remarks to move a 

motion for the consideration of all Members of this Assembly and I hope that they will support this 

motion. 

 

Personally I have no particular desire to be consciously political in the discussion and debate in this 

proposed resolution. Opposition Members are constantly reminding us of an unemployment problem in 

the Province of Saskatchewan, and there 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1397 

is a serious unemployment problem right across Canada. Their claim is that a lower percentage of 

unemployment existed a year ago than is the case today. Their claim may well be true, I sincerely hope 

that they are using statistics from Statistics Canada which should be the most reliable source in terms of 

statistics for the whole of this country. However, I would remind them that 1971 was a Homecoming 

year, particularly in the latter half of that year. Many tradesmen who left his province, electricians, 

carpenters, steel workers and other construction workers, left during the major economic recession we 

suffered in 1969, 1970 and 1971. These people went in large numbers of British Columbia and Alberta, 

a large number of those persons appeared in the statistics of unemployed persons in British Columbia 

and Alberta in those years. Large numbers of them were unable to find employment in those areas and 

have returned to this province, therefore they are a factor in showing up in the unemployment statistics 

available today in this province. This is a fact of our general economic life. 

 

In the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, governments at all levels are going to be confronted with severe problems 

related to the work force and unemployment. I think, Mr. Speaker, it is perfectly logical to contend that 

our economic structure has undergone and is undergoing significant and fundamental change. The war 

babies of the last war and the children born in the 1940s and 1950s are now entering our labor markets 

and they are entering the labor market in increasing numbers. This is a basic fact of reality in the Canada 

of today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the present date in our society we have a continuation of a practice which has, in my opinion been 

too long with us. Too many of the things which we as consumers buy are wants contrived by 

advertising. Often something which prompts the consumer to buy and in the process spend money, 

which he hasn’t got, for something he really doesn’t want; and an emphasis on selling all too often 

needless and wasteful production in terms of maintaining employment. Mr. Speaker, productivity in the 

industrial process in this country is extremely high. Expansion of the public sector is practically a 

foregone conclusion in the foreseeable future and cyclically graduated compensation in the form of 

unemployment insurance is already in process. Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Assembly is concerned 

about the unemployment problem and I believe they are sincerely concerned about it. Economically it is 

many hundreds of times more wasteful than are illness, absenteeism, loss of work through injury and all 

other factors combined. 

 

In 1969 and 1970 the Federal Government of this country gave tacit approval to a form of monetary 

restraint applied by the central bank of this country, the Bank of Canada. The Government’s contention 

was that it was a requirement to contain inflationary pressures in the economy. We all agree, Mr. 

Speaker, that inflationary factors create real hardship and enact a particularly potent penalty on the 

person who is on fixed income, the pensioner, the unorganized worker and particularly on the 

unemployed. By dampening down money supply through the central banking agency by a fiscal 

approach which balanced the Budget in 1969-70, thus removing purchasing power from the economy at 

a period of time when the work force was being swelled by numerous new entrants – those children born 

in the last war and after the last war – the unemployment rolls rose rather drastically. The Federal 

Government and the Prime Minister of this country readily agreed that unemployment would grow, but 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1398 

contended that the steps taken although having numerous unsatisfactory side effects would reduce the 

inflationary factor and in the end result would be beneficial to all of us. Mr. Speaker, I am the first to 

admit that inflationary factors are a serious matter to all Canadians whether this fact is realized or not. 

As a person who spent most of his working lifetime in the field of pension administration I readily admit 

that inflation generally has a disastrous impact on pension probabilities. However, after outlining the 

problem related to inflation which hurts fixed income recipients, pensioners and particularly the 

unemployed, one must also look at the impact of deflationary policies which almost inevitably result in 

heavier unemployment. 

 

Perhaps nothing is more soul-destroying than to be unable to secure gainful employment. My criticism, 

and I trust it is constructive criticism of the Federal Government’s most recent policies in this respect, is 

that all too often the timing is in error and the tendency to rely on monetary policy as the major means of 

achieving adjustment is most unwise. Both monetary restraint and the offsetting approach of an 

expansionist monetary stance inevitably has its impact. The time lag between institution of such a policy 

and the end result is usually some 18 months or more. By the time the major impact arrives economic 

conditions have altered and the monetary methods employed are often attempting to correct a condition 

which is no longer applicable. 

 

I favor a means of controlling inflation and readily admit that monetary restraint must be a factor which 

must be utilized. However, it must be utilized with extreme care and the timing associated with its 

utilization must bear no relationship to political expediency or an attempt to gain political advantage. 

My major complaint against the Federal authority is this country can be summed up under specific 

headings. 1. In using the money supply and the application of restraint to control inflationary tendencies 

sudden abandonment when electoral probabilities loom large in the authorities perspective merely 

compounds the problem, though it may be temporarily successful in diverting public opinion from an 

inevitable side effect of restraint policies, namely increasing unemployment. 2. If the Federal authorities 

would use selective price control, for example, on a basic commodity at a time of industrial 

confrontation the overall inflationary impact followed by monetary and fiscal restraint would be 

appreciably reduced. In addition the side effects created by the inevitable deflationary impact, Mr. 

Speaker, of the restraint measures would also be appreciably reduced. 

 

May I simply give you an example to illustrate this point. In 1969, I visited in Ontario in the Sudbury 

area when the Falconbridge Nickel Mines and International Nickel Mines were on strike. These plants 

had been struck by the United Steel Workers, a very powerful union. The strike lasted some four or five 

months. During that period United Steel Workers with their muscle, if you want to term it as such, were 

able to extract a very good contract for their members from these two companies. Immediately after that 

settlement the price of nickel was raised 25 cents a pound. I had occasion to check very carefully 

Falconbridge Nickel and International Nickel, along with many other companies in my work as an 

administrator of a pension fund. I discovered that in 1969 International Nickel had net earnings of some 

$59 million but in 1970 the year after they raised that price of nickel by 25 cents a pound, their net 

earnings climbed to $161 million. Now it is obvious 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1399 

that during 1969 the companies’ earnings were hurt to an appreciable degree by the strike. My 

contention is simply this; an extremely powerful union, United Steel Workers and two powerful 

companies, Falconbridge and International Nickel, which largely control the total nickel supply in this 

country and indeed throughout the world, after they came to a settlement simply, of course, moved the 

settlement on to the consumer of the goods. Now the real problem that arises here is the tremendous 

impact that it has on our general economy. Nickel is a basic commodity. It is used in the manufacture of 

automobiles, washing machines, televisions, sets, industrial commodities, etc. If the Government of the 

day had used some kind of price control on the basic commodity it would have appreciably slowed 

down the inflationary impact on this country. In any economic society there are those who, when placed 

in positions of power, whether it’s union groups or companies, will abuse that power and secure unfair 

economic advantage. It is the function of the Federal authority to police that power. This could be 

accomplished at least to some degree through a prices review board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is little doubt that price increases at times are justified. Economic catastrophe could 

occur in an industry which could not alter its price structure on products or services when its costs have 

risen to a level which consistently exceeds realized return on its operations. It is equally true that price 

increases are sometimes totally unjustified. The unscrupulous may well take advantage of the general 

trend. A review board would analyze price increases, if unjustified such increases would be revoked. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, on two occasions in recent years the Federal authority has used that approach, rather 

timidly admittedly, but they applied it in relation to proposed price increases in the steel industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I presume it fair to say that inflation and deflation are in all probability not very 

meaningful to the man on the street or the average Canadian. Yet inflationary and deflationary 

tendencies in our economy exert powerful influences and vital impact on every Canadian. Inflation 

destroys the purchasing power of our savings and deflation may well usher the individual into the ranks 

of the unemployed. Economic devastation can be inflicted on Canadian economic life through the 

deflationary factor and through the inflationary factor. Mr. Speaker, no factor is more deflationary than 

hundreds of thousands of unemployed persons who lack purchasing power which prevents them from 

reasoned participation in the mainstream of Canadian economic life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Opposition Members in this Assembly have expressed well-founded concern for 

unemployed persons in Saskatchewan. They cannot, therefore, do other than logically support the intent 

of my resolution. They are well aware, at least they should be, that the economic capabilities of the 

Federal authorities whether in the field of monetary or fiscal policies are the vital factors in determining 

whether or not unemployment is a major problem in Saskatchewan and indeed throughout Canada. 

Suffice it to say that my criticism of the Federal authority in this matter is basically that all too often 

political expediency appears to govern the economic decisions. If our timing were improved with 

reasoned economic planning the hills and valleys of economic activity could be smoothed out to some 

degree and the tragic impact of unemployment on people thereby reduced. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1400 

Our objective in urging the Federal authority policies which may well alleviate the unemployment 

problem without attendant inflationary side effects is in line with the general recommendations of the 

Economic Council of Canada and in accordance with definable economic goals. I, therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, urge all Members to support my general Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I have not had the opportunity to prepare in any great length a 

speech on this particular subject but in listening to the Hon. Member who put forward some very valid 

points I do think a resolution of this importance, because it comes to one of the most important things in 

the country at this particular time and I really found very little to quarrel with him when he was talking 

about monetary policy, employment policies and so forth in creating a full employment climate in our 

country. I do think though that he has not nearly gone far enough in his analysis of the difficulties now 

besetting the economic system and the problems of unemployment in the country. For example, he says 

that the Federal Government should mobilize its resources to create jobs and achieve full employment in 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, that, of course, has been the long and great cry from the NDP for a number of 

years and it continues to be, but I wish to assure the Hon. Member from Saskatoon that the Federal 

Government alone will never overcome the problems which he so eloquently speaks of. The Federal 

Government through monetary policy, fiscal policy or any other type of winter works program that are 

measures to solve the unemployment in the short run will never overcome the difficulties besetting the 

country as far as the unemployed are concerned, without the co-operation of the people of this country 

themselves which unfortunately I have to say has not been forthcoming in the measures which are 

required. 

 

I come to the very core of what he said about International Nickel and Falconbridge Nickel because 

precisely this is what is happening across the country. The economic groups such as the powerful labor 

unions or powerful business, one as bad as the other, have been able to look after themselves very 

nicely. A powerful union has been able to achieve substantial wage gains far beyond the inflationary 

gains in the economy; the industry in many instances has simply passed this on to the consumer at the 

expense of the poorly organized public. Those people who are unorganized are basically the farmers, the 

old age pensioners, young people, people who work in the small shops for relatively low wages and 

have very little economic power. They are the people who are paying the price towards both big 

business and big labor in Canada today and until the co-operation is forthcoming of both big business 

and big labor those people will still be occupying a very low rung on the economic ladder in Canada. I 

suggest to the Member, therefore, that if we in this country are to overcome the problems of 

unemployment that there is going to have to be a great deal more co-operation between both big labor 

and big business because it is pretty obvious that up until now they have simply been looking after 

themselves. It’s absolutely mind boggling to myself to take a look at some of the provincial budgets that 

are being presented today. You take a look at the Province of Alberta which supposedly is under a brand 

new, one of great image politician in Mr. Lougheed and they bring in a budget of $199 million deficit. 

Now the Province of Ontario, and not even an election 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1401 

year I might add, Mr. Speaker, brings in a deficit budget of something like over $500 million. This is 

going to be in one of the most prosperous years that our country has ever seen for the year that has been 

presently budgeted for in these two particular provinces. The Province of Manitoba I didn’t have at my 

fingertips the deficit in its budget. And yet the provinces all across the country are budgeting for 

tremendous deficits in order to try and prop up the economy and solve our unemployment problems. 

Meanwhile much of the co-operation and need of the general public in keeping our costs and our 

competitive edge is being lost. Many highly organized unions and highly organized businesses are 

simply pricing themselves out of the market at the drastic loss of jobs to the general economy. We can’t 

help but look at the demands which are being placed throughout the economy by people in all walks of 

life. Some of these demands are legitimate but far too often they are based on what is good for me and 

how much can I get, Mr. Speaker, and the economy becomes secondary. 

 

What I want to do is suggest to the Member opposite that there is simply no use in us passing a 

Resolution saying that the Federal Government should be able to overcome all of these problems. The 

Federal Government can’t overcome all these problems without the co-operation of the rest of the 

people of this country and they are not likely to overcome it. Whether the Government is called 

Conservative, NDP, Liberal or any other political stripe, the problems of unemployment aren’t going 

away until the people of this country start showing some co-operation in the creation of jobs by 

remaining competitive and by the desire of people themselves to hold economic gains within reasons. I 

would apply these comments not to any particular group, because it is obvious that any group with 

economic power is using it to full advantage today in Canada and the only groups that are really 

suffering are those who have little or no economic power. So I want to simply suggest to the Member 

that while I support his Resolution that I should have liked him to address much of his speech equally 

not only to the Federal Government but to the Provincial Governments of Canada and to the various 

economic groups of Canada, including both big business and big labor. It is only through the 

co-operation of all of these groups that we in this country can ever possibly even come close to 

overcoming many of the economic problems that are creating such high levels of unemployment and 

difficulty for so many people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Resolution but I do not accept the narrowness of the Resolution but 

simply point out that the Federal Government by itself will never at any time, nor with the Provincial 

Governments at any time, overcome these problems without substantially more co-operation than they 

have been receiving up until now from various strong economic groups. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, there are a few words that I should like to 

add to this very important Resolution and I should like to say first of all that it is somewhat encouraging 

to hear some of the remarks of the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) who just took his seat. I 

think this is the first glimmer of recognition that we have seen from Opposition benches which 

recognizes that some of the economic ills and some of the 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1402 

problems of our country can be traced directly to the exorbitant and excessive profits that have been 

wrung out of the national blood stream of this country of ours. I think that this is the first glimmer of 

recognition that we have seen in the 10 or 12 long years that I have had the opportunity of sitting in this 

House facing Members opposite. 

 

I want to congratulate the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) for presenting 

with I regard as a very important Resolution on a very impressing problem. I feel that the Resolution 

proposed by the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre is entirely relevant and extremely 

appropriate at this time. 

 

The Resolution’s emphasis with regard to the allocation of responsibility for the alleviation of current 

unemployment is also very much to the point. The Federal Government I believe must bear the major 

portion of the blame for the high jobless rate in this country and with its control over the nation’s fiscal, 

monetary and general economic policy, Mr. Speaker, it must assume the dominant role in implementing 

lasting solutions. Before the Federal Government started to tinker with the economy the Ottawa 

administration obviously adopted the widely held view, Mr. Speaker, that unemployment and inflation 

could not exist at the same time. Presumably this was their motivation in deliberately creating conditions 

of unemployment in an attempt to curb excessive price increases. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is well 

that we hesitate for a moment and see just how successful that Ottawa experiment has been. On the one 

hand their experiments have undeniably put hundreds of thousands of Canadian people out of work – 

627,000 last month according to the most recent Statistics Canada Report. The February unemployment 

rate was 7.3 per cent or doubt what is needed to sustain conditions which are regarded as relatively full 

employment. Although the seasonally adjusted rate stood at 5.8 per cent, although it is lower than a year 

ago, it is still very much too high. 

 

What about inflation then, Mr. Speaker? Not even the most optimistic Federal Liberal would claim that 

the February 1971 to February 1972 consumer price rise of almost 5 per cent or two and one half times 

the acceptable standard is in any way a measure of progress in controlling costs. The Members of the 

Trudeau Cabinet seem to have invented their own version of the old chicken and egg riddle in reverse. 

They couldn’t decide which came first, unemployment or inflation, and so they didn’t know which they 

should be attempting to make disappear before the other. As a consequence of their uncertain 

manoeuvring to settle the question they have been eminently successful, Mr. Speaker, in disposing of 

neither. No one will deny that inflation is a force to be dealt with but surely, Mr. Speaker, no responsible 

person will say that this should be done at the expense of a man’s livelihood. In Saskatchewan in 

February some 20,000 people were reported to be without jobs representing an unadjusted 

unemployment rate of 6.1 per cent. It’s true that the Saskatchewan rate is one of the lowest in Canada 

after Alberta and Ontario. However, this fact is not likely to offer very much consolation to the 

individual who finds himself without a job. 

 

As a number of labor observers have pointed out if you are unemployment, Mr. Speaker, you are not 6.1 

per cent unemployed you are 100 per cent unemployed. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1403 

It’s disturbing to note the available statistics reveal that a significant proportion of the jobless total is 

made up of persons who have not worked for seven months or more. Moreover an important factor 

reflected in the February figures is the impact of unemployment on our young people. The 

unemployment rate in Canada for persons under 25 years of age was more than double that for members 

of the labor force who are over 25 years of age and a similar pattern may be set to apply in 

Saskatchewan also. At the same time I believe it has to be recognized that the official unemployment 

estimates do not tell us about the extent of underemployment as indicated by the number of persons who 

are not working on a full time basis. Nor do these statistics include persons who have withdrawn 

themselves from the labor force because they have despaired and have stopped looking for a job. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, it would be irresponsible, I believe for governments at any level to 

underestimate the severity of our unemployment problem. 

 

The effect of unemployment on the economy is a cause for great concern. One thinks, for example of 

losses in output produced by unemployment in terms of the additional production of goods and services 

that the unemployed would have created had their productive potential been developed and utilized. This 

extra production would have resulted in higher personal incomes and purchasing power and accordingly 

higher business sales volumes and higher government revenues. In addition, a portion of the financial 

resources of the country must be set aside to provide the funds necessary to meet the living needs of the 

unemployed. 

 

In 1971 during which a great deal was said about strike losses in Saskatchewan, time losses attributable 

to unemployment totalled about 3.2 million man-days or 1,600 times greater than the time not worked as 

a result of work stoppages. That is to say that the time lost as a result of unemployment was 1,600 times 

greater than the time not worked as a result of work stoppages. The estimated wage loss occasioned by 

unemployment in Canada last year amounted to the staggering sum of $3.7 billion. Apart from the 

economic inefficiencies produced by the underutilization of manpower resources, Mr. Speaker, the 

implication of the social problems resulting from unemployment are also very substantial. 

 

The unemployed person is often forced to endure a standard of living which is below the minimal 

acceptable line. Unemployment is frequently accompanied by poverty. Poverty breeds ill health, it leads 

to a sense of futility. It can mean poor housing and it can mean inadequate food. Above all the lack of a 

job places an individual outside the mainstream of productive society. Our younger people particularly 

feel this loss keenly because they are anxious and willing to start making a useful contribution to the 

development of that society. 

 

Granted, we have social assistance programs to meet the sustenance level, physical needs of unemployed 

workers and their families but this is neither a complete nor is it a satisfactory answer. 

 

In this connection, Mr. Speaker, with your permission I should like to quote from a brief to the Senate 

Committee on poverty in Canada, submitted by the Humans on Welfare Group in 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1404 

Edmonton some time ago. The report says this and I quote briefly: 

 

To become poor, to be forced to seek welfare assistance is to be damned to second-class 

citizenship. To be thought of and treated as something less than a human being. Raped of dignity 

you experience constant panic, frustration, deprivation and injustices. Worse still is the shattering 

hopelessness of knowing that you are trapped because the system is designed to keep you there 

to maintain you in the welfare trap unless you possess extraordinary determination and good 

health or are blessed with good luck you will remain trapped on welfare street. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t concur in total with all of the sentiments that are expressed herein but I think 

it does express some of the feeling of loss and some of the feeling of frustration of those people, many 

of those people who make up our unemployment statistics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I resent and I deplore this kind of a situation as a member of this Government, as a trade 

unionist and as a Canadian citizen. It is imperative that effective and permanent methods be devised to 

combat unemployment to reduce the human and social consequences. 

 

Late last fall, Mr. Speaker, in belated acknowledgement that action was required to deal with the 

question the Government of Canada established the Local Initiatives Program, the Government Loans 

Program and the Training on the Job Program to create additional jobs. Although these plans were 

hastily conceived and leave very much to be desired from an operational point of view, the Government 

of Saskatchewan was quick to take advantage of them for the benefit of the people of the province. A 

Provincial Task Force on unemployment was established to consider suitable employment producing 

projects which would qualify under those programs. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Government, itself, committed a substantial financial 

contribution to these programs in order to maximize the effectiveness of these programs in our province. 

The Government agreed to offer a Provincial Special Development Loans on the same basis on which 

the Federal loans were made available to authorize a system of grants to match the loan forgiveness 

feature of the Federal plan and to initiate a Provincial counterpart of the Local Initiative Grants Program, 

applicable when the Federal funds were exhausted. 

 

The next cost of these programs to the Government of Saskatchewan is not estimated to be close to $6 

million. This is by no means, Mr. Speaker, the only involvement of the Government in work generating 

activities. We were cognizant of the pressing need for positive measures in this direction when we first 

assumed office. This is why the Government launched a special $5 million capital construction 

employment creating program last fall. This is why individual departments are carrying on special 

projects intended to maximize employment during the winter months. 

 

The Department of Welfare for example, Mr. Speaker, is engaged in the government subsidized scheme 

under which new special-care homes are being constructed and improvements are being made to 

existing structures. This is a program that was accelerated early last fall. Seven special-care projects are 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1405 

currently under way and an additional seven will be commencing shortly. The total estimated value of 

this project is almost $2 million and the labor content is significantly high. This is why the Government, 

Mr. Speaker, will move additional construction schedules forward this year. This is why the Department 

of Labour will be administering a special provincial employment program to find jobs for students and 

additionally, unlike the program of last summer, will also be finding jobs for unemployed young people 

out of the school system since February and for employable social assistance clients. 

 

These arrangements will help, Mr. Speaker, but long term solutions are required to create conditions of 

full employment on a stable basis. This will be a formidable task as we all know. 

 

As the Economic Council of Canada has recently reported some 1.4 million new jobs will be needed in 

the period of 1970 to 1975 if employment is to grow fast enough just to absorb the anticipated large 

increase in the labor force and to reduce unemployment to a more acceptable level. The Council has 

observed that the rate of job creation in Canada has not kept pace with the growth of the labor force in 

the last four out of the last six years. Further, the Council has reported that the greatest employment 

needs will occur in the 25 to 34 age group and they will be particularly large for men in this group for 

whom the rate of employment growth must be more than double that of the last half of 1960. This is the 

age group, Mr. Speaker, largely responsible for the establishment of families with their demands for 

housing, for durable goods and for urban services. Accordingly, unless meaningful steps are taken 

immediately to accommodate these requirements, there will be very serious repercussions before the end 

of the current decade. 

 

In the achieving of full employment the entire spectrum of economic and social remedies will have to be 

explored, including more expansionary, monetary and fiscal policies, a greater emphasis on the 

development of secondary and service industries so that our natural resources will be processed in 

Canada and not simply shipped to other countries for refining. We will have to introduce measures 

designed for increasing purchasing power and to distribute income in a more equitable fashion. We must 

turn our attention to the institution of more adequate occupational training programs, possibly even the 

restructuring of labor demand to match labor supply and perhaps to the judicious application of such 

legislative tools as the reduction in the hours of work to create employment as we have already done in 

Saskatchewan to a minor degree or to the encouragement perhaps of early retirement. 

 

In this connection, Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government, I suggest will have to take the lead in 

introducing innovative and imaginative employment practices across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we pride ourselves in living in a land of plenty, a land with the second highest standard of 

living in the world, a land in which, assisted by technology, we’ve been able to exert impressive control 

over the resources of nature. However, I believe this all has a very hollow ring when we see the faces of 

despair in the line-ups in front of the Canada Manpower Centres, the Unemployment Insurance 

Commission offices and the Welfare offices of our country. It is the duty of Canadian society and the 

Government of Canada to look beyond the 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1406 

statistical numbers used to measure unemployment to the individuals who are seeking work. Concern for 

people is what Government is all about and what our particular kind of democratic system is all about. 

 

In this setting, Mr. Speaker, I’m firmly convinced that the Federal Government has an obligation to do 

its utmost to ensure that every able-bodied individual is entitled to the opportunity to engage in 

employment and this way share in the benefit of our growing national prosperity. 

 

I’ll be very pleased to join with the Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) in supporting 

the motion that is before us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I feel that I probably could have supported 

this motion if the Hon. Member from Saskatoon had included the Province of Saskatchewan in the 

Resolution. 

 

It’s said to be a favorite game among politicians from the municipal level to the federal level to try to 

blame somebody else for their problems. I sometimes wonder how confused the public must get with 

this shifting of responsibility between levels of government. The Resolution before us certainly is aimed 

in that direction to point the finger at Ottawa as the one who has failed to come up with the answers to 

the unemployment situation. 

 

I don’t doubt but what everyone in this room shares the view that we should have as high a rate of 

employment as possible. I sometimes wonder though when the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw speaks of 

the line-ups in front of the manpower offices and I’ve seen some of them myself. When one looks 

through today’s Leader-Post, in the help wanted columns there are about three or four of them without 

touching the sales types, and there is quite a variety of positions advertised; mechanics, accountants, 

delivery drivers, business form correlator operators, bartender, hotel clerks, heavy-duty mechanic, 

plumbing apprentice, parts manager, watch repairman, forest industry workers, accounting clerk, barber. 

Here’s one, they want a gentleman – I don’t know just what that category would be. A scraper operator, 

machine serviceman, caretaker, radiator repairman, grinder man for a large crank shaft general grinding 

outfit, watch maker, painter, light welders, driver for a semi-trailer unit, journeyman lineman, and I 

could go on but there are about four columns of help wanted and you wonder why some of these people 

who find themselves unemployed can’t possibly fit into some of these categories. 

 

My first impression is that they may be in the fringe of the trained area and possibly cannot get out of 

the ranks of the unemployed with their present abilities and if such, possibly training programs should 

be stepped up and this involves both levels of government. Ottawa is always a good scapegoat and I 

think it’s justified by the assumption by politicians in most provinces that they can’t go wrong by 

hammering at the Federal Government. We did our share when we were the government, nor can they 

go wrong by hammering the banks and the railways and there seems to be another group that is getting 

its share today, namely the big business corporations. I won’t pretend to defend 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1407 

them because I’ll be accused of being a shareholder in one of them. But the Government opposite must 

have realized by now, Mr. Speaker, that it also has a responsibility to find employment for young 

people. 

 

Now, the Hon. Minister of Labour has cited some programs that have been launched, some that have 

been carried over from the previous administration, but to me this is a mere drop in the bucket to what is 

required. I’m sure also that in light of discussions in this Chamber earlier that it must be quite evident to 

them that their philosophy is detrimental to the encouragement of job-making opportunities by the 

private sector and the Hon. Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) said, governments whether 

Provincial or Federal, cannot overcome this problem themselves. They must have co-operation and the 

participation by the private sector and I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the Members opposite are not in 

tune with the private sector. 

 

On every hand as indicated in previous debates they seem to have been discouraging this sector. It is 

evident in such things as the pulp mill, the iron mine, the oil industry, the suggested increase in 

corporate taxation, probably worst of all the suggested Succession Duty Bill, restrictive legislation of all 

types and descriptions and as we saw yesterday a Bill to regulate the sale of training courses and to me it 

was using a baseball bat to kill a flea. Far out of proportion to the requirements and so complicated that 

if any training course salesman endeavors to sell his courses in Saskatchewan he’s a brace soul indeed. 

He is going to have to struggle through about six pages of the Bill first to find out what he has to do and 

it must be pretty discouraging for them to even endeavor to be licensed. 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, that the Government opposite should put its own house in order before appealing to 

Ottawa, they should recognize their own failures in creating job opportunities for youth in our province. 

As I indicated there is certainly no harm in pushing Ottawa and if they had included their own 

shortcomings in the Resolution I would have no difficulty supporting it. 

 

Certainly when the province has exhausted its own resources for finding employment then there is 

justification in appealing to Ottawa. This, in my opinion, has not been done whereas Ottawa has been 

recognized by other leading nations as having shown more success than most countries in handling 

inflation and unemployment. 

 

The London Times, I believe, was one worthwhile publication that recognized the position of Canada in 

relationship to other countries in its fight against inflation and its fight to maintain employment. I doubt 

whether the London Times is going to be patting Canada on the back unnecessarily or when not 

justified. I feel that while Canada may not have done as much as we think they should when we look at 

the country in isolation, yet when compared to other Western countries our record looks petty good. 

 

I doubt, Mr. Speaker, whether you are ever going to have full employment. It is something like the 

family farm and I don’t know how you define it. It certainly isn’t 100 per cent. I believe it is recognized 

that something around 3 or 4 per cent unemployment is considered full employment. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1408 

I feel that they have mobilized a lot of their forces in creating the record that they have created in the 

eyes of the authority that I quoted, namely, London Times. I should like to move an amendment as 

follows: 

 

That the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

Congratulates the Federal Government for having created more new jobs in Canada in the last 

six years than the Governments of Italy, France, Germany, Belgium, Holland, Sweden, and Great 

Britain combined, and condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its failure to mobilize its 

resources to create jobs in the Province of Saskatchewan and create an economic atmosphere 

which would encourage the Private Sector to provide employment opportunities for our young 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I find that I cannot support the amendment 

and the reasons that I cannot support the amendment is that it tends to congratulate the Federal 

Government for the energy that they put into . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — . . . the solving of the unemployment problem in Canada. And the reason that I cannot 

support the amendment is because the Federal Government chose to discriminate against Saskatchewan 

in allocating funds to the programs that they initiated to combat the unemployment. 

 

I should like to bring to the attention of Members sitting opposite some relevant facts. If we take a close 

look at the Local Initiatives Program, we find that in Saskatchewan we have a population of some 

925,000 – give or take a few. Canada’s population is approximately 22.5 million. 

 

Now when we look at the allocation of funds to the Local Initiatives Program we find that the Federal 

Government allocated $150 million for all of Canada. But then we look at how much they allocated to 

Saskatchewan and an interesting observation is that the Federal officials did not reveal how much the 

allocation per province would be. On checking the figures we find out that Saskatchewan appears to 

have only been given $1,388,000. This works out to something less than 1 per cent of the total funds 

allocated to the program, when we have approximately 8 per cent of the population. 

 

When we look at Saskatchewan’s effort at the same time in the same program we find that we had 

already allocated $885,000 almost as much as the Federal Government had allocated to this program. 

But the most interesting part of the picture is when we turn the page over to the Employment Loans 

Program and we find that the Federal Government did allocate $6.9 million out of $160 million. This 

works out to approximately 4.5 per cent of total funds allocated. At least we are trying to get close to our 

8 per cent on a population base. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1409 

What did the Saskatchewan Government do at the same time? They allocated $6.9 million to the same 

program. We were willing to do as much to combat unemployment in our province as the Federal 

Government was. Yet, I think, all the Members sitting in the House will agree that the unemployment 

situation is caused generally by the Federal Government’s monetary policies. 

 

I should just like to say before I close that most of the money, or a great deal of the money, allocated to 

these programs may not be spent because of the deadlines involved. I have every reason to believe that 

our Government will see fit to extend the deadline so that we can indeed spend the money that we have 

budgeted to these programs. We don’t know how long we can extend them, but I am sure hoping that 

this Government will see fit to extend them by two weeks or one month. And only if the Federal 

Government will do the same thing can we really have a direct commitment from them that they really 

mean business in fighting unemployment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Whitmore 

Park (Mr. Grant) is trying to distract the attention of this House from the major issue and a major 

responsibility that rests with the Government of Canada in the area of creating employment and taking 

those measures that will reduce the present rate of unemployment in this country. 

 

The Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) has told this House that Canada is one of the most wealthy 

nations in terms of resources, in terms of potential. We are a nation where we can rid ourselves of 

unemployment, providing the Government of Canada gives leadership in adopting the kind of fiscal and 

monetary policies which would develop our economic resources in the interest of the people of this 

nation. 

 

We recognize that in this province there is some unemployment. Fortunately the ratio of unemployment 

in the Province of Saskatchewan is less than the Canadian average and smaller than in most of the 

provinces in the Dominion of Canada. However, we recognize that this is not good enough. Keeping in 

mind that we have taken office a matter of eight or nine months ago, following on the heels of a 

government that had no policy for economic development and economic growth for the Province of 

Saskatchewan for the last seven years. It is not easy to develop a program in a short period of time, 

whereby thousands of new jobs can be created for those who have been unemployed for many years in 

this province. 

 

We recognize that new measures have to be taken. We have already taken some measures. We have 

provided a large amount of funds for municipalities for public works programs by far larger than has 

ever been done in the last number of years. We have also taken legislative action in reducing the hours 

of work and increased the minimum wage, provided better wages for our public servants and better 

wages for the hospital employees so that their purchasing power can be increased. We know that their 

purchasing power will find its way into the community to help create more jobs. 

 

What did the Liberals do in the area of providing decent 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1410 

wages for hospital workers and for the Government employees? For seven years these workers were 

starved by the former administration. Yet the former Minister of Health is saying that within a period of 

nine months we should have done all the things that are necessary to be done to create massive 

employment. I can assure him that our Government is concerned about employment. That is why we 

admit that we are a government that intends to plan our economy and our economic development for 

growth and for creation of new jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal more comprehensively with this topic of unemployment. I would beg leave 

to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 9 – INCLUSION OF LEVEL III NURSING CARE UNDER 

SASKATCHEWAN HOSPITAL INSURANCE ACT 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park) moved, seconded by Mr. Boldt (Rosthern): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the immediate inclusion 

of Level III nursing care under the Saskatchewan Hospital Insurance Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Resolution is to try to rationalize health priorities in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that the Members opposite will be quick to point out that their program and their 

promises were a four-year document and that while they promised attention to the question of Level III 

care, that it wasn’t necessarily to be a first year priority. 

 

The election promise, in my opinion, was very garbled and I have spoken on this on previous occasions, 

and referred to Level IV care being covered under Medicare. It is quite evident that somebody did not 

have his facts when they drafted the plank in the platform because Level IV care is already covered 

under the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and in any event would not be covered under the 

Medicare Plan. 

 

I am assuming that they meant to say the inclusion of Level III care, under the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan. If this Resolution before us serves no other purpose than to clarify this misworded 

election promise I will feel that it has been justified. 

 

Over the years, Mr. Speaker, there has been difficulty experienced because of the problem of 

distinguishing a Level III patient from a Level V or acute-care case, or a Level IV type. This was largely 

overcome in 1969 with the publishing of a booklet titled “Definitions and Descriptions of Various 

Levels of Care,” and I believe it is now looked upon in the health field in the province and elsewhere as 

a good guide for determining the levels of care. 

 

Another basic step forward was initiated in 1970 with the establishment of a Board of Referees to 

adjudicate on cases in dispute. As you can appreciate, Mr. Speaker, there are many different opinions on 

various cases and really the only way to reconcile them was a Board of Referees and this was 

established a couple of years ago. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1411 

However, there continues the fiscal difficulty involved in the transfer of patients from acute level to a 

nursing level. The first, namely, acute level being covered in the hospital scheme and the second 

category, namely, nursing level not being covered in the scheme. 

 

As I stated Level IV already being covered adds another problem, an effort on the part of many to be 

designated Level IV, in place of Level III, and thus avoid personal costs. The nursing homes have a 

serious problem in staffing. Their staff complement is based on Level III care. However, it is a daily 

occurrence that some patients will temporarily lapse into a Level IV category and this requires a higher 

degree of nursing care, and the nursing homes are faced with not providing it or on the other hand 

providing it with no chance of reimbursement or staff complement strengthening. 

 

There seems to be an ever-increasing number of elderly people falling in the category between social aid 

cases and well-to-do. It is only a matter of time until they become social aid recipients, when their own 

resources are exhausted. I believe some 65 per cent of the people in nursing homes in Saskatchewan are 

presently receiving social aid. I am sure we all regret seeing these pioneers become wards of the 

Government. Would it not be better, Mr. Speaker, to contribute to their care while they pay a portion of 

the costs from their own resources? 

 

Alberta has followed this plan for some time. I believe the individual pays $3.50 per day and the 

Province of Ontario, I believe, moves into this area this month. I believe likewise in Ontario the patient 

or his family will be responsible for about $3.50 per day. 

 

I certainly strongly favor a participating program and would suggest the Government consider paying 

roughly two-thirds of the cost and the individual one-third. 

 

The inclusion of Level III care under the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan is strongly supported by 

many groups in the province, including the Saskatchewan Hospital Association. They do this for various 

reasons, most of which I have already cited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three years go by quickly. There are many hurdles to overcome in the implementation of 

this scheme. I feel that this problem may have higher priority socially than utilization fees and premiums 

for those over 65. About the same dollars are involved and this is what prompts me to suggest that the 

Government opposite give it their attention at this time. 

 

I will now move this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Taylor (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to take part in this debate, 

although I can’t say that I am happy to accept the Member opposite’s interpretation of our New Deal for 

People. His reading must be rather limited. He didn’t read page 13, for example, which says, “By 

increasing government support of public and non-profit nursing homes.” Now this is a problem that has 

concerned me for some time and we ought to commend the man who 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1412 

was the previous Minister of Health for his concern in this matter. In many ways, Mr. Speaker, the 

motion presented by the Member from Regina Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) is laudable and praiseworthy. 

Very few in our society can be so callous as to disregard the needs of either the aged or those who are 

physically incapacitated. Level III care, what we normally refer to as nursing home care, has to be 

considered an important part of any government program of health and social care. It is an important 

component of any of the care provided. I should like to emphasize that I am pleased that the Member 

from Whitmore Park has so much sympathy for this particular segment of our society. Mr. Speaker, I 

almost have to be pleased, because I have to be happy when I see a conversion taking place. There is 

certainly much cause here for rejoicing. The one important part of the conversion process is repentance, 

which means simply to turn around and go the other way. I think this is what the Member has done. I 

say this, Sir, because I am somewhat conscious of the record of the previous administration of which 

this Member was a part and at one time also a Minister. Mention was made earlier of political games, 

and this is such a game where one as Opposition immediately introduces recommendations about things 

which they had not intention or inclination to implement while in office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Maybe along the conversion we could say that they are now attempting to overcome the 

sins of omission. So concerned were they in the past with the welfare of those who were incapacitated 

by age or illness that they taxed them for every day they spent in hospital. So concerned were they for 

the welfare of our senior citizens that they charged them $1.50 every time they had to visit the doctor’s 

office. So concerned was the Liberal Government with the difficulties faced by the aged that they 

withdrew $4 per bed allowance paid special-care homes. This was done, if I remember rightly in 1969, 

up until that time all these homes received $5 per bed per month, to assist in keeping the cost to the 

patient down at least slightly. I sat in on one of the roving Cabinet meetings that was held in the town of 

Kindersley in 1970. The local nursing home asked at that time that the grant be reinstated. The reply was 

very interesting. The reply they received was that the grant had been cut to $1 a bed, because this was 

more economical than $5. Now we have to admit to the truth in this statement! I think it was the 

Member for Milestone the other day who made some reference to simple arithmetic, and I should like to 

suggest that they were very good at simple arithmetic when it came to subtraction, but I am not so sure 

of addition. The $1 a day bed was maintained so that the home would qualify for the sales tax rebate, not 

out of concern for the senior citizens. When we see then the actions of the previous administration I 

think we can be happy in seeing a change of heart, a repentance, or a conversion. 

 

Have a look at the rationale for Level III care which the Member opposite himself mentioned. The 

Department of Welfare explains it this way. 

 

This level of care is usually associated with the clients having an advanced physical or mental 

illness that is reasonably stabilized and which is not expected to deteriorate in the near future, 

barring the occurrence of additional disease or accident. This care while carried 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1413 

out under the supervision of a registered nurse or registered psychiatric nurse and directed by the 

client’s personal physician is rendered by staff aids who mainly have been trained on the job. 

 

The kind of care required often includes special diets, tray service for meals, and this kind of thing. The 

client may well need supervision for his own health care, although in most matters he will be fully or 

partly dependent on himself. Clients at Level III care we are told will need an average of two hours of 

personal and basic nursing care per patient per day. Now there is no question, Mr. Speaker, that I believe 

society as a whole must share a responsibility for our senior citizens. With the changing patterns in our 

way of life, and in the very structure of society itself, it is too great a responsibility to be left purely to 

families. This could, and sometimes does, place such a burden on a family that they may never recover 

financially. We do as a society have a debt to the past that we cannot ignore. It seems to me, Mr. 

Speaker, that in our present culture, which is in many ways youth oriented, it would be easy to do just 

that. We cannot permit this to happen. 

 

Most of the residents of Level III care homes are senior citizens, not all, but most. Any society which 

turns its back on its senior citizens is attempting to ignore its past heritage and in doing so is destroying 

its future possibilities. The future is always built on the past and we do have a debt to previous 

generations that we cannot ignore. I submit that New Democrats recognize this truth. We recognize the 

contribution which our senior citizens have made to this province. I can personally have nothing but 

respect and admiration for the pioneers of this great province. Their task was not an easy one when they 

settled this land, they faced many difficulties and hardships. In many cases they had to fight a pretty 

hostile climate with little resources, but they gave themselves to this task with a single minded devotion 

that ought to serve as an example to each of us. They literally spent their lives building for the future and 

future generations. It was in fact these citizens through the taxes and work of the past who supplied for 

us the education, health, and the other services that we now enjoy. Now when they reach a stage when 

they are in need of assistance we cannot turn our backs on them. We recognize that it is particularly 

difficult for these citizens to sit back and see savings dwindle away, savings that they have built up over 

many years of hard work. For many years they struggled for survival and then struggled to provide 

themselves with financial security for old age. Unfortunately now some of them see their savings 

dwindle as they make the necessary payments for their own care. For some this becomes almost a 

traumatic experience. 

 

I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that our responsibility is not only financial as the Member opposite 

seemed to suggest. We must also ensure that the kind of care these citizens receive is of the highest 

possible quality. 

 

As I have had the opportunity to travel across this country, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that I visited 

some nursing homes that could do nothing but turn your stomach. Just a few years ago I had the 

opportunity of visiting one, a two-storey frame building with 12 patients. The patients were not cared for 

in any real sense, they were left lying in their beds, lying 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1414 

very often in their own urine. The kind of care provided, if any, was minimum. In some of these homes 

there were no trained staff and little, if any, enforcement of even fire regulations. Clients were literally 

left in them to die. We cannot permit this kind of situation to exist in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When we consider the cost of these services we must also consider the services the clients received in 

return. We must ensure that Level III facilities include care for the whole man, including his recreation 

and his social needs. Level III care homes must, I submit, be licensed; and they must be supervised to 

ensure that minimum standards are maintained. Indeed, Sir, I would suggest that all such homes should 

be public or non-profit owned. There must be no profiteering off our senior citizens. 

 

As we consider the actual financing, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the failures of shortcomings of the 

previous administration in this regard. I ask you to look with me for a moment at what this Government 

has already done to assist people in Level III facilities. Certainly I submit the abolition of deterrent fees 

was of major assistance, since people using these facilities often tend to have a real need for medical 

services. The removal of deterrent fees then has resulted in a considerable saving to the clients of Level 

III homes. Since most of the clients using such facilities are in the senior citizen category, the abolition 

of medical care premiums has also resulted in a considerable saving and has cut their costs by $36 a 

year. The Government even now is working towards the establishment of a drug formulary program that 

would provide drugs at much reduced costs. Again this would be of great help to people in nursing 

homes, their drug use is above average. 

 

This Government is also studying methods of providing hearing aids at much reduced costs and again 

this will benefit a number of clients needing such aids. The Government is also to be commended for the 

establishment of an interdepartmental committee to study the criteria for the establishment of 

special-care homes. It must then be recognized that this present Government is showing a great deal of 

concern for the needs and welfare of this segment of our population, and has shown more concern in 

eight months than the previous administration did in seven years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — This Government is committed, committed to providing assistance for patients and for 

the special-care facilities themselves. In the New Deal for People we promised to assume the nursing 

part of that care. It should be noted that there was never a pledge to assume the full costs. The promise 

was eventually to assume the nursing component part of the cost. This is our program and policy, and I 

suggest that those who have not read this at least learn to read. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 

reasonable attitude. If we were to assume the total cost, it seems we should also have to assume the costs 

of senior citizens’ homes, for this is part of the total cost of Level III facilities. Members opposite have 

been reported in the Press as calling for financial responsibility by this Government; and yet in this case 

they seem to ignore this responsibility, calling on the Government immediately to spend somewhere 

between $7 and $8 million in this particular 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1415 

program. We believe that assistance has to be provided, and that Level III care must be available on the 

basis of need and not on the basis of wealth. This can only be done, however, with care and planning. 

Consideration must be given to the social as well as the economic factors involved. I am not convinced, 

for example, that we should make Level III care so financially attractive that there would literally be an 

encouragement to children to place parents in such facilities. I think in the long run we must ensure that 

the use of such facilities do not cause severe economic hardship or difficulties to the families involved. 

On the other hand, it would surely be wrong to have a stay in Level III care facility cheaper than a stay 

at home. I still believe that the family unit is important, and it would be wrong therefore for this 

Government to provide an incentive for breaking up that unit. On the other hand, when such care is 

really necessary, it should be available without a severe economic penalty to the people who are seeking 

the care. 

 

This New Democratic Government is committed to providing assistance. We are committed by policy to 

assuming a larger proportion of the cost of Level III care. It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that this 

Government will do so after thought, foresight and planning. It is not the sort of question on which an 

instantaneous decision can be made. We believe that assistance must be given! We believe that financial 

responsibility must be considered! We also believe that the Government must assume responsibility for 

the quality of the care, and make sure that a high standard is maintained across the province. Because of 

this, Mr. Speaker, I should like to present the following amendment. I move, seconded by the Member 

from Arm River (Mr. Faris) that Resolution No. 9 be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words following the word “Assembly” in the first line be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

regrets the indifference and inactivity of the former Liberal Government in providing financial 

assistance to special-care home guests and recommends to the consideration of the Government 

the provision of increased financial support by the Government for the nursing care components 

of the care provided to Level III guests in licensed special-care homes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on this resolution. 

You know the Member for Kindersley started off by the word ‘conversion’, and he indicated that there 

was a sudden conversion by the Member from Regina Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant). I want to tell you that 

we were around here in 1964 and we saw the situation in nursing home care in the Province of 

Saskatchewan in 1964 and I should like to remind him about it. 

 

In 1964 there were 2,500 special-care beds in the Province of Saskatchewan, approximately, as the 

Minister of Welfare will tell you. Today there are over 6,000. There were more special-care home beds 

and facilities built in the last four or five years than since the beginning of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1416 

In the town of Kindersley, just walk down your own main street and see the new nursing home. Look 

around the city of Regina, see the addition to Pioneer Homes, Santa Maria, the Salvation Army, the 

Lutheran Home. Go to Weyburn, Estevan, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Melville, Yorkton, any town you 

want in the Province of Saskatchewan and there is a brand new special-care home built by the Liberal 

Government of this province in the last seven years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — We spent more money in four years on special-care facilities and building nursing 

homes for the old people in this province than you did in the 20 years that you were the Government of 

the Province of Saskatchewan. You call that a conscience and a conversion. 

 

Let me tell you that the contribution and the attitude of the NDP over 20 years to the senior citizens of 

this province was an absolute disgrace, an absolute disgrace! They had the most vicious means test on a 

supplemental allowance of any province in the Dominion of Canada and yet every time somebody spoke 

in this House they got up and criticized the Federal Government on a means test. Yours was the most 

vicious in the Dominion of Canada. There were people receiving $2.50 a month. In addition to that you 

talk about the $4 we took away from the $5 construction grant. The reason that was taken away was 

simply for the fact that we could transfer that payment to the Federal Government because the Federal 

Government was contributing 50 per cent of the cost to almost 70 or 75 per cent of the patients, and it 

cost that many absolutely nothing. And the attitude of this Government since they have taken office? 

Ask the Minister of Welfare about the Community Services Program, a program that was originated and 

started here two years ago for senior citizens in the province where the meals on wheels are now in 

many of the cities including Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw and Yorkton. There are recreation programs 

now for the first time in the senior citizens homes. There is day-care being provided and a multitude of 

community services which are being provided and instituted by the Liberal Government a year ago 

which were unheard of before. 

 

The Member for Kindersley talks about nursing home conditions in the Province of Saskatchewan and 

they were bad in the Province of Saskatchewan where there was no trained personnel where there were 

people lying in their own urine, to quote the previous speaker, and that was absolutely the condition in 

1964. We had to close up hundreds of homes in Saskatchewan which were supposedly looking after 

special-care facilities or senior citizens in the Province of Saskatchewan. The attitude of the NDP 

Government toward the senior citizens in this province was, as I say, a disgrace. Now to turn around and 

hear him talk, why they turned around and reduced the medicare premium, they took away utilization 

fees. That doesn’t have anything to do with special costs. Certainly it does when somebody goes to the 

hospital, but 70 per cent of those patients were on welfare, and there were no utilization fees and they 

didn’t have any medical care costs or medical care premium. 

 

On top of that, I want to tell you another thing when you consider the fact that 70 per cent of those 

people are being paid by welfare now, we’re not asking the Provincial Government to put in another $7,  

$8 or $10 million and I am not sure of 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1417 

the amount but I am sure the Minister of Welfare can tell you. We are saying that it is time that this is 

transferred from a handout from welfare where people will take their life savings and because in most 

cases Level III care is permanent care they may stay there for five, six, eight or ten years and despite the 

life savings that they may have it gets eaten away gradually and then they have to go to the Department 

of Welfare on handout. We are saying it is time it was transferred to the hospital plan, where the person 

has it by right where it is a form of sickness and you know the separation between Level III and Level 

IV care is in most cases very difficult. The Member turns around and says that is going to break up the 

home, that the home should assume the responsibility. I don’t know whether he realizes or not but 

nobody can be accepted in Level III care unless it is by a doctor’s written authority. It isn’t a question of 

the patients. There is a special committee in each nursing home, an admission committee with doctors 

on it which determine the level of care that is required for each patient in the special-care homes. 

 

Now, the reason for this particular resolution, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this Government when they 

were running around the Province of Saskatchewan crying and looking for votes they promised the 

people in nursing homes that they would provide this under Medical Care or Hospitalization. Now it is 

time you carried out that responsibility. You know, it was rather interesting on June 23rd after the 

Government took over we instituted a new policy because for a while there was real hesitation in the 

Special Session of the Legislature. He almost reneged on that promise. We hear the Member for Maple 

Creek (Mr. Flasch) stand up and take credit for a new nursing home in Maple Creek. Ask the Minister of 

Welfare when the approval was given and when the financial resources were allocated from Treasury 

Board. The Member for Watrous (Mr. Cody) stands up now and tries to renege on a government 

promise with relation to a special-care facility in the town of Bruno. We will be very interested in the 

community of Bruno and what happens when we go to Estimates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All I can say, Mr. Speaker, that the resolution of the Member for Whitmore Park is a good resolution, it 

is an expansion of the priority that the Liberal Government gave to senior citizens in Saskatchewan 

where we had to concentrate on the resources of the Government to build special-care facilities, provide 

the places and locations for every town and every village, small urban centre in Saskatchewan so 

nursing home care could be provided. Now that the level of care is reached so that we almost have as 

many nursing home beds per capita as any province in Canada and perhaps more than most provinces in 

Canada, now it is time we look for an extension of service and that is what the resolution from the 

Member for Whitmore Park does. I certainly hope that all the Members will recognize their political 

promises on the campaign hustings and get up and support that resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Welfare): — It is always a pleasure to be entertained by the Member 

for Milestone on a short-term basis. I think there is a limit to how long people can really enjoy the kind 

of 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1418 

melodrama that pours forth when the former Minister takes his message to the people of Saskatchewan. 

I was slightly amused by the Member’s suggestion that these were facilities that the Liberals built. I just 

want to draw to his attention once and for all that any of the commercial nursing homes that were built 

had not one penny of Liberal money or Government money invested in them. I want to point out to him 

too that in the case of the non-profit nursing homes that the contribution by the Department of Welfare 

was then as it is today 20 per cent of the capital cost. So when the former Minister stands in his place 

and attempts to suggest that somehow this was a result of a construction project of Liberals I think he is 

stretching his imagination and the credibility of his Party once again just a little bit further than it can 

stand to be stretched. 

 

I think it should be remarked upon and it should be remembered that at the time the Liberals came to 

office another specific event took place. It took place in the year 1965 when approximately 1,000 mental 

patients were released from the mental home in Weyburn in a matter of only a very few months putting 

the kind of pressure on the community that we have never seen in this province. It wasn’t because of 

Liberal benevolence but because of Liberal neglect that it was necessary for a large number of nursing 

homes, many of them commercial homes to come into operation in order to take care of the backlog and 

the neglect that was brought about because of the events that were imposed on the community when the 

Government of Saskatchewan with the present Leader of the Opposition as Minister of Health imposed 

this dreadful hardship on the people of Saskatchewan. This was the thing that spurred the building of a 

large number of nursing home beds when these 1,000 people were thrust upon the community without 

any community support services, without any follow-up therapy, without any community resource 

people who would be in a position to take care of the needs that were thrust on the community within a 

matter of a very few months of the Liberal Government assuming office in 1964. 

 

I say today that we in this Government, we of my political party are prepared to stand on our record and 

we invite you to stand on yours and the people of Saskatchewan will judge us as they have judged you 

and they found you wanting and that’s why you are sitting over there in reduced numbers. That’s why 

you are 15 in number and that’s why you’ll remain as you are as long as you assume the attitudes that 

you have in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park has put forward a resolution to this Assembly and it 

proposes that this Government include Level III as an insured service under the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan. As the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley has indicated so eloquently we on this side of 

the House are very pleased at the recent conversion of Members opposite. We however wonder what 

happened during those years that were described by the Premier as those seven long gaunt lean years. 

 

Before I comment specifically on the resolution, let me first of all take a few moments to review the 

actions of the previous Liberal Government with regard to the special-care programs that seems to have 

stimulated the imagination of the Member for Milestone. I should like to comment on it for a moment. I 

should like to draw to his attention that in the face of escalating costs early in 1971 various homes 

throughout 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1419 

the province had requested, as the former Minister will recall, an increase in maintenance rates for their 

guests. In response to this request the Liberal Government made a blatant politically oriented move 

when they decided to hold back maintenance rate increase until after the June elections and the former 

Minister of Welfare will remember this well. The subterfuge used was that the increases in minimum 

wage was in the offing and that rate structures should be reviewed after the announcement of the new 

minimum wage. I suggest to you that this was political expediency and not the minimum wage which 

led to that particular decision. The Liberal Government didn’t permit an increase in rates for one reason 

and one reason only and that was the impending June 23rd election. But in place of an increase in rates, 

Mr. Speaker, the previous administration promised government subsidies in order to cover increased 

operating costs until after the election. In a letter to the special-care homes, the Member for Milestone 

assured the homes that the Government would underwrite the increased costs for all guests, not just the 

welfare guests, but for all guests. The subsidy of approximately $380,000 was authorized to assist homes 

to care for their guests who were receiving assistance under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. This 

Government, Mr. Speaker, has no quarrel with providing increased funds when it relates to those guests 

who require financial assistance. But in addition to the $380,000 subsidy, Mr. Speaker, the previous 

administration authorized a warrant for a further expenditure of $470,000 and the Minister will know 

that this is one of the first things I faced when I put my feet under his old desk, a warrant for $470,000 

authorized on the 29th day of June, shortly after this Liberal Government had been defeated. This was 

one of the last official acts which the previous administration performed before they vacated office. I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this warrant, this $470,000 warrant, was a deliberate attempt by the Liberal 

Government to embarrass the incoming government by attempting to force us into a totally unacceptable 

policy, a policy which we had no part in making, a policy which would have caused many special-care 

homes to operate at a deficit thereby jeopardizing the care of their guests. 

 

In order to devise an acceptable solution to the situation the Government launched an immediate study 

of the Special-Care Homes Program, Mr. Speaker. This special-care homes study committee has 

completed a detailed report on all aspects of the special-care program. The findings of this committee 

are being given careful consideration by the Government and a policy statement can be expected 

regarding the financing and the development of special-care homes in the very near future. 

 

We are concerned that the maintenance rates charged by the special-care homes to their guests have 

increased sharply in recent years and are placing an unrealistic financial burden on many guests and 

their families. We further believe that special-care homes should not be forced to operate at a loss, but 

rather homes should operate on a non-profit break-even basis. Therefore, in addition to instituting a 

study into special-care homes the Government also established an appeal committee to review the status 

of homes which were in financial difficulty as a result of the freezing of rates. Under the circumstances, 

Mr. Speaker, it was our decision that the rates for guests should remain frozen pending the outcome of 

the special-care study. At the same time however, it is imperative that wherever necessary special-care 

homes be given immediate assistance to ensure that they would not be forced to operate on a deficit 

basis. The appeal committee immediately began to 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1420 

study the financial needs of special-care homes which appeared to be in difficulty. Block grants were 

made available to homes on the basis of the recommendation of that committee. 

 

When the increase in minimum wage was announced, the Government invited special-care homes to 

reassess their financial position and block grants were again made in order to compensate for escalating 

costs. These then, Mr. Speaker, are some of the steps taken by the present administration to assist both 

senior citizens and special-care homes since we assumed office in June of last year. 

 

Let me then, Mr. Speaker, turn for a moment to the matter of Resolution No. 9 proposed by the Member 

opposite. The resolution proposes, “The immediate inclusion of Level III nursing care under The 

Saskatchewan Hospital Insurance Act.” It is our contention, Mr. Speaker, by definition that Level III 

care cannot be insured as a benefit under The Saskatchewan Hospital Insurance Act. The primary 

function of a special-care home is to provide personal care, the nursing care element constitutes a minor 

portion of the total service which is provided to guests. The first two levels of care, namely Supervisory 

Care and Limited Personal Care contain no element of nursing care whatsoever. The third level of care, 

Intensive Personal and Nursing Care is perhaps badly named in that it gives the impression that the word 

“intensive” applies equally to the nursing element. This is not the case, the word “intensive” refers to 

intensive personal care and stresses the depth of personal care required at Level III. Nursing care is 

intended to mean “basic nursing care”. However, it appears that the description of Level III care as 

“intensive personal and nursing care” continues to cause confusion as to the amount of nursing care 

provided. I am confident, however, Mr. Speaker, that no confusion exists in the mind of the Member for 

Milestone, since it was he who as Minister of Welfare set out a very lengthy and a very definitive 

statement on Level III care to the Saskatchewan Hospital Association some time ago. That statement 

included a detailed argument against insuring Level III care as he will well remember. 

 

I wish to stress once again that the focus of the special-care home is a social rather than a medical one. 

The aim of the special-care home is to provide the elderly citizens of this province with a setting that 

meets their social, emotional and physical needs. It is at Levels IV and V that the emphasis is based on 

nursing care services for the elderly. In recognition of the fact that Level III care does contain an 

element of nursing care it is the intention of this Government to give assistance to our older citizens 

towards the cost of basic nursing care which might be calculated as a portion of the difference between 

Level II and Level III care. Considering these facts, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the 

amendment which was moved by the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley which says in effect that this 

Assembly regrets the indifference and the inactivity of the former Liberal Government in providing 

financial assistance to special-care home guests and recommends to the consideration of the 

Government the provision of increased financial support by the Government for the nursing care 

component of the care provided to Level III guests by the Members of my political party prior to June 

23rd, it is the position that we assume today and announcement will be made in due course in this 

connection. Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased to support this amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1421 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the amendment I feel I can’t support it not only for the first 

part of it but the amendment fails to make any reference to the promise of the Government opposite 

when they were electioneering and suggests some financial assistance which is most inadequate. 

 

Referring to the New Deal for People published by the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. “A 

New Democratic Government will . . .,” and there are several items here, fifteen or so, but this is item 

number 5: 

 

Give better care to our senior and chronically disabled citizens through including extended 

nursing care Level IV as an insured service and by increasing government support of public and 

non-profit nursing homes and geriatric centres. 

 

Now that is the most garbled, misleading, poorly construed, poorly thought up election plank I think that 

has ever originated in Saskatchewan. Now the thing that bothers me, Mr. Speaker, is I understand that 

the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) either haired that policy committee or had a prominent role 

in it and I think he must have been absent the day that that one was thought up because it’s so 

completely at variance with the facts and I am sure at variance to what the Hon. Members opposite 

thought they were promising. Because, first of all if you are going to include – well, first of all they had 

the levels wrong and they had the branch of the government wrong, but disregarding that – if you are 

going to include this level of care under an insurance scheme then why do you have to give additional 

support to public and non-profit nursing homes and geriatric centres? Geriatric centres are already 

covered. So I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t wonder the Hon. Members moved an 

amendment which really says nothing because the whole thing is based on a garbled political promise 

made last June that was poorly thought out and it admits, Mr. Speaker, that they are not prepared to 

implement the promise even if you interpret it the way they intended it to be interpreted. I will not 

support the amendment. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Do I have the right to speak on the main motion? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You spoke on the motion and the amendment at the same time. They were concurrent. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, I merely wish to repeat that it was quite evident that the Members opposite 

didn’t know what they were talking about last June when they made their garbled promise and I haven’t 

had an opportunity to analyse the other 13 as closely as I have analysed this one but I certainly hope that 

they are more accurate and that the Government opposite will be able to implement them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was . . . 

 

Mr. Grant: — Well, that’s just as bad as the Minister of Health doing it because I just can’t for the life 

of me understand how an election plank could get so garbled. Now we all make promises 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1422 

that we have difficulty living up to and I am sure the Members opposite will remember the occasions 

when a pamphlet distributed in Regina South was waved at me on numerous occasions asking me when 

I was going to do such and such. But I should like to know, Mr. Speaker, when the Members opposite 

plan on implementing this garbled promise. The Hon. Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) suggested 

that it wasn’t cost shareable with Ottawa and I’ve heard so many different opinions on this that I must 

admit I am not prepared to accept or reject his statement. I am reading from a document by the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Association, Medical and Nursing Services Committee, saying this: 

 

It is important to note that the Saskatchewan Hospital Association has checked with appropriate 

authorities in the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta and were able to confirm that 

nursing care comparable to Saskatchewan’s Level III care does receive Federal cost-sharing in 

British Columbia and Alberta. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Minister of Social Aid check with the Hospital Association 

and the two neighboring provinces to fine out how they are receiving this Federal aid because I must 

admit I have a tendency to believe what he says, but here is an authoritative group who says they have 

checked and they found ways of getting around it. Now it has been suggested by the Premier that the 

previous Government missed many opportunities to cost share with Ottawa and I wouldn’t want the 

present Government to fall into that pitfall. If there is any possibility of cost-sharing with Ottawa 

possibly they had better take another look at the promise made last June 23rd and see if they can’t 

implement it immediately Mr. Speaker, I’ll support the motion. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 13 – INCREASED GRAIN SHIPMENTS THROUGH PORT OF 

CHURCHILL 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino) moved, seconded by Mr. J.K. Comer (Nipawin): 

 

That this Assembly urges that the Government of Canada recognize the importance of increasing 

grain shipments to improve farm incomes, and show their concern to preserve its reputation in 

world grain markets as a reliable and steady supplier of grains under its contracts taking all steps 

necessary to utilize more fully the facilities of the Port of Churchill and give immediate attention 

to planning and effecting improvements so as to increase the through-out capacity of that Port. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this resolution, I am going to try to keep my remarks as 

short as possible. I know that there are several other speakers who will follow me and perhaps cover the 

areas that I shall not deal with. 

 

It appears to me that in Western Canada when we have a good crop we wind up with trouble trying to 

deliver the crop to the hungry people of the world. The railroads, port facilities and I think all the areas 

of grain-handling should be looked at. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1423 

But nevertheless, we have here right close, some 800 miles away from us the Port of Churchill. And 

when you look at the figures what has that Port been doing? In the last 10 years they have handled about 

21 to 22 million bushels on the average. I think when you look at the amount of grain that needs to be 

moved and you look at the port facilities and the elevator facilities that we have in Canada and you look 

at the deep sea port right here close to us that is not being used any more than for some 20 million 

bushels, I think there is something to complain about. 

 

I just want to read to this House some of the statistics that I got from the Wheat Pool, the Licensed 

Terminal Elevators. Just to show you how it is distributed across Canada. At Churchill you have five 

million bushels capacity. You know, in Saskatchewan we have 11 million bushels capacity in Moose 

Jaw and Saskatoon. That’s inland terminals. British Columbia has 28 million bushels capacity. Then you 

go to Ontario, every company has a little transfer terminal. Now for instance, the transfer terminals 

amount to 53 million bushels in Ontario. Quebec has 69 million bushels. New Brunswick, three million 

bushels; Nova Scotia, five million bushels and that’s at Halifax. What I want to point out is this: you 

take British Columbia with a capacity of 28 million bushels, yet last year for the year 1969-70, the 

Pacific Coast handled 43 per cent of our grain. The Lakeheads, 50 per cent and Churchill around seven 

per cent. So it appears that the powers that be want the grain to trickle through the Great Lakes, the 

Seaway and so on, at a much higher cost of handling in order to get the business down there. So I think 

this resolution should go to Ottawa and say to pay special attention to Churchill, that’s what it is calling 

for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I want to read an article from the secretary of the Hudson Bay Route Association 

quoting a speech from Sir Wilfrid Laurier and it goes back to 1907. And here is what he says, Sir 

Wilfrid Laurier speaking in the House of Commons, February 22, 1907, and I quote: 

 

It is not enough for us to confine our views to Canada that it is now settled. We must look ahead, 

we must push northward as far as colonization can go. I have great confidence that before many 

years are passed we will see towns and villages on the shore of Hudson Bay like those we see on 

the shore of Norway. Where people will be prosperous, engaged in lumbering business, 

pulpwood industry and mining industry and others. That is what I hope Canadians will see before 

long. 

 

Again on September the 8, 1908, he said: 

 

We have undertaken the construction of another railway, the Hudson Bay Railway, there will 

then be a present route and the Hudson Bay Route. The trade of Canada is too great even of those 

of two other outlets. 

 

Now, that was way back in 1908. Do you think the Port of Churchill has had a fair deal? I think far from 

it. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1424 

I could go on and bring out a few more statistics. When we read the annual report of the Hudson Bay 

Route Association and I want to mention the distance that we can save between Liverpool and Regina. 

You can save 980 miles between Liverpool and Regina via Churchill. Another thing, from Saskatoon 

you can save 1,128 miles. You know that is not walking across the street, 1,128 miles. From Prince 

Albert you can save 1,215 miles. That is quite a saving and I hope this Government along with the 

Government of Manitoba and Alberta will put pressure on the Federal Government to really improve the 

Port of Churchill. One thing we are not going to have any snow slides that are going to stop the trains 

and we can get to the Port in less time and it comes right into the heart of the grain belt. The railroads 

are there and I don’t see why we should have waited so long for improvements to that Port. 

 

Here is a comment by a man that the older Members of this House perhaps would remember, an address 

given to the 28th annual convention of the Hudson Bay Route Association by Mr. W.H. Howes of the 

C.D. Howe Company of Thunder Bay, Ontario. By request each delegate wants a copy. He goes on and 

I want to quote from the report. 

 

First of all, I would like to thank you again, Mr. President, and the officers of your Association 

for the invitation to our Company to attend this convention. In the direction to his report which 

was adopted at the convention yesterday morning reference was made to our research for the 

Port of Halifax. And I would like to enlarge on this a little bit. What we proposed was a shuttle 

service set up between the Port of Churchill and the Port of Halifax. The main purpose of this 

shuttle service was two-fold as follows: To insure a steady supply of grain to the Port of Halifax 

at a time when the railways are fully committed elsewhere to obtain the maximum output from 

the Port of Churchill by using the ships specially designed for the trade on the regular schedule. 

 

Now, he goes on to say that we could save five cents a bushel by using his shuttle service between 

Churchill and Halifax and bypass the railroads if they are fully occupied in other work. Now I think this 

is something to consider and I think if we work at some of those little things a little better when we have 

markets for our grain that we can really get it there on time and not have to lose any of our sales. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I think there are other things that will benefit us if we use the Port of Churchill a little 

more. We see industry closing up in Western Canada and I am going to tell you one of the reasons why. 

You see the Quaker Oats go, if they want to get closer to markets and don’t you think with the Port of 

Churchill being 800 miles instead of 1,200 miles from the seaboard that we wouldn’t gain some mileage 

on sales for our products not only wheat grain, but manufactured products if we want to go into it. There 

again the Port of Churchill would be very important in that respect. 

 

I want to bring another attitude to the attention of the House and that’s talking about the Hudson Bay 

Route Association. They work with a budget with some $21,000. Just imagine $21,000 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1425 

bucks to try and promote the Port of Churchill. And who is handing out this money? The rural 

municipalities are putting up $10,450 of that money, almost half. I think the Government is coming up 

with some because there are grants of $2,850. I think we should pay more attention to seeing that this 

organization gets more money to put on a much greater campaign in favor of that Port. 

 

There is a lot more that could be said about the shipping season. At the present time Churchill has a 

shipping season of 82 days and it can be brought up to 214 days if they build a causeway across the 

Churchill River and take the water around the Port. Now, a shipping season of 214 days would be 

possible and it would make the shipping season over Churchill almost as long as the shipping season 

from Montreal and over the Seaway – I mean from Thunder Bay. Therefore, I will leave a little bit for 

the other Members of the Legislature to say, but I hope that this Resolution will get unanimous support. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words. First of all I want to 

congratulate the Member for Melfort-Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) for bringing this Resolution before the 

House. I think this is the kind of Resolution that the House and the Members of the legislature should 

all, not only co-operate in, but get behind and give it 100 per cent co-operation. Because, and I might 

say something non-political, perhaps one of the favorite causes of the Late Premier Ross Thatcher, was 

the Port of Churchill. Many of the Members are aware that he devoted a great deal of his time and his 

individual effort in promoting the use of the Port of Churchill. In fact while he was the Minister of 

Industry and while he was the Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan he delegated one man from the 

Department of Industry who would have almost complete responsibility in doing everything to promote 

the Port of Churchill. And realizing, first of all, that it was a great benefit to the producers of 

Saskatchewan. I have here, for example, an illustration of what kind of a benefit it would give to the 

producer in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The cost of wheat at Liverpool – it was put out by the annual convention of the Hudson Bay Route 

Association 1971 – was $2.02½ via the Port of Churchill; via Thunder Bay it was $2.14; via the lower 

St. Lawrence it was $2.12 1/8; via the Atlantic Ports $2.14½ which indicates that even in the Thunder 

Bay region it was a saving of 10 cents, the St. Lawrence and the Atlantic Ports a saving of close to 12 

cents to give you an idea of what 10 cents a bushel can certainly mean to the Western Canadian 

producer. As you know the maximum that has ever been exported out of the Port of Churchill is 

approximately 26 million bushels of grain. This is something like 56 grain ships. And all of us are aware 

now that with the new ice cutters that it is possible to use the Port of Churchill to a much greater extent 

than it has in the past. I believe it should be an active promotion. 

 

I agree with the Member for Melfort-Kinistino that the same problem exists at the Port of Churchill as it 

does at Vancouver. It is unfortunate that he wouldn’t pass his speech on to the Attorney General (Mr. 

Romanow) and to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), because I think the same kind of priority is 

required at Vancouver. As has been indicated the storage capacity is 28 million as compared to over 100 

million at Thunder Bay. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1426 

The top priority at Vancouver is not to build a 10-day railway extension, but to increase the storage 

capacity and the handling capacity at the Port of Vancouver, or the West Coast, where there would be 

any port along there. 

 

And so we certainly agree and I just want to congratulate the Member saying that he will have the 

support of this side of the House certainly on this Resolution and I would hope that it is the kind of a 

resolution that the entire Legislature can get behind and do anything possible to promote it on behalf of 

the producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. L. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I too want to congratulate the Member for Melfort-Kinistino 

(Mr. Thibault) for bringing this Resolution in. I am also pleased to hear that the Opposition is going to 

support it. 

 

I am a little unhappy and a little disturbed at the fact that this is becoming almost a perpetual resolution. 

You know if you really want to do justice to the Port of Churchill it is difficult not to go back and look 

at some history and look at some events. It is, of course, true that the Port and the Bay in particular, have 

been recognized for several hundred years. The existence of it was known by the Eskimos and the 

Indians long before the white man ever laid eyes on it. 

 

It was mean like Coates, Frobisher, and, of course, Henry Hudson, who really as far as the white men 

are concerned recognized the great potential and the great phenomena of an inland sea right in the heart 

of the continent. The fur trade recognized the importance of it. And, of course, as the country was settled 

and grain began to move the importance was emphasized even more. 

 

Figures have been quoted as to price savings, distance and so on. I don’t intend to bore the House with 

these, although they are very interesting and very revealing. I think that they more depressing aspects of 

the Port are the facts that for years the West has been clamouring for its additional use, clamouring for 

additional facilities. It is interesting to note that the studies for the development and use of the Port go 

back into the 1880s. 

 

The MacLean Report on the Hudson Straits expedition recommended the lengthening of the season and 

the added use of the Port. Then you get into later years and another barrage of reports by the National 

Research Council, Mechanical Engineer, Feasibility of extending Navigation at Churchill by Tom Dick 

for the division of mechanical engineering and the Murray Jones and Associates Report. And then you 

have the Report of the Royal Commission on Pilotage in 1968. And then you go to a later date and you 

run into, again, a great number of reports and a great number of recommendations. 

 

I think the irony of this is the fact that we have the information on what is needed to be done, we know 

some of the facts that are necessary and we equally well know the benefits that are available through the 

use of the Port, yet nothing is done. The question you will have to ask yourself is, why is this so? 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1427 

An interesting item, of very great interest to every Canadian, is the process of developing the huge 

untapped resources of our North – oil discoveries, gas discoveries, natural resource discoveries of every 

kind. When you look at some of the developments that are taking place in almost similar territory, in the 

Soviet Union, Siberia with a population of some 22 million people almost the same as Canada. In the 

Siberian North it is interesting to note that there are 632 mines and factories every hour of the day, 24 

hours a day. They have not stood back in developing the North. 

 

These ports in Siberia are further north, and more icebound and they are much more difficult to 

manoeuvre and manipulate into. If we in Canada are serious about the development of the North we 

have to recognize that to get these resources to the world markets we are going to have to use the 

shortest routes possible. And, of course, lying right under our nose is the great Hudson Bay and the Port 

of Churchill. 

 

It would be very, very difficult to understand why a country like Canada, with its huge undeveloped 

resources in the North is not developing a place like Churchill. 

 

Now I could go on and quote a great number of other comparative examples that are taking place, but I 

want to, before I sit down, review some of the things that have been requested, minor things that have 

been requested. My friend from Kinistino talked about the grain that is going through the Port. It is 

interesting to note that the projections that go as far as 1985 include, when you look at the optimistic 

side, only an increase of up to some 52.8 million bushels. When you look at the conservative projections 

which are usually what we get, it is down to 37.3 million bushels. This is projecting into 1985. Very 

obviously someone is not really too interested in developing the Port. Someone is really not working at 

it with their true spirit and true minds and the true ability that Canada has to develop this great inland 

seaway. 

 

It is very interesting to note that when you look at the amount of grain that is to be made available and 

my friend quoted the figures and I won’t repeat them – they are always forecast and always projected a 

good year in advance. This means that someone is sitting down and just simply saying that we are not 

going to worry too much about Churchill. We won’t let it go too far because it may cause trouble so we 

will just leave it on the status quo basis. 

 

With the tremendous problems that we have had with the grain tie up this year, with the loss of sales, 

with the loss through demurrage that has been paid on ships, surely this ought to be the year when a 

concerted effort should be made to try to get some additional facilities, some additional lengthening of 

the season and some additional grain that can go through this Port. 

 

It is quite clearly recognized that the shipping season could be lengthened by some 15 to 20 days 

without any danger. If you look at the average ice-free days, the insurance rates always play it about 15 

or 20 days on the safe side. If we were interested in shipping, insurance can be made available with a 

slightly higher rate and someone picking up the tab and yet no one offers to do this. So in a year of 

tremendous problems, with tremendous amounts of sales being lost, and money being lost to 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1428 

the farmers, it seems to me that a very concerted effort ought to be made in making Churchill our main 

port. 

 

Now with these few comments and remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate, again, the Member for 

Melfort-Kinistino and hope that this Legislature will not only pass the Resolution, but that we will do 

something more constructive, put more pressure where it is needed. It is my contention that the Federal 

Government, together with the grain-handling industry, are not really interested in the development of 

this Port. And let us for goodness sake put pressure where it is needed and see if we can’t get this Port 

into its full potential. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.K. Comer (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, it is always nice to rise in this House when we have the 

so-far indicated degree of unanimity. It is not very often that we get this. 

 

I think that the Member from Pelly (Mr. Larson) touched on some of the salient factors in dealing with 

the Port of Churchill. The fact that certain interests in this country do not want further development of 

that Port, certain basically Eastern business interests. 

 

I should like to go back and deal for a few moments with some of the historical developments in 

Canada, which have brought this situation about. I should like to go back a long way beyond the 

development of the Hudson Bay Railway. 

 

Canada, as a nation, developed around what has been called by geographers and historians the St. 

Lawrence Great Lakes System, a shipping system. It was that system which saw the French control of 

much of North America, control of what is now Canada, much of Canada, and control of what is now 

the United States. It was because of this transportation route which facilitates entry into the continent of 

North America that this control was exercised. After 1763 the British took over that control. They 

maintained that control of the northern half of the North American Continent. Because of this a 

transportation route that facilitated entry into the centre of North America facilitated the exploitation of 

North America. 

 

First of all this route was based solely on the water route. The CPR was built really as just an extension 

of that route to make it easier to get into the centre of North America, to make it easier to exploit the 

centre of North America, to make it easier to exploit what is not the Canadian Shield and the Prairies. 

Because of that transportation route, industry and business developed in Eastern Canada. The goods 

from the Shield, from Western Canada were funnelled through the Great Lakes into the industrial 

heartland. And because of this a great deal of development has gone ahead in Eastern Canada and it has 

not gone ahead in Western Canada. We have become almost a colony within our own country. 

 

I think it is because of this relationship between the industry of the East and the raw materials of the 

West that there is a good deal of potential for the Hudson Bay Railway and for the Port of Churchill. 

Certainly there is potential in the shipping of grain and making Western Canada more competitive on 

world markets. There is also the potential to have goods brought in from Europe to Western Canada 

cheaper. There is the potential 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1429 

to have raw materials, to have manufactured products from Western Canada shipped out to Europe by 

this route, by-passing the Eastern interests which basically have an exploitative interest in Western 

Canada. 

 

This route, this Port of Churchill, has the potential of greatly developing Western Canada if it is used. 

Now I think it is obvious that Eastern Canada and the economic power and the political power of this 

country lies in Eastern Canada is not interested as the Member for Pelly mentioned, in developing this 

route. 

 

It is not interested and it is going to be up to the provinces of Western Canada to develop this route, the 

Provinces of Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

Recently, I think, we have seen a furthering of inter-provincial co-operation on the Prairies. Let’s hope 

that this co-operation can continue to develop the Port of Churchill, to develop Western Canada. The 

fight will not be easy but I think it is necessary for the well-being of Western Canadians. Now I am not 

making out that the Port of Churchill is some sort of cure-all for all of Western Canadian problems, it is 

not. But it is a beginning for starting to deal with some of the problems we face in our relationships with 

Eastern Canada. I am not suggesting western separatism although it might be possible to construe that. I 

am proud to have seconded this motion and I am very pleased that the Hon. Member from 

Melfort-Kinistino introduced it and I certainly plan to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.W. Carlson (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to enter this debate today on a 

matter as important as the utilization of the Port of Churchill. I think one of the most important factors in 

the transportation of our grain to foreign markets is the utilization of this port. There are many reasons 

why the Port of Churchill is significant to us in Western Canada and to the grain producers of 

Saskatchewan. To start off with it’s a much shorter distance from the Prairies to Churchill than it is to 

the Eastern seaports of the Lakehead or at Montreal or further east on the St. Lawrence. It is also shorter 

from Churchill to a lot of our markets in Europe but this is of less significance in that the transportation 

costs at sea are less than rail. I think the real significant factor is the closeness of the Port of Churchill to 

the Prairie grain producing areas. As an example, from the city of Yorkton to the city of Montreal is 

some 1,600 miles, but from Yorkton to Churchill it is only 700 and some miles. Indeed this is a 

significant saving. The Port of Churchill and indeed the CNR line to Churchill is geared specifically to 

handle grain. I think this is important when you realize that the main line of the railroads are always in a 

state of competition between commodities. They tend to give priority to high revenue freight such as 

merchandise, lumber and potash. The line to Churchill is geared to handling grain and train after train 

goes north to Churchill and train after train comes back with empty boxcars. I think this is important 

when you realize some of the complications of the transportation system as we know it in Canada today. 

 

There are many problems I’ll admit associated with the Port of Churchill. The main problem in my view 

is the fact that they 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1430 

are not handling a large enough volume. If they were handling a larger volume the savings to the 

producers of Western Canada would be indeed much greater. Why is the volume so low? I submit that 

one of the reasons is the cost of insurance and the fact that the insurance companies determine the length 

of the shipping season. Lloyds of London, one of the biggest insurance companies in the world set the 

season from July 23rd to October 15th. As the other speakers have mentioned this is based on averages 

and in each and every year there is room for variations. 

 

The opening of the shipping season for unstrenghened vessels is determined by ice conditions in Hudson 

Bay and the Hudson Strait. Churchill Harbor is open at least 35 days before the waters of the Bay and 

the Strait are open for navigation. The end of the season, the close of the shipping season, is determined 

by river ice in the Churchill Harbor. If November 10th is considered as the latest safe date for 

unescorted, unstrengthened vessels to pass through the Strait, the close of the season could be extended 

from 13 to 28 days if a method were devised to control the formation of slush ice in the Harbor. The 

explanation of this, of course, is that the Port is located at the mouth of the Churchill River and therefore 

there is a constant supply of fresh water and, as you all know, the fresh water will freeze earlier in the 

fall and thus determines the closing of the season. Conversely the salt water in the Bay and in the Strait 

remains cold much longer in the spring and thus protects the ice floes and icebergs that come down from 

the North for longer periods of time. 

 

But the hazards do not appear to be as great as the insurance companies and insurance rates would 

indicate. Since the Port was opened in 1931 only one vessel has been seriously damaged or lost. In 1932 

the S.S. Brightfan sank after striking an iceberg. The investigation found that no proper look-out was 

being maintained and at the time of the collision the ship was in fact off course. The second reason that 

volumes of grain that move through Churchill are low is the fact that the Churchill Port and the channel 

is not deep enough. The loading berth right at the loading platform is some 32 feet but the shipping canal 

has a minimum depth of 24 feet. Therefore, the larger ships once they are loaded can only leave after or 

near high tide. The third factor limiting the use of the Port is the loading rate. This is a limiting factor 

during the shipping season as we now know it. Two or three ships can be loaded at one time but they 

cannot be loaded at the full rate that one ship could be loaded. So there is definitely need to expand our 

facilities there. The real bottleneck appears to be in the cleaning facilities. The Port can receive some 

35,000 bushels an hour, the facilities will handle 36,000 bushels an hour to convey it and load it into the 

ships but they can only clean 17,000 bushels. It is true they clean the grain during the off season and 

have some prepared to go when the first ships come in but this is soon used up and then the bottleneck 

occurs in the cleaning facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that some of the people who designed the Port of Churchill were probably 

involved in the design of the Big River Sawmill. The fourth factor and possibly the most serious is the 

prejudice of the Federal Government which has a power base in Eastern Canada as the Member from 

Nipawin (Mr. Comer) has indicated. They have strength there both in terms of finances and of course in 

terms of political power or votes. They refuse to promote our seaport on the 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1431 

Prairies. If you go back into history prior to and following Confederation you will find that it was a 

conscious decision of the Eastern politicians to develop what was then known as the Great North West 

for the benefit of the East. The West was developed as the market for manufactured goods of the East 

and as a source of raw materials that were destined for Eastern Canada and for export through Eastern 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, the same holds true today and the governments of the East are not prepared to 

give up this high revenue transportation through their ports. 

 

I think there are a few recommendations that we should look at. First of all, as has been indicated by the 

Member from Pelly (Mr. Larson) the shipping season must be extended. We must be able to utilize the 

Port for longer periods each and every year. I would suggest that we could use the Port for 105 to 110 

days a year at least. We must work together with the other Prairie Governments as this Government has 

done in the past and I am sure will continue to. We must put pressure on the Federal Government for 

them to take action in the development of the Port of Churchill. I think we could conceivably, in 

co-operation with the other Prairie Provinces and the Federal Government collectively devise alternate 

methods of insurance. Government collectively devise alternate methods of insurance. It seems to me 

that a joint effort in this manner could be of considerable significance in extending the shipping season 

through the Port. We must convince the Federal Government that the Port needs improving, we must 

dredge the channels deeper so that we can have loaded ships leaving when they are ready to go and not 

force them to wait for high tide. We must also convince the Federal Government and the National 

Harbors Board that we need an extension of the loading facilities so that at least three ships could be 

loaded at full speed at any given time. We need more dock facilities so ships that are unloading 

merchandize are not competing for space at the berth with ships that are wanting to load grain. We must 

double our cleaning capacity so we can in fact handle some 35,000 bushels an hour and not be retarded 

by this process. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we must make it clear to Ottawa that we in Western Canada have for long enough 

been the hewers of wood and drawers of water. The time has come when Western Canadians demand to 

be involved as equals and not as serfs slaving for the West. We have our own seaport some 800 miles 

from the city of Regina, we want to develop it for the benefit of every grain producer and indeed every 

citizen of the Prairies. I think the expansion of the Port of Churchill is desirable and realistic, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t suggest that it is an alternative to shipping via the Lakehead or Montreal. I suggest it 

should be co-ordinated to complement the Eastern ports. I think it is a very good motion, Mr. Speaker, 

and I am indeed in full support of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, we have been pleased to hear from several of the 

Members opposite. I am sure that over the years there have been two favorite topics for discussion in 

this Legislature that we quite often agree on. One is the wheat problems that we have and the other is the 

greater use of the Port of Churchill. We have certainly spent many hours debating this the few years that 

I have been here but I think with equally disappointing results. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1432 

I should like to commend the Members certainly for their up-to-date information. We used to have 

Members, the NDP Members, get up in the House and blow the dust off their Port Churchill speech year 

after year and give us the same old speech. I thought maybe that some of the newer Members had 

inherited these speeches and I am pleased to see that they have dug up some up-to-date information on 

their own and we certainly are in agreement with them. I would certainly agree with the Member from 

Kinistino and the others who have promoted or who suggested that Churchill be upgraded, the facilities 

upgraded, more storage and that we use all of our influence to try and bring this about. 

 

I think we should remember, Mr. Speaker, that the Port of Churchill is in Manitoba, it’s not in Ontario, 

it’s not in Quebec and it’s not in Nova Scotia, it’s in Manitoba. For this reason the Government of 

Manitoba should certainly be taking more active steps to promote the greater use of the Port which is in 

that province. We would hope that the Members opposite would use their influence, if they have any, 

with their colleagues in Manitoba and perhaps when this Legislature meets next year we may expect 

some action which will finally result in the greater use of the Port of Churchill. To indicate that in the 

Resolution I should like to move the following amendment, seconded by Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina 

Albert Park) that Resolution No. 13 be amended as follows: 

 

That the words “and the Government of Manitoba” be added after the word “Canada” in the first 

line. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, we are not changing the intent of the Resolution, we are simply saying that 

in addition to asking the Government of Canada we should be asking that the Government of Manitoba 

participate in whatever steps are necessary to encourage the use of the Port of Churchill. 

 

The debate continues on the amendment. 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I only have a few words to add to this. I 

have listened on two occasions now with some considerable interest to the Member from Yorkton (Mr. 

Carlson) and I do have to say that it’s a pleasure . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You must keep your remarks at this time to the amendment and not on the main 

motion. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I wanted to congratulate him for his fine speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The amendment is just in addition to the motion, so we must debate the amendment 

first and then you would be in order to speak on the motion. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Right. Mr. Speaker, I am aware now that if I am to congratulate him on his speech I 

must do it at some other time and if I don’t rise then he has to do without that congratulations. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1433 

Mr. Speaker, the difficulty, of course, arises because the Port is in Manitoba. It is a very limited port in 

the sense that it is far from most of the centres of commerce. It is a limited port not only for the numbers 

and quantities of grains and products that go through it but also the time during which there is an open 

shipping season. 

 

I agree totally that the Province of Manitoba must lend its full force and support to this motion and to 

this pressure that we hope to exert upon Ottawa and other governments, or else it holds little chance of 

success. 

 

The Government of British Columbia certainly isn’t going to support this motion. They have very little 

interest at all in this kind of motion. The Government of Alberta has far less interest in it than we have. 

It may well be a matter of reasonable indifference as far as the Government of Alberta is concerned, but 

it is vital to Saskatchewan, and I think should be vital – although it hasn’t been demonstrated in 

Manitoba that it is vital to them but it should be vital to Manitoba. 

 

The difficulty arises, of course, again because Manitoba has large interest related to the Thunder Bay 

area and shipment in that direction and has not shown in the past the kind of interest in the Port of 

Churchill that one would have expected from a government that had a port within its own boundaries. 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I strongly support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on the 

amendment that is before this House. The words that I have are very few in respect to this amendment. I 

address myself to the question of whether or not it is appropriate, whether or not it really adds anything 

to the motion to add the words “and the Government of Manitoba.” In my submission to the Members of 

this House I say that it adds nothing to the Resolution. My reasoning is like this, if Members will 

analyze the Resolution they will see that the intent of the Resolution is as follows: This Assembly urges 

the Government of Canada to recognize firstly the importance of increasing grain shipments to improve 

farm incomes. Now in whose jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, does the matter of increased grain shipments 

fall? Does it fall within the province of Manitoba or does it fall within the Government of Canada’s 

jurisdiction? I think quite clearly the Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) and every Member of 

this House will agree with me that that is an area which is jurisdictionally, solely and exclusively within 

the power of the Federal Government, the Government of Canada. Then the next part of the Resolution 

says: This Assembly commends the Government of Canada that it show its concern to preserve its 

reputation in world grain markets as a reliable and steady supplier of grains under its contracts. I submit 

that in that second part the main thrust of it is a showing of concern for world grain markets. Who is in 

charge of world grain markets? Is it the Province of Manitoba or the Government of Canada? The 

answer is it is obviously the Government of Canada and not the Province of Manitoba. The Port may be 

located in the Province of Manitoba but the question of world grain markets falls exclusively within the 

jurisdiction of the Government of Canada. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1434 

Then the third part of the resolution says to take all steps necessary to utilize more fully the facilities of 

the Port of Churchill. I ask the Members of the House, who has the say as to whether or not facilities 

should be used. It is the Canadian Wheat Board, Federal Agencies, the Government of Canada, not the 

Province of Manitoba. The Province of Manitoba has nothing to do with rail transportation. It has 

nothing to do with national harbors. The problem falls within the area of national harbors. And the final 

request is to give immediate attention to planning and effecting improvements so as to increase the 

through-out capacity of that port. 

 

Again, with respect, Mr. Speaker, if you analyze it, it must clearly fall within the jurisdiction of the 

Government of Canada. And I say to the Hon. Member who proposed the amendment that I think his 

motivated well. He wants as many governments as possible to show their concern but I think it is wrong 

for this House to pass and include in the amendment the inclusion of the Government of Manitoba. By 

my reading of the amendment to the motion there is no way basically that the Government of Manitoba 

has any direct concern on any of the points raised herein. 

 

The points raised in the basic thrust of the motion falls solely and exclusively on the Government of 

Canada. Whether or not there is going to be any increase in grain shipments depends upon the 

Minister-in-Charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Lang. He is going to determine by the control of 

the Canadian Wheat Board whether or not there are going to be increased shipments. It falls on the 

Liberal Government in Ottawa. The question of whether or not there is going to be an increase in world 

grain supplies depends on the abilities of the Canadian Wheat Board to sell the wheat and get it shipped. 

The question of increasing the facilities will fall on the National Harbors Board. The question of 

planning and effecting improvements also falls on the National Harbors Board together with the 

question of grain and the transportation. 

 

So that adding the words, “the Government of Manitoba” has no effect at all. In fact, it will dilute the 

motion. It will weaken the strength of the motion. We as Members of this House should speak in a 

united way to Otto Lang and the Federal Liberals, we should say to them in a very strong way that we 

are not happy with what has been done in Churchill. We say that you have not done enough. You’ve 

neglected it. You have put other parts of Canada ahead of a very accessible port in Canada. By allowing 

this amendment we will be diluting the strength of the representations that all of us say that we are for. 

Therefore, I invite the Hon. Members to consider carefully this amendment, to reject it because it has no 

applicability to the Government of Manitoba. Let’s get on with the task of insuring that Otto Lang and 

the Federal Liberals get this job done for the farmers of Saskatchewan, long overdue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, may I speak again on the amendment? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Hon. Member cannot speak again on the amendment. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — I believe I just made the amendment, do I not have a chance to close the debate? 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1435 

Mr. Speaker: — No, you spoke to the amendment in moving it and you cannot close the debate on an 

amendment. 

 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — I want to thank the Attorney General for clarifying the situation. I 

hope in view of his explanation that the Members opposite might withdraw their amendment so that we 

can as a united voice support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before we vote on this particular matter. Unfortunately the 

Attorney General has seemingly ruled out of order many of the speeches made by his own Members this 

afternoon who spoke on the facilities at the Port of Churchill and did not restrict themselves strictly to 

grain sales and the transportation of grain. And I think it was the intent of every Member opposite 

notwithstanding what the Attorney General says or not to the knowledge of the Attorney General to 

speak on the facilities at the Port of Churchill. And it is with the concern of the facilities at the Port of 

Churchill that the Opposition has proposed an amendment. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Are we speaking on the amendment now? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We are speaking on the amendment but he was commenting on the remarks of the 

Attorney General on the amendment how he was relating the amendment to the Port of Churchill and I 

think the Hon. Member for Lumsden has attempted to do the same to come to the amendment which has 

been proposed. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — It seemed, Mr. Speaker, with due concern that he was talking about points of 

order and I think he should restrict himself to the amendment that is before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, well I think he will do so. The Member for Lumsden. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that there have now been two Members on the opposite 

side who have had the matter clarified. Mr. Speaker, the amendment was proposed to take cognizance of 

the fact that the port is . . . Cognizance? I’ll spell it for the backbencher who wasn’t aware of the word 

and is not aware of the fact that the facilities are under the control of the Province of Manitoba. It was 

also proposed to bring to the attention of the House an argument that seems to have been ignored with 

the discussions on the Port of Churchill and we have heard talks about eastern control, etc., etc. We must 

be aware of the fact with regard to the Port of Churchill that in Winnipeg and Manitoba many people are 

not interested in the development of the Port of Churchill. The Province of Alberta is not interested in 

the development of the Port of Churchill. And what we really should be doing is speaking with one 

voice and showing that we want efforts by Manitoba which has that port under its control and which has 

done nothing in the development of that port. And this House should speak as one voice, Mr. Speaker, in 

urging the Government of Manitoba to take a more active part in the development of the facilities at 

Churchill and this is why we proposed that amendment. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1436 

Mr. Romanow: — Would the Hon. Member permit a question? Would the Hon. Member not agree with 

me that the National Harbors Board falls strictly within the Federal jurisdiction, port development and 

facility control, therefore falls within Ottawa? 

 

Mr. Lane: — If I am permitted to answer, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I agree with that aspect but the point 

is we are dealing obviously in this House with a political question and the fact is . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — The fact is that the Government of Manitoba has done nothing to develop this port or very 

little and it is one political force that should be used to develop the facilities at this port and the confreres 

of the Members opposite in Manitoba have done nothing. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 15 – LOSSES DUE TO FAMILY FARM PROTECTION ACT 
 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin) moved, second by Mr. Lane (Lumsden): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that a 

Board be established to determine the amount of financial losses suffered by various groups of 

individuals due to The Family Farm Protection Act, and to determine what compensation should 

be paid to these people by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: I can’t understand all the applause. Mr. Speaker, this particular resolution was introduced 

because of our concern that certain persons are going to suffer substantial financial loss due to The 

Family Farm Protection Act. I don’t want to leave the impression of course that our concern is only for 

those suffering loss of major or substantial amounts of money because of the nature of the events 

affected by The Family Farm Protection Act and the precarious financial position of some of the parties 

involved even a small loss for these people could be disastrous. I am not going here to argue the merits 

of The Family Farm Protection Act. We have done this before and we have a chance in the future to do 

this in another debate. But my argument at this time is simply this that in a case where someone 

interferes in the normal business relationship between two people and if this interference results in a 

loss, financial or otherwise to either party then those responsible for the interference should also be 

prepared to accept some responsibility for the loss. 

 

The Provincial Government last summer by passing The Family Farm Protection Act interfered in the 

normal business relations between farmers and implement dealers, between farmers and credit unions 

and among other people. There is no doubt that the Provincial Government by its actions has directly 

caused substantial financial losses to various people. We therefore, feel that it is reasonable for the 

Provincial Government to set up some type of a board or tribunal to determine the extent of these losses 

and to accept its responsibility by compensating 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1437 

those who have suffered the loss. Many types of losses will occur because of The Family Farm 

Protection Act. Some of these losses I think are quite obvious to us and other types of losses are perhaps 

more obscure. One of the more obvious is that suffered by the implement dealers in the province. At the 

Saskatchewan-Manitoba Implement Dealers Association Convention the president said and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan-Manitoba Implement Dealers Association president Bob Larter of Estevan warned 

that dealers will not feel the full effect of The Family Farm Protection Act until it lapses July 

31st. 

 

Dealers claim that they are likely to be caught with farmers returning a large number of machines which 

have been used for a full year and upon which the farmer has made no payment. 

 

Now I am not going into details of how the dealers will suffer due to excessive depreciation or loss of 

machinery payments. This again has been debated and I am sure it is well known and accepted by 

everyone. The committee hearings indicated to me that the vast majority of farmers are in sympathy 

with and support their local implement dealer. They know that many dealers have gone broke or 

discontinued their businesses in the last few years throughout the small towns of Saskatchewan. They 

also know that dealers are needed in our small towns and they don’t want to suffer the inconvenience 

that would result if any more dealers find it necessary to leave the implement business. The majority of 

farmers know that they will be the ones to suffer if the Government does nothing about the harmful 

effects of The Family Farm Protection Act on the small dealer. Farmers have become and have been 

very astute businessmen. They recognize that The Family Farm Protection Act was a grandstand play 

hastily conceived by the NDP Government in the flush of victory after June 23rd, and without 

consulting the farmers. There is no doubt the farmers were not consulted in this case. They recognize 

also that this NDP Government was not putting up one dollar to back up the legislation. It was not 

costing the Provincial Government any money. The Government hoped to take credit for The Family 

Farm Protection Act and let the machine dealer, credit union and small farmer suffer the losses. If you 

read the reports of the proceedings of the agriculture committee you will find many, many examples of 

how rural people feel about this lack of compensation for those suffering losses. I am not going to quote 

them, you can look at the recordings, the committee hearings but I would refer you for example to pages 

58 to 63 the hearings at Gull Lake or page 77 of the hearing at Weyburn. 

 

Some types of losses due to The Family Farm Protection Act, I will admit will be difficult to determine. 

How do you calculate the loss to a marginal farmer who desperately needed a new baler or combine last 

fall but couldn’t obtain it because of the tightening of credit due to The Family Farm Protection Act. 

This may well have been the blow that put marginal farmers, the odd marginal farmer out of business 

and I certainly wouldn’t know you would determine this loss. How do you assess the loss of a farmer 

whose loan application was turned down at the local credit union because The Family Farm Protection 

Act had prevented this credit union from making collections and using that money to make new loans. 

Because some types of losses are difficult to assess there is no reason why some attempt should not be 

made to assess these losses. Perhaps this is all the more reason why we need some sort of a board or a 

tribunal to 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1438 

attempt to assess the loss. The board set up to examine these losses should consist of representatives of 

machine dealers, credit organizations and farmers. It should have power to pinpoint cases of financial 

loss and recommend payment by the Government who is in the end responsible for the loss. The people 

of Saskatchewan are expecting the NDP Government to accept responsibility and I am sure that the 

Members of this Legislature expect the Government to accept the responsibility in this case. I therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, take pleasure in moving this resolution. 

 

Mr. A.W. Engel (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, during the summer months and this fall 

we were involved in studying this question of continuing The Family Farm Protection Act, and what 

type of legislation would be in order, or be involved, or what kind of board should be set up. We have 

made recommendations, Mr. Speaker, in this Special Committee on Agriculture report along similar 

lines. I haven’t had time to study the comparison or if the Member from Moosomin has changed his 

mind because he has had reservations on this type of a recommendation in the report, and therefore I beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 16 – CANADIAN ARMED FORCES EFFORTS APPRECIATED 
 

Mr. Gardner moved, seconded by Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): 

 

That this Assembly express to the Canadian Armed Forces our appreciation for the work they 

have done in the past to maintain peace in the world, the efforts they are now making to ensure 

peace in the trouble spots of the world, and the valuable contribution they are prepared to make 

when emergencies arise in Canada. 

 

He said: It seems to be my night, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t want to miss this one. Mr. Speaker, I 

introduce this particular resolution to the Legislature for several very specific reasons. In dealing with 

the very urgent day to day problems in our society we are tempted perhaps to neglect and overlook the 

contribution that is being made and has been made in the past by a very important group of our citizens 

and I am speaking of the Canadian Armed Forces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Though it seems, Mr. Speaker, that among some of the radical groups today it has 

become popular to condemn, to criticize and to take pot shots at many of our long established and 

worthwhile institutions included the Armed Forces. And there seem to be two groups that there people 

could be put into I believe. I think they make these criticisms for two reasons. The first group are the 

most extreme radicals who have a genuine desire to destroy our society and our way of life and to do 

this they must attack and belittle the bastions of our society. We see many instances of this, they criticize 

our police forces, our universities, education institutions, our free-enterprise system and our Canadian 

Armed Forces. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1439 

Fortunately this first group of rather extreme radicals are not too numerous but they are well organized, 

they are dedicated and they are dangerous. They are active at our universities and they are skilful in 

acquiring recruits from less radical groups of young people. Examples of their activities are obvious in 

the Press almost daily. They oppose such things for example, as recruitment for the RCMP, the Armed 

Services, Defence Research Board and we see many examples of this in the Press. I’d like to just take a 

look at one or two of these. One is headlined for example: 

 

Talks oppose RCMP career – Regina Campus students were urged against seeking a career with 

the RCMP in a number of short speeches made Tuesday by members of the Canadian People’s 

United Front Against United States Imperialists. 

 

And it says on in the article for example, 

 

Circulars distributed to the students which summarized the view expressed by the speakers said 

the RCMP is attempting to recruit university students to oppress the Canadian people. 

 

That is just one example. I have another here and this again is at the Regina Campus. 

 

Small group of demonstrators gathered outside the Canadian Manpower office of the Regina 

Campus Political Education building to protest recruitment of students for the Federal Defence 

Research Board. The demonstration was organized by the Regina Campus New Democrats and 

the Students for a Democratic University. 

 

Just a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second group that are involved in criticizing our institutions perhaps have less sinister motives but 

he results may be equally as dangerous. They comprise perhaps a greater number of people, mostly 

young, who believe that it is the “in” thing to attack the establishment. They are cynical and in seeking 

publicity they make statements perhaps they don’t completely believe themselves. It is a fact of life that 

if you make a statement supporting the police, the Armed Forces, Cadet movement, or anything of this 

nature, no one is really likely to listen to you or pay much attention. But if you make a statement critical, 

defamatory or downright insulting about any of the these institutions you are likely to get your name in 

the paper or gain some prestige amongst fellow radicals. 

 

Again, examples are easy to find and you don’t have to go to the United States or distant provinces, 

many examples are available right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

For example, I have here a picture of the demonstration which took place here in Regina and I’ll table 

this later, and it shows a group of young people who are carrying banners which read, “NDY supports 

the NDF” or “Victory to the NLF,” and it’s headed by the NDY and this of course is simply saying that 

the New Democratic Youth are supporting the National Liberation Front or the communists in Vietnam. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1440 

Mr. Gardner: — In addition I have a little quotation also from Winnipeg and this one says: 

 

That a panel at the New Democratic Party Convention here supported resolutions seeking more 

assistance for American draft dodgers and deserters. 

 

I also have here a report, Mr. Speaker, of an incident in Saskatoon where a disturbance was caused at a 

wreath-laying ceremony and an NDP Member of this Legislature later wrote to the Saskatoon City 

Council in an attempt to have the charges dropped. And I’m sure that you are all familiar with this. It 

happened only last fall. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Was that Rolfes? 

 

Mr. Gardner: — No, it wasn’t him this time. This apparently was a young lady and the newspaper 

reports said that it is alleged that she used a megaphone to shout slogans during a wreath laying 

ceremony at the cenotaph during the annual RCAF Association Convention. 

 

The article that I have with this is headed “Letter terms insulting” and it is also date-lined Saskatoon. 

 

Members of the City Council, Monday, took exception to what one alderman described as an 

insulting letter from MLA John Richards. The letter, signed by Mr. Richards as MLA for 

Saskatoon University and Legislative Secretary to the Public Health Minister, suggested that 

charges brought against Alice Klein for her part in a demonstration on September 29th be 

dropped. 

 

And it goes on to ask, for example, is the province giving direction or is it Mr. Richards in his personal 

capacity? Alderman Owen Mann described the letter as insulting as the previous request. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone is certainly familiar with the NDP stand during the FLQ crisis in Quebec, when 

the NDP opposed the War Measure Act which was necessary at that time to maintain law and order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — And I’m not trying to suggest, Mr. Speaker, certainly not, that all radicals are NDP or 

that all NDP are radicals. Very, very far from it. I am sure that some of the NDP Members in this 

Legislature and certainly members, many members of the rank and file of the NDP are as concerned as 

anyone about some of the events that are happening today. But it does seem that most of the radicals 

seem to end up in the NDP and become the radical fringe of the NDP movement. 

 

You know unfortunately today, Mr. Speaker, the silent majority are often ignored and I believe that a 

great percentage of the people today, and this includes both younger people and older people, appreciate 

the job being done by the Canadian Armed Forces now both in Canada and overseas. The great majority 

are certainly thankful for the sacrifices made by our servicemen in World War I and World War II. The 

great majority 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1441 

also favor the Cadet movement and realize that we must have well-trained and well-organized 

peace-time armed forces. This is one reason why this Resolution appears on the Order Paper. It is an 

opportunity for those who wish, and I certainly hope there are some, to speak on behalf of the silent 

majority and express our appreciation to the Armed Services. 

 

The Cadet movement in Canada, in the last three or four years, has been singled out for considerable 

criticism from radical groups in Canada. These radicals on one hand seem to be in favor of extensive 

government grants and hand-outs to any far-out group for underground newspapers, questionable 

opportunities for youth programs, radical schools or colleges and various other destructive projects. But 

they object to the relatively small amount of money allocated by the Federal Government to support the 

Cadet movement. 

 

The Legion, the Veterans’ Association, have also been subjected to harassment by radical groups and by 

news reports. This is more apparent perhaps in the United States than it is in Canada. American Legion 

Conventions, for example, in recent years have been particularly bothered by demonstrations and 

criticisms from radical groups. The 18 million veterans in the United States are a stabilizing influence on 

the society of the United States and for this reason they are a source of annoyance to radicals. The same 

applies to a lesser extent in Canada. Canadian Legion Branches all across Canada are providing useful 

community services as well as serving as fraternal organizations for veterans. Right here in 

Saskatchewan there are over 300 Legion Branches with over 20,000 members actively serving their 

communities. The Saskatchewan Legion sponsors one of the largest physical fitness camps in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — It is for boys and girls, Grade 7 to Grade 12, it is held at Dundurn every summer, it is 

not restricted to the children of veterans. It has been very successful and it is only one example of the 

many community services that Legion Branches are engaged in. Many Legion members have actively 

defended our country and the institutions that are associated with it. For this reason they are not likely to 

stand idly by and see these rights and these freedoms eroded away and attacked by radical groups. 

Legion members certainly know better than anyone else the horrors and the futility of war and for this 

reason they favor peace-time armed forces which can act as a deterrent to war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Legion members are active throughout Canada and it is difficult perhaps in this day 

and age always to identify readily the Legion members of the veterans in our society. You know I was 

trying, while I was making this speech, to get my colleague from Regina Lakeview (Mr. McPherson) to 

wear his old Tank Corps beret tonight. I thought that this might help to back up the speech while I was 

giving it, because really I don’t suppose many people know that he led a tank crew after D-Day in great 

tank battles with the German Panzers in Normandy during the last war and was wounded at that time. As 

I say veterans are mixed in our society and not readily identified. 

 

No one can deny that the Canadian Armed Forces have served a vital role in the preservation of peace in 

the Middle East and other places in the world. They have been responsible for the 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1442 

prevention of hostilities during the past 15 or 20 years which would have resulted in the loss of many 

lives throughout the world. And I don’t know how you could put a price on this type of thing. Certainly I 

doubt if anyone can say that Canada should not have spent defence dollars in this particular manner. 

Now I know it’s easy for someone to get up and ay that we shouldn’t have spent money on Romarc 

missiles or aircraft carriers or certain other types of equipment. This is easy to say after. It’s like a 

person saying that the money he spent on fire insurance over the past 20 years is wasted because the 

house never burned down. 

 

I should hope that everyone will support this Resolution and that it will not be rendered meaningless as 

some others have by opposition amendments. It will be an indication to past, present and future 

members of the Canadian Armed Forces that we do appreciate the job they are doing and I, therefore, 

take pleasure in moving this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Taylor (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I am just a little bit confused as to what the 

previous speaker was getting at. He made mention of a number of things which, you know, are 

important, but I wonder if when one is supporting the Armed Forces one has to put it in the same bag as 

the free-enterprise system. If we criticize the present free-enterprise system does it automatically mean 

that we are against the Armed Forces and that seems to be the suggestion. 

 

The members of our Armed Services gave a good deal. Many of them gave their lives to provide us with 

the right to criticize when we thought something was wrong. And yet the Member who has just taken his 

seat suggested that our young people are wrong in being critical of the establishment. I suggest that the 

members who gave their lives gave them for this very reason. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — The Member who has just taken his seat also suggested that the New Democrats were 

supporting Communism or the communists in Vietnam, because we at some time have said that there are 

certain policies that should be followed, because we have been against some of the bombing raids that 

have taken place. Do they then suggest, and I don’t think they do, because I don’t think Liberals believe 

t his, but are they then suggesting by the same logic that Liberals support Napalm bombing of children 

in Vietnam? If the one is logical, so also is the other. 

 

I’m not going to speak very long about the FLQ crisis, but to us, at least to me, it was a question of 

individual freedoms and rights and really had nothing to do with the Armed Services as such. 

 

I happen to be a member of the Canadian Legion. I also lived in the city of Glasgow during the bombing 

raids of the last World War, and I appreciate what many of the men who served in the Armed Forces 

have done. I remember hearing the bombers come over and the V-2 rockets landing on my city. I 

remember some of my friends and relatives being killed by these same rockets and bombs and I 

appreciate what the men did, and 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1443 

the women, who fought for our freedom. But I appreciate it enough that I am going to fight to keep that 

freedom, that freedom to criticize. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I don’t remember New Democrats ever criticizing the men who have fought for this 

country, or the men who are at present engaged in the Armed Services. But we do reserve the right, and 

insist on it, to criticize any policy which forces the Armed Services to carry out the types of manoeuvres 

with which we do not agree. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I think our men have done a tremendous job in the two World Wards, in Korea, in Suez 

and in Cyprus. During the Korean War, the start of it, I spent six months in a military hospital as a 

patient and saw some of the men who were involved. They believed, as did the men before them, that 

they had been fighting for something worthwhile. But remember, friends, that in the two world wars 

men believed that they were fighting a war to end all wars, and this is what our young people are 

disgusted with. It didn’t work. And now they are turning and trying to find other alternatives. 

 

Now I suggest that the use of troops for United Nations Policing purposes is certainly something with 

which we can all agree. We can probably all agree with the use of troops for defence; but some of us, at 

least, draw the line when it comes to using troops to interfere in the internal struggles of other nations. 

 

Now the Legion has also been mentioned and it has done much for its members. After a lot of years of 

fighting they even convinced the Federal Liberals to raise the pension benefits for their members. 

 

And so I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the men who have given so much; and of asking the 

Members opposite to at least give us the right, as individuals not as a Party, to differ when we are 

differing with policy and not differing with the intent of the men who have suffered and who have died. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.M. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, as a veteran I served overseas for four 

years, I was in the same bombing that the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley was talking about in the 

southern part of England. I am going to speak just a few words on behalf of the Legion, these are 

veterans who have come home and are settled in Saskatchewan, all over Canada and they are people 

who have contributed a lot. Every member in our regiment stationed in the southern part of England, in 

Brighton we had 16 and 17-year old men come up as recruits. Being in a tank regiment we had a tank 

crew of five and these men were well trained and the people that we wanted to put into field. We went 

into France on D-Day our casualties were very heavy in the Fort Garry Horse and on the first day in four 

hours we lost 200 men. I want to tell 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1444 

this House that as a Veteran it makes you feel just a little weak when you hear somebody get up and 

criticize the Armed Forces and what they are doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — To see 200 men killed in a matter of hours is something. These men were all 16, 

17-year old boys who wanted to fight for their country. I feel pretty bad about it when I hear the 

criticism the Member from Bengough (Mr. Lange) criticizing and talking about welfare for our armed 

forces. I want to say also to this House, Mr. Speaker, that as a veteran and the veterans of Canada 

recognize people that have fought for their country, and have done a good job. When I see the Minister 

of Natural Resources and the Minister of Public Health laying a wreath on the cenotaph it makes me feel 

pretty bad with all the members of the civil service we could have picked out two legionnaires. I 

criticize the Premier very, very much for asking these two. I can’t see what he is thinking of. I know 

there are a couple of veterans over there, there may be two or three and I am speaking on behalf of them 

too. But to pick the Minister of the Natural Resources and the Minister of Public Health to lay the 

wreath on the cenotaph for the veterans makes me feel just a little bad. Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more to 

say because I know that the veterans on this side of the House and the veterans on the other side of the 

House feel very bad about the way the Member from Bengough talked about the Legion, talked about 

the members of the Armed Service and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — No, no, if the Hon. Member is going to reprimand another Member 

he should continue . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson: — All right I’ll stand up and keep talking too. The Member of Natural Resources, was 

he a veteran? I just said that the two Members, the Minister of Natural Resources and the Minister of 

Public Health were not veterans. I said you could have picked other people to lay the wreath. I beg leave 

to adjourn the debate. 

 

Motion for adjournment negatived. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, may I just raise a small Point of Order. I am not speaking on this 

debate. I would ask, now that the Member has taken his seat, that you ask Members to speak from their 

seat and not from other seats. I didn’t want to interrupt the Member, but I want to point that out. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I realized that the Member wasn’t speaking from his own seat, but I didn’t want to 

interfere at the time. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few words to say in this debate and I beg 

leave to adjourn it. 

 

Motion for adjournment negatived. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1445 

Mr. D.H. Lange (Assiniboia-Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, it is with some apprehension that I rise to 

speak on this motion. It seems almost strange to me that a motion of this nature should appear almost 

‘out of the blue’ so to speak. I cannot help wondering for what reason it could have been introduced, 

unless of course it is a titillating tactic on behalf of the Opposition to arouse a latent nationalist spirit 

amongst the populace. If this was indeed the strategy of the Opposition they should be highly 

commended. Upon mulling over the consequences of this motion however in my mind, one thought has 

become significant to me and as a result I should like to offer some advice to the Opposition. 

 

I realize that it is rather presumptuous on my part being one of the youngest Members in the House and 

with little experience to be offering advice. But one possibility has occurred to me which if allowed to 

run its full course unchecked could have traumatic consequences for the Members opposite. We would 

not want that to happen would we? I would caution the Member from Moosomin to weigh very carefully 

his comments on this matter because this is a subject charged with emotion. It is possible, for instance, 

that some iconoclastic reprobate could get a copy of your comments and distort them beyond 

recognition. Suppose, for instance, that a reactionary editor of one of our newspapers were to do a 

misconstrued article on your comments. Again having had very little experience in this line I am willing 

to concede that I may very well be wrong. It is only because I am concerned about the welfare of the 

Opposition that I have offered any advice. Since I can’t imagine anyone having the unmitigated gall to 

oppose this motion – of course that doesn’t apply to the Member from Prince Albert West, since I 

understand he has had most of his removed anyway – and as one conscious of how my freedom has been 

attained, I unequivocally give this motion my wholehearted support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to join with the other Members who have spoken in 

this debate in support of this resolution. I wondered when I saw the resolution on the paper just why the 

Member from Moosomin had brought in this resolution. It was quite obvious after we heard him start in 

his debate that it was brought in strictly for political purposes. I expected better from him and I was 

disappointed. I thought he would give a reasoned statement which would reflect some respect and 

appreciation for the Armed Services and for what they have done. Instead we were treated to the kind of 

a ridiculous accusations which I didn’t think even he would believe. 

 

As an ex-serviceman with some four years of service in the Armed Forces and as a member of the Royal 

Canadian Legion I want to express our appreciation for all those who served their country during the 

two world wars and to those unfortunate ones who served and did not return. To them and their 

surviving families we owe a debt of gratitude which we cannot easily repay. We are also appreciative of 

the many young men who have since that time served in many troubled areas of the world as part of the 

United Nations peacekeeping force. We commend the spirit in which they have performed what may be 

construed by some as being a very unenviable role in a conflict between warring nations. When we on 

this side of the House take issue with many 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1446 

of the policies on military matters which have been pursued by various governments in Canada in the 

past years we are in no way being critical of the young men who are performing their required duties as 

a result of such policy. 

 

It is very difficult to condone, for instance, the huge useless expenditures being made by the Department 

of National Defence, such as the refitting of the aircraft carrier Bonaventure for the sum of $18 million 

and its subsequent scrapping within a year as obsolete. We question the expenditures of huge sums of 

money on the Bomarc and Minute Man programs on this mid-Canada and Dew Line sites when it was 

acknowledged that this mode of defence was obsolete even before it was completed. We questioned the 

spending of millions of dollars on fighter aircraft which were outdated before they rolled off the 

assembly lines. We will continue to criticize these and other expenditures which add nothing to the 

security of our nation but constitute a serious and unnecessary drain on the taxpayers of this nation. 

 

These however, are political decisions and blame for such misdirection cannot in any way be laid at the 

feet of our servicemen and there is no desire or intent on our part to implicate them in any way. 

Members of the Royal Canadian Legion are extremely conscious of their responsibility with respect to 

the maintenance of freedom and democratic rights which they sought in two world wars to preserve. 

Wherever legionnaires meet there is concern for the best possible means to ensure those freedoms. 

Contrary to some general misconceptions the Canadian Legion is not a pro-military organization. 

Having been exposed to the tragedies and brutality of actual combat and having experienced first hand 

the wholesale destruction of property and mass annihilation of innocent civilians, they are most keenly 

aware of the need for a strong and effective world organization; an organization which can act to prevent 

further conflict and which will serve to improve the economic conditions of underdeveloped nations. 

They are aware that only through united and sincere efforts of all nations to relieve the disparities and 

miseries of underprivileged nations can there be any real hope for lasting peace. Because we live in an 

imperfect world we recognize the continuing need for all responsible nations to make their contribution 

to a world peacekeeping force. In spite of some of the disillusioning experiences we have had with 

peacekeeping operations of the United Nations in the past we recognize that for the present at least it is 

the only alternative to military balkanization. 

 

The role of a serviceman in a peacekeeping operation is sometimes much more difficult and frustrating 

than that experienced by his predecessor in actual combat. Not only must he be ready for instant action 

where necessary but much of the time he must exercise the utmost restraint in the fact of intense 

provocation. In such cases it would be much easier for him to strike out at the tormentor rather than to 

maintain a clam and unruffled posture. In many cases they find themselves embroiled in political 

manoeuvring which they extremely dislike but have no power to resist. I am very concerned that our 

Armed Forces should not be put into a position in Canada where they are used indiscriminately for 

crowd control particularly where public demonstrations take place by people who have grievances 

against governments or other jurisdictions. We recognize that there may be some requirement in 

emergency to guarantee the safety of the public. However, more often than not military forces are used 

to impose the will of autocratic governments in very 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1447 

undemocratic situations. This we must resist to the utmost if we are to remain a truly democratic 

country. We are now almost two generations removed from the time of hostilities after the end of World 

War II. It is difficult for many of our younger people to comprehend the bond of fellowship and loyalty 

experienced by those who served during those critical years. On many occasions the resentment shown 

by our younger generation to anything military, strikes a discordant note among the older generation 

who were trained to accept the premise that military strength signified security. However, we now live 

in a new era where civilization has the power to completely annihilate itself through the use of modern 

weapons. Under these circumstances the role of the serviceman becomes less and less important and the 

political role becomes much more dominant. We must commend those who have worked tirelessly to 

provide the kind of world wide political structure which is the only hope for the survival of future 

generations. A true and actively supported United Nations appears to be the only logical force which can 

hope to assume this role. 

 

In conclusion I should like to emphasize again that I believe our only hope for world survival is in a 

strong and internationally supported United Nations. I agree that as a responsible nation which is a 

partner of that international body we must be prepared to make our contribution with both financial and 

military peacekeeping forces. I know that in this role our servicemen will not fail to uphold the traditions 

of which our former servicemen were so justly proud. Mr. Speaker, I will support this motion. 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in support of the 

motion I only want to make very few observations. I am brought to my feet because of what the Hon. 

Member from Lakeview had to say. It is regrettable that we find people who for whatever motive reduce 

the debate at times to its lowest unbecoming level. Mr. Speaker, as I recall my laying the wreath at the 

cenotaph, the Premier and I were invited, as most Members of Legislature are invited, to participate in 

memorial services on November 11. If my memory serves me correct it was the legion that made the 

request and we felt it an honor as well as a duty as Members of the Government to be part of the services 

that are held on November 11th. I know that Members of the Legislature throughout the province 

participate in laying wreaths on that particular day when we remember those who gave their lives for 

this country, whether they were in the Armed Services or were not in the Armed Services. As it 

happened, I was not in the Armed Services because I was too young, but I might tell the Hon. Member 

that in the First World War my father served in the Armed Services and was wounded twice in the cause 

of freedom. I don’t know what the Hon. Member from Lakeview is trying to prove but I do believe that 

he owes this House an apology for bringing in that kind of an argument. I do hope that in the years that 

are ahead of us all Members, regardless of what side of the House they sit that they will respect and pay 

tribute to those who have fought for our country and on November 11th they will be part of those 

services. I intend to be because I do respect those who have fought for our freedom. I believe I am no 

less loyal, no less interested in the cause of freedom and peace than a person who had been in the Armed 

Forces. I believe as a Member of the Legislature I am trying to serve my province and I am trying to 

serve my country as well as those who have fought in the Armed 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1448 

Forces in the interest of keeping freedom in this nation and throughout the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I now rise in this debate to answer 

statements that are made by the Member, I won’t say Honourable because he has dropped in my 

estimation, Mr. Speaker. There are people who did not serve, of which I am one, and I am not going to 

stand up in this House and say why, I’ll leave that to him to find out why. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — I know why! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Oh, do you! Well bless your heart! You mention the Legion, I have in my hand here an 

honorary membership in the Legion, my own Legion in North Battleford. I don’t think Legion people 

are so hypocritical that they would bestow an honorary membership on anyone if they felt that they were 

not really worthy of it. It just so happens, Mr. Speaker, that I have laid wreaths on Remembrance Day, 

on decoration days in North Battleford in two and three locations ever since I have been a Member of 

the Legislature and the people of The Battlefords have seen fit to send me back as MLA for 20 years and 

that is something few people can say in this House. 

 

I will put my loyalty and my conscience up against anyone else in this House or outside of it, any 

Canadian, and that is all that I am going to say on that matter. 

 

I stayed home in Regina and failed to lay those wreaths that I have laid for the last 19 years in order to 

take my place at the Legion cenotaph here on behalf of the Government. If I get an invitation again, I 

will certainly check with the Regina Legion and those people who are responsible for the ceremonies, as 

to whether or not I am acceptable or if they think the same way as the Member who just spoke. 

 

I want to say while I am on my feet I support the motion. I think the motive of bringing it in was 

certainly not genuine, not sincere. I think the whole thing is a cheap political move, but the words I can 

support, the motive I can’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words. I wasn’t going to take part 

in the debate. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — You are another . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — The Member from The Battlefords had his chance to take part in this debate. He was on his 

feet and he sat down and now he still wants to continue the debate. I think there are some rules in the 

House that say once you have spoken you have to wait your turn. 

 

I am glad, Mr. Speaker, to hear that so many Members opposite are supporting this motion. I have been 

in this House for some 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1449 

12 years and I can recall motions very similar to this that were presented by Members opposite dealing 

with banning the bomb and certain questions like that. And as I recall I don’t think we ever stood up and 

claimed that they were being introduced merely for political purposes. We didn’t always agree with 

those and this was even before the time of the young Member from Saskatoon, the present Attorney 

General (Mr. Romanow). 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I remember the . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — Well, you can get up when I finish speaking and make your speech. You will have the 

same opportunity that all other 59 Members in this Legislature, you always have. In fact you probably 

take more time than any other Member in the House talking about things which you feel you have 

something to say about, so nobody is going to hold you back. 

 

All I am saying is that I don’t think the Members opposite should read ulterior motives into this any 

more than we could have done and we could do in much of the legislation, many of the resolutions, that 

we spoke on today that Members opposite introduced. 

 

I think perhaps the comments of the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. McPherson) were 

misinterpreted. I didn’t take those as being particularly critical of the two Members who laid the 

wreaths. I think it was a criticism of the Premier for not ensuring that when veterans are available to lay 

wreaths on Remembrance Day, that he should make some attempt to get veterans. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the fact that the Premier was so quick to react shows that probably this 

thinking is not too far off the track. It is surprising how he snaps to the bit, jumps up whenever there is 

the least bit of criticism. I would suggest that if he is going to be Premier for very long he is going to 

have to get used to some of the criticism from this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — He is not living in an ivory tower, you know, and the sooner he comes down out of the 

tower and is prepared to accept criticism which I think was levelled in good faith, then it would be better 

for all concerned. 

 

I could say considerably more about some of the resolutions that have gone back and forth on both sides 

of the House, on banning the bomb, and when some of the supporters of Members opposite burned an 

American flag not too far out of town here, but I don’t think there is to be anything gained here tonight 

to bringing these in. These have been debated in the past. I as I said in my opening remarks, that we are 

going to have support from both sides of the House. I am sure that the veterans of Canada will 

appreciate it and consider it in the light it has been presented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1450 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. D.M. McPherson (Regina 

Lakeview) for Return No. 28 showing: 

 

The number of new industries that have been opened in the Province of Saskatchewan since June 

23, 1971, and the company names. 

 

Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry): — Mr. Speaker, the motion for an order in its present form 

seeks to inquire into the number of new industries that have been opened in the Province of 

Saskatchewan since June 23, 1971. I should like to move an amendment as follows: 

 

That the words “new industries that have been opened” be deleted in the first line and the words 

“industries which have commenced new commercial production or completed an expansion” be 

substituted therefor. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 37 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 37 showing: 

 

The number of sawmill operators that were licensed and operating in Saskatchewan in the fiscal 

year 1971-72 as of March 1, 1972. 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, question No. 37 there was some 

problem in getting an accurate answer to this in the way that it was worded. I am moving an amendment 

now to read as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word “Saskatchewan” be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

In each of the fiscal years for 1964 up to March 1, 1972, based on a licence expiry date of 

September of each year. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I will raise a question which the Minister can answer 

when he closes debate. First of all I would say that I don’t know why this question is causing difficulty. 

It is worded in exactly the same way, the identical words that the Minister himself asked a question 

when he was in Opposition last year and we had no difficulty providing the answer. I would think that 

the same staff is there to do the work and therefore I don’t see the difficulty, Mr. Minister. But if this 

provides me with the information, and I believe it does, if the licence expiry date of September refers to 

September 1972. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? And the September that we are talking about is 

September 1972? 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1451 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Guy: — So that is fine with me. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I might say in closing debate . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must warn the Hon. Member that he cannot close the debate on an amendment. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Can I not answer his question, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I think you are out of order at this time because if he had risen to ask you a 

question before you took your seat it would have been fine. But he didn’t do so and so you are out of 

order to answer at this time. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 38 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Guy (Athabasca) for Return 

No. 38 showing: 

 

(a) Whether there has been any timber extraction operations in Nipawin Provincial Park from 

July 1, 1972, to March 1, 1972. 

(b) If so, the names of the operators. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, on question No. 38, once again, we feel that the information that the 

Member has requested is not going to be complete, therefore I move, seconded by Mr. Bowerman that it 

be amended to read: 

 

That all the words after the letter (a) be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

Whether there have been any timber extraction operations in Nipawin Provincial Park from July 

1968 to June 30, 1971. 

(b) Whether there have been any timber extraction operations in Nipawin Provincial Park from 

July 1, 1971, to March 1, 1972. 

(c) If so, the names of the operators in each case. 
 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I am glad to get the additional information to save me the work of going back 

into the Journals for the past two or three years and sorting it out. 

 

But again it is the identical question that was asked by the Hon. Minister when he was in the Opposition 

last year. The answers are available in the Journals and I was going to save him the time of having to 

look it up himself but now he has offered to do it. It is appreciated. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, once again the answer is the same, but the answer given last year was 

incorrect . . . 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1452 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! You cannot come back into the debate. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 41 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Guy (Athabasca) for Return 

No. 41 showing: 

 

(a) Whether there has been any change in government policy since July 1, 1971, respecting 
reforestation of areas in which timber has been cut for use by MacMillan Bloedel at Hudson 

Bay. 

(b) If so, the substances of the changes. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, once again, on Return No. 41. The Hon. Attorney General raised the 

question and I think with some very good reasons regarding whether or not these are proper questions 

and motions to be put, or whether or not they should be asked under Estimates as policy questions, 

because they are policy questions. 

 

But in order to oblige the Member and break protocol we are prepared with a minor amendment to go 

ahead and answer it. We hardly think the ‘gufuffel’ is worth it and if he wishes to submit the question 

that was turned down previously we will answer that one too. 

 

No. 41 – and I hope you won’t have to amend this one, Mr. Speaker – is to be amended to read: 

 

(a) Whether there has been any change in government policy since July 1st, 1971, respecting 
forest practices and reforestation of the areas in which the timber has been cut for use by 

MacMillan Bloedel at Hudson Bay, 

(b) If so, the substance of the changes. 
 

It is simply by an addition, Mr. Speaker, of forest practices in the former motion. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, a brief word that again I appreciate the offer of the 

Minister to provide as he calls this ‘gufuffel’. I might remind the Hon. Member that it is exactly the 

same ‘gufuffel’ as he requested last year when he was sitting almost in fact I think this is the identical 

desk that he was sitting in when he moved that ‘gufuffel’ that was provided. There is only one question 

that I can’t help but wonder about and I suppose probably it is due to the inefficiency of the Attorney 

General, I am not sure. But it seems very strange that they are now prepared this evening to pass this 

Resolution regarding MacMillan and Bloedel and hopefully Prince Albert Pulp and yet they voted down 

by a standing vote the one on Simpson Timber just a few days ago. Now I think we should resubmit the 

question because it appears that there might be something that you are trying to hide in that area. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1453 

RETURN NO. 42 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 42 showing: 

 

(a) Whether there has been any change in government policy since July 1, 1971, respecting 
reforestation of areas in which timber has been cut for use by Prince Albert Pulp Co., Prince 

Alberta, at Hudson Bay. 

(b) If so, the substance of change. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, this amendment to Return No. 42 is amended in exactly the 

same way. Once again I move seconded by Mr. Bowerman. That all the words after the word 

“respecting” in (a) be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

Forest practices and reforestation of areas in which timber has been cut for use by Prince Albert 

Pulp Co., Prince Albert. 

(b) If so, the substance of these changes. 

 

We have also deleted “at Hudson Bay”. I don’t know what the Member for Athabasca meant, but 

anyway Prince Albert is not at Hudson Bay so we took that out. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 66 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 66 showing: 

(a) The names of Cabinet Minister, Legislative Secretaries, and other government employees 
that have been issued credit cards at the request of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

(b) The credit cards that have been issued to each of the above. 
 

Hon. J.E. Brockelbank (Minister of Public Works): — The Member for Athabasca has demonstrated 

a continuing need for more information and we are quite willing to oblige him. The question as it was 

placed on the Order Paper some time ago was rather imprecise and I approached the Member about it 

and he more or less agreed that I should offer some amendments to sharpen up the point of the question. 

I am therefore, Mr. Speaker, proposing an amendment, seconded by Mr. Cowley (Biggar): 

 

That all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

The names of Cabinet Ministers, Executive Assistants to Cabinet Ministers and Legislative 

Secretaries that have been issued credit cards, or CVA 1 cards, at the request of the Government 

of Saskatchewan; 

(1)(a) in the fiscal period 1970-71; (b) in the period April 1, 1971 to August 6, 1971; (c) in the 

period following August 6, 1971, to March 31, 1972. 

(2) The reason for the change from the CVA 1 cards to credit cards. 

 

By way of brief explanation, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that the purpose of breaking the periods 

down in this manner was to give in (a) for the sake of comparison, the fiscal period 1970-71. In (b) the 

period April 1 to August 6, 1971, when it became the practice of the Central Vehicle Agency to issue 

credit cards in some instances rather than CVA 1 cards; delete the final part of the Return asking for the 

number of credit cards that have been issued in each of the above, which is irrelevant 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1454 

because a person with a CVA 1 card could obtain services from any number of service stations with that 

same card, whereas with plastic credit cards as we all know them, you have to have a separate credit 

card for each station. Therefore in order for the Minister or the person using the card to have the same 

flexibility they would have to have a number of credit cards for use. If the same person was using a 

CVA 1 card and from a certain date onward he was using a plastic credit card he would not necessarily 

be buying more product but would need the extra number of cards to facilitate his use of a vehicle. I 

therefore, move that amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I believe this is all right. I’ll just ask the Minister a question and he can nod his head. This 

includes other credit cards than just CVA? 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 – INCOME STABILIZATION PROGRAM FOR PRAIRIE FARMERS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J.R. Kowalchuk 

(Melville). 

 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government to proceed immediately with legislation to 

establish an income stabilization program for prairie farmers, which program would include the 

following: 

 

(1) A guarantee that total grain receipts in the prairie region will not fall below 1.1 billion 
dollars during the 1971-72 crop year, and that this figure be adjusted in subsequent years to 

take into account costs of production; 

(2) The establishment of a Stabilization Fund for the purposes of this program, with 
contributions from producers, consumers through a two-price system for wheat; and the 

Federal Government, through an annual contribution from the Treasury; 

(3) A payout from the Stabilization Fund in any crop year that gross-receipts fall below the 
guaranteed minimum, with distribution on the basis of the numbers of bushels of grain 

delivered, such payment to be included in the final payment made by the Canadian What 

Board. 

 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, this debate concerning farm income stabilization is one 

of the most important of this Session. It is important because it reveals the difference between the NDP 

and the Liberal farm policy in an inescapable manner. Both parties want a stabilization plan. The 

Liberals remain loyal to the Otto Lang stabilization plan which went down in flames in the Assiniboia 

by-election. The NDP position is that any plan must take into account increasing costs of production. 

The Liberals support the Otto Lang plan to remove all Federal responsibility for grain storage costs. The 

NDP will support removal of the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act if it is replaced by a plan to have the 

Federal Government responsible for the storage costs of 400 million bushels of all grains stored. The 

NDP position is based on the view that any stabilization plan must be designed to stabilize the farm net 

income situation. Any plan that does not take into account increasing costs of production does nothing 

more than guarantee poverty. That’s why every major farm organization in 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1455 

Canada opposed the Lang Stabilization plan. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Manitoba Wheat Pool, 

the Alberta Wheat Pool, the United Grain Growers, the National Farmers Union, the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Agriculture, Unifarm of Alberta, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, all of them 

opposed the Lang Stabilization plan. The Liberal Party stood alone in opposition to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What happened to farm income in Saskatchewan under Ottawa and Regina Liberals? The realized net 

farm income reached an all-time high of $480 million in 1967. Within two years it had plummeted to a 

27-year low of less than $170 million in 1969. In 1970 the Saskatchewan realized net farm income had 

increased by a mere $25 million. Yet the Liberal Party continued to stand alone in opposition to the 

farmers in Saskatchewan. I want the Opposition to know that the farmers of Saskatchewan still realize 

that net farm income is their greatest need. In a presentation to the Saskatchewan Government just last 

February the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture said and I quote: 

 

Too low a realized net farm income is the most important problem facing Saskatchewan farmers, 

the total agricultural industry and the provincial economy. The last five-year period has been 

plagued with rising farm production costs, relatively poor markets and lower prices for farm 

products. To be successful beyond the short run agricultural adjustment policies must be part of 

an overall, integrated, Provincial-Federal agriculture policy that has improved farm incomes as 

its objective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Federation of Agriculture was referring to the Land Bank as an adjustment program. It 

was pointing out that unless there is Federal co-operation to improve net farm income the Land Bank 

could not be successful. This is perfectly true. Unless the Federal Government will co-operate with our 

provincial program there is no hope for farmers. There is no hope for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the sake of Saskatchewan I hope the Opposition will unite with the Government of 

Saskatchewan and fight for a stabilization plan which will take into account increasing costs of 

production; fight for a plan to include basic grain storage costs; fight for a plan based on a realistic level 

of net farm income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, the other day when the mover of this motion spoke I was 

quite impressed by the forcefulness, it almost looked as if he was really mad at somebody that there 

were promises made, I can’t quite recall all the promises he reiterated that the Liberals had failed to 

fulfil. I thought I would just remind the Member, he’s not in his seat today, that I should like to refer him 

back to his promise during the election campaign that within three weeks of an NDP Government the 

hospital at Neudorf would be opened. I don’t think that hospital is open to this very day. 

 

He referred to the Task Force on extermination of two-thirds of the farmers of Saskatchewan. The Task 

Force takes into consideration all the farmers in Canada, not only the Saskatchewan farmer. The Task 

Force really has nothing to do with the 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1456 

Government, the Government has never said that they would go along with the Task Force whereby it 

had recommended that two-thirds of the farmers should be taken off the farm. It is rather a very weak 

argument when one looks at some of the committees that have been struck and the recommendations 

that have been made, governments very seldom implement the recommendations that the committees 

make. The only one that I know of currently that has been adopted is the Liquor Commission Report. 

 

I think if I’m right, the Farmers Union at first did not oppose the stabilization program, nor did the 

Wheat Pool. As a matter of fact I think they went along with Otto Lang until there was some resistance 

from some farmers and then they stabbed him in the back. Later on Mr. Lang said that he would never 

again go back to the Wheat Pool or the National Farmers Union and ask for their advice, he would rather 

go to the grassroots farmers. In answer to strong support in the Assiniboia by-election where they had 

gained the seat, I believe they only got 39 per cent of the vote as compared to 61 against, so that doesn’t 

speak very strongly about the support of the NDP policies. 

 

The Member that just sat down had some comments to make regarding the Temporary Wheat Reserves 

Act and the cost of production. This is where the Wheat Pool and the farm organizations and I have 

violently disagreed. Always considering the cost of production, now a two-bushel quota to many 

farmers, let’s say he has 1,000 acres under cultivation, a two-bushel wheat quota would mean $2,000 for 

this farmer. The cost of production can only be assessed on the amount of sales he has. If there are no 

sales whatsoever then of course the cost of production is tremendously high. If the farmer could sell 

everything he produced and if he wouldn’t have carried into the Operation LIFT program and raised 

another crop in 1969, and if all this grain was sold that is now in storage, the farmers wouldn’t be asking 

for any subsidies. The NDP Government Members are just one year late in proposing an income 

stabilization program. The farmers of Saskatchewan needed this kind of support last spring when Otto 

Lang introduced just such a Bill. But at that time, Mr. Speaker, the NDP were not the Government of 

Saskatchewan and they did everything possible to prevent the passage of this Bill and eventually the 

Federal Government had to withdraw the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Now that they are the Government they would like the Federal Government to pump as 

much money into the Saskatchewan farm economy even more than the Federal treasury can stand just to 

improve the provincial economy. 

 

They forget, however, that the Provincial Government could also implement programs which would 

help the Saskatchewan farmer. In the seven years of Liberal Government many programs were initiated 

by the Provincial Government to help stabilize farm income, but not once did we ever get any support 

from the then Opposition which is now the Government. In fact the now Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) ridiculed the hog marketing program and other stock programs that were initiated to help the 

farmer diversify and have a better income. 

 

They went out and claimed that because of our diversification our programs were instrumental in 

reducing farm product prices. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1457 

The Federal Stabilization Bill was not designed to take care of all the farmers’ troubles, but it certainly 

was a step in the right direction. The actions of the NDP, the MLAs and the MPs in Ottawa just kept $60 

million out of the farmers’ hands. 

 

Today with increased grain sales, good cattle prices, and hog prices 50 per cent higher than a year ago, a 

Stabilization Bill is not as urgent as it was a year ago when you people defeated the Stabilization Bill. 

$60 million last spring would have meant more to many a young farmer than now when sales and 

income to the farmer is much greater. 

 

The Federal Stabilization Bill would have assisted many small farmers who had not delivered grain to 

the Wheat Board. Under the payments made through the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act a highly 

diversified farmer with no sales to the Wheat Board, he got absolutely nothing. Instead the landlord, not 

necessarily farming, reaped the benefits of the Temporary Wheat Reserves Act by virtue of grain 

delivered in his name by the renter. 

 

A diversified farmer with no grain deliveries to the Wheat Board could have received about $950 under 

the Federal Stabilization Bill. The NDP MPs and the Saskatchewan NDP supporters can be credited for 

doing them out of this amount. 

 

The Resolution suggests that the cost of production should be taken into account. This has also been 

argued by the farm organizations, however, there is nothing that will benefit the farmer more, as I said a 

few moments ago, than to be able to sell all his grain. There would be no hardships in Saskatchewan – 

and I am sure the Government would be quite pleased – if the farmers could sell the 800 million bushels 

of wheat that is now in storage and will be in surplus after the crop year. We will have about 300 million 

bushels of barley in surplus and about 40 million bushels of rape. The surplus grain we now have on 

hand could very easily amount to $1.5 billion to the prairie farmer. 

 

The emphasis for the farmer still is sales. If all of our grain could be sold farmers would not need to 

request subsidies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The Provincial Government has responsibilities as well. The Member for Arm River (Mr. 

Faris) looks at the Feds and criticizes Otto Lang. You take that boulder out of your own eye and then 

look at the splinter in somebody else’s eye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The two Members sitting there talk about conversion on this side. They really need some 

conversion on that side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The Provincial Government has responsibilities as well but so far they have made 

farming much more costlier. Sure all they have done is implement the 40-hour week, applying this to the 

farm implement dealer which has raised his cost, 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1458 

which he is transferring to the farmer. And he has also cut his services to the farmer. That is the way you 

act but you want the Feds to do differently. You are, in my humble opinion, the most hypocritical group 

that have ever sat to the right of Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — They are just not honest. They have the – now the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) is 

walking out and I have a message for him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — They talk about farming. Why didn’t you, the Member for Arm River tell the Attorney 

General, why it was necessary to raise the farm licence plates by $1. If you think the costs to the farmers 

are too high why didn’t you leave him out? The truck plate rates are high enough, the premium income 

equal the claims so there was no need whatsoever to raise the licence plates on the hard-pressed farmer. 

 

Most of the rural municipalities mill rates will go up. These are the farmers that we are talking about. 

Why, I hear, one municipality after another raising the mill rate because the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs (Mr. Wood) has cut grants here and cut grants everywhere. And yet you talk to Ottawa, what you 

steal from the farmer you want Ottawa to make up. 

 

And now for the school units. I spoke to a school unit member today. 

 

An Hon. Member: — From Rosthern? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No, from Aberdeen. He said that the mill rate in the Saskatoon East School Unit would 

have to go up by three mills. And these are farmers and you ay they can’t afford to pay any more. Why 

are you so hypocritical, why don’t you give grants so that the school rates could be reduced? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — But you have a completely different opinion when it comes to your pocket book and 

when it comes to the Ottawa pocket book. 

 

These are only a few of the examples of this Government’s treatment of the farmer and certainly they do 

not indicate that they have any intention to assist the farmer at the provincial level. Recently we have 

learned of the farm services leaving Saskatchewan in droves and these are the ones that you wanted to 

bring into Saskatchewan and just the opposite has taken place. I am thinking of Smith-Roles. A large 

hog enterprise was interested in locating in Saskatchewan. This would have created 1,500 jobs. Maybe it 

would have put all the unemployed school teachers to work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1459 

Mr. Boldt: — It would have utilized 11 million bushels of feed grain and about 500 to 700 farmers 

would have contracted with this firm to raise the hogs. But the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) calls 

this a bogus industry or bogus company. This company will now establish in Alberta as have many 

others since June 23rd. If they are not moving to Alberta they are going to Ontario as did the Quaker 

Oats from Saskatoon. 

 

The Liberal Party of Saskatchewan supports the principle of the Income Stabilization for Saskatchewan 

farmers. We deplore the political actions taken by the NDP in Saskatchewan and the Federal NDP 

Members of Parliament in defeating . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — . . . the Federal Stabilization Bill introduced by Otto Lang in the House of Commons in 

the spring of 1971. I, therefore, want to amend this Resolution by striking out all the words in the third 

line after the word “farmers” and the following substituted therefor: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the action taken by the Provincial and Federal Members of the 

NDP for sabotaging the first Federal Government’s Stabilization Bill, causing loss of $60 million 

to western farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This becomes an alternate conclusion of motion so the debate will continue on the two 

concurrently. 

 

Mr. E.L. Cowley (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says “another farmer,” well I 

was born and raised on a farm and I suspect that I know as much about farming as he does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — If that’s all you know you better sit down. 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We will record that one for the next election. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Go right ahead! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I was interested in listening to the amendment offered by the Member for 

Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) who accused the New Democratic Members of Parliament of sabotaging – and I 

believe that was his word – sabotaging the grain stabilization program offered by the Federal 

Government. 

 

I was rather interested because I have been listening to the debate from the other side of the House over 

the past few weeks in which they have been accusing the Government here of steamrollering them. I 

should like to remind them that it is not the size of the majority, it is the fact that the Government has a 

majority which enables it to put legislation through. 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1460 

Had the Federal Government wishes to go ahead with the legislation, and had they been capable of 

convincing the people of Saskatchewan that it was good legislation, I am sure that the Federal 

Government would have gone ahead with it. But once they proposed that legislation, and once the 

National Farmers Union which the Member opposite mentioned, and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

which the Member opposite mentioned, had seen the legislation in detail, had had a chance to examine 

it, they came out in opposition to it, as did our Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The Member opposite made a great point out of the fact that only 39 per cent of the 

people in Assiniboia voted for the New Democratic Party. And he said that 61 per cent voted against 

them. I should like to draw to the Member’s attention that it was a considerably smaller percentage of 

the people in Assiniboia who voted for the Liberal Party and for the Grain Stabilization Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — If the Member opposite is very interested he might consider and take a look at the size 

of his majority in comparison to the size of the majority of the Member of Parliament for Assiniboia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member also mentioned in his amendment there was a loss of $60 million to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan. I mentioned in an earlier debate, and I think it bears reiterating for the 

information of the Members opposite, that you can hardly call this a loss of $60 million. That payment 

would have been a one-shot payment to the farmers of Saskatchewan which would not have been 

repeated. The farmers of Saskatchewan would have been required to pay 2 per cent of their gross grain 

sales thereafter into the stabilization plan. I think the Member opposite has probably read some of the 

submissions to the Federal Government on the grain stabilization program. 

 

In some of these submissions, such as the one made by the Government of Manitoba, it was pointed out 

that it was highly unlikely, because of the low level of gross receipts from the six grains included over 

the past few years, it was highly unlikely there would have been any payments out of the grain 

stabilization program in the foreseeable future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers lost the $60 million, but I should like to draw to the Member’s attention to the 

fact that in the last crop year there was some $62 million paid in to the Temporary Wheat Reserves 

Fund. Some $62 million in 1970-71, the last crop year. And this would have been wiped out 

retroactively had the Bill passed. There was a $73 million final payment which was just announced a 

few months ago and a large part of this payment was a result of that payment into that Temporary Wheat 

Reserves Fund. 

 

Also there was a two-price system which was announced. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe – and the 

Members opposite may disagree with me if they wish – but I don’t believe that a two-price system 

would have been announced had the $100 million been paid out under the grain stabilization program if 

it had been brought into effect. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1461 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that two-price system is not a one-shot effort. I hope that it will be 

carried on next year and the year after and in the years to come for the farmers of Saskatchewan and the 

rest of the Prairie Provinces. That two-price system, I submit would not have come into being if the 

Grain Stabilization Bill had been passed by the Federal Government. 

 

So I don’t think that you can point to the ‘sabotaging’ as the Member calls it as having cost the farmers 

of Saskatchewan $60 million, because I don’t believe it did. 

 

The other point which the Member raised and sent some considerable time on was the question of 

whether or not a grain stabilization program or an income stabilization program should be tied to the 

cost of production. And he said that if farmers could sell their wheat there wouldn’t be any problem and 

there wouldn’t be any need of subsidies. 

 

Well farmers might be able to sell all their wheat at 25 cents per bushel. I don’t think that the Member 

then would say there wouldn’t be any need of subsidies. 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Yes, he would! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — You think he would? It is not a question of the amount of grain one sells, it is a 

question of what one receives for what he sells and a question of what it costs him to produce that. 

 

I think the Member opposite is well aware of the fact that land prices have increased considerably in the 

last 20 years, the fact that the prices for machinery have increased considerably, and then he says that 

there is no need to relate an income stabilization program to the cost of production. It is simply not true 

unless the Member is thinking of building large corporate farms of 100,000 acres, or so that they can be 

farmed with this expensive machinery but on a high volume, then you may make money with low 

prices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — He mentioned one thing that I thought was interesting, because when I read the Task 

Force Report they talked about the elimination of two-thirds of the farmers. I guess the Member is going 

to go a little further in solving the problem. I think he mentioned the extermination of them. He also 

mentioned that the Member for Arm River must have had a boulder in his eye. Well it is probably better 

to have a boulder in your eye than behind your eye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to mention again before I take my seat the question of the 

Member making the point that if we could sell all the grain, even at the price it is at now, there wouldn’t 

be any problems. Well, I should like to draw to his attention that we are not assured of always having the 

kind 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1462 

of rather bountiful crops that we have had in the last ten years in Saskatchewan over the whole province. 

 

If we have an income stabilization program one of the purposes of that program will be to take into 

account the fact that the farmers haven’t been able to grow as much. There will be years when farms will 

produce what used to be considered an average crop of wheat in our country, of 15 bushels an acre or so, 

not the 35 or 40 that we have had in the last few years. And it may be if farmers could sell all their grain 

last year or the year before last that they could have kept up to the cost of production in those two years 

because we had grown a lot of grain. I don’t think we can assume that we are always going to be able to 

grow bumper crops and so the price of the grain has to be related to the costs of production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other thing I should like to comment very briefly on and that was the Member’s 

comment about mill rates for school boars and the fact that this was increased cost which farmers had to 

bear because he suggested that mill rates were going up all over the place. I notice he conveniently used 

the example of the Saskatoon East School Unit, rather than the example of the Rosthern School Unit. I 

would simply like to point out to the Members opposite that the school grants paid through the 

Department of Education to the various school boards around the province are not intended to reduce the 

mill rate. The mill rate is to be reduced through the Property Improvement Grant. And I think if the 

Member looks at an average farmer in the Rosthern School Unit or in the Saskatoon East School Unit or 

in the Saskatoon West School Unit or in the Biggar School Unit and takes into account their mill rate 

this year as compared to their mill rate last year for education and takes into account the Property 

Improvement Grant, he will find that there has been a substantial reduction in the amount of the tax paid 

for school purposes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I will be pleased to support the motion and vote against the amendment 

offered by the Member. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS – 48 

Messieurs 
Blakeney Dyck Meakes 

Wood Smishek Romanow 

Snyder Bowerman Thibault 

Larson Baker Brockelbank 

MacMurchy Pepper Byers 

Whelan Carlson Engel 

Tchorzewski Owens Robbins 

Matsalla Cowley Taylor 

Faris Cody Gross 

Mostoway Comer Rolfes 

Hanson Oliver Feschuk 

Kaeding Flasch Steuart 

Loken Guy Grant 

Boldt McIsaac Gardner 

McPherson Lane MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1463 

 

Thorson Lange Wiebe 

 

NAYS – Nil 

Messieurs 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 12 – MANDATORY HEARINGS PROPOSED BEFORE LEGISLATIVE 

ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Weatherald 

(Cannington): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the Government of Saskatchewan that legislation be proposed 

to ensure that provision is made for mandatory public hearings before any major environmental 

change is made in which the Government participates or for which Crown lands or Crown 

permits are required. 

 

Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I must say on rising that I do indeed 

support part of the contents of this resolution in principle but I feel that I must move an amendment at 

the conclusion of my remarks to clarify my position as a concerned Member of this Legislature. The 

principle of holding public hearings, Mr. Speaker, is indeed a good one, especially before decisions are 

made affecting our environment. This was a policy seldom practised by the Members sitting opposite 

when they held power. But I find the clause in this resolution stating “only when the Government 

participates or for which Crown lands or permits are required” leaves a lot to be desired. If we are 

serious about listening to the public we cannot specify segregated areas when public discussion should 

be instigated. It is my hope that in setting up the proposed department of environment that it will be 

automatic that the public be consulted before any action is taken affecting the resources of this province. 

This Government has already initiated programs to bring the public into discussion on a number of 

projects. 

 

A good example of this, Mr. Speaker, was the public hearings with regard to the Land Bank. But better 

still is the new Wetlands Committee and Project Advisory Committee which will co-ordinate and 

discipline all matters relating to Wetlands. They will be establishing a Wetlands inventory which would 

meet the demands of our residents for not only hunting purposes but educational and scientific purposes. 

We will under this program, Mr. Speaker, and through public discussion replace the hit and miss 

programs that developed individual and isolated projects. We may embark, if the public so wish, on a 

land purchase program to retire land as Wetlands financed not only by hunters’ licences but also from 

the general revenues of this province which would recognize the total values of these resources to the 

province as a whole. The structure of this Wetlands Committee is such that Saskatchewan people will 

constantly have voice whether they are dealing with the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission, 

the Conservation and Development Branches or the Water Rights Board. This should ensure that all 

projects are approved by the people of Saskatchewan before construction or excavation begins. In 

making these few comments, Mr. Speaker, I will move the amendment seconded by the Member for 

Assiniboia-Bengough 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1464 

(Mr. Lange), 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

deplores the action of the previous Government in permitting resource developments that had 

dire effects on the environment and ecology of the areas affected without providing an 

opportunity for interested parties to appear before public hearings held for the purpose of 

considering the effect of such developments, in particular, the construction of a pulp mill in 

Northwestern Saskatchewan being an example of a possible or potential environmental hazard; 

and further that this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for the 

establishment of the Wetlands Project Advisory Committee through which water control projects 

that affect multiple resource use can be fully considered by all the interests involved, and 

furthermore, for the (proposed) establishment of the Department of Environment in order that the 

optimum use of our natural resources in the interests of the people of the province may be 

assured. 

 

Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I agree with the basic 

principle of this resolution. I think we can speak of developing our resources and using up the resources 

that we have which don’t replenish themselves quickly or maybe not at all. But unless we consider the 

effects that this development, sometimes we refer to it as progress, I sometimes wonder whether it really 

is. Unless we consider the effects of this on the environment we may end up by destroying ourselves as 

well as our natural resources. I think, Mr. Speaker, that some of the points raised by the amendment are 

worth considering. I wish to have more to say on this and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 3 – TWO-PRICE SYSTEM FOR WHEAT 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Wiebe (Morse): 

 

That this Assembly commends Honourable Otto Lang and the Government of Canada for the 

implementation of a two-price system for wheat. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Larson: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

acknowledges the Honourable Otto Lang and the Government of Canada for the implementation 

of a long over-due two-price system for wheat and that this Assembly, out of concern for the 

temporary nature of the proposed payment, urges the Federal Government to establish a 

permanent two-price system with a method of distribution which is fair to both wheat producers 

and producers of other grains, such distribution to be through a Grains Income Stabilization Plan 

as proposed by Saskatchewan’s present Minister of Agriculture. 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1465 

Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — It indeed makes me happy to rise in support of the 

amendment. I should just like the Members of the House to consider the real objectives and the ideas 

behind a true two-price system for wheat. I want you all in the House to look at this program and 

analyse what the farming groups really wanted when they requested the two-price system for wheat, and 

consider for yourselves whether we are getting that program. The present two-price system that was 

proposed by the Hon. Otto Lang is going to be based, Mr. Speaker, on an acreage basis with a maximum 

payable to each permit holder. It looks to me as though we shall be averaging something like 78 cents an 

acre with a maximum of about $500 per farm. The average per farm in Saskatchewan will probably 

work out to around $300. Now from the time I was ten years old I was active in 4-H Clubs, then into the 

Farmers’ Union, the Wheat Pool Committees and all through this period one of the foremost things on 

my mind as well as other people in these groups was the discussion of a two-price system for wheat and 

the principles that were involved in it. I should just like to point out to the Members sitting opposite, the 

principles that these groups, the Farmers’ Union, the Wheat Pools and other farm organizations you can 

speak of, wanted included in the two-price system. The first idea that was important to all of us was that 

wheat producers would receive at least a dollar a bushel extra for the first X number of bushels per 

permit holder delivering said grade of wheat as used for domestic consumption. 

 

The second principle was that that said payment would come from the consumers of brad not the 

national treasury. The estimated cost to the consumer was in the neighborhood of 1.2 to 1.5 cents per 

loaf of bread. Do we see any similarities between the farmer’s idea of a two-price system for wheat and 

that as proposed by the Hon. Otto Lang? Not much except the name, Mr. Speaker. I should like the 

Members opposite to examine the Diefenbaker deficiency payment of the late 1950s. It was paid on an 

acreage basis, maximum acres per permit book, paid out of the national treasury not from the flour used 

in Canada, and it was not statutory, it could be removed at any time, definitely wasn’t permanent. Notice 

any resemblance here, Mr. Speaker, to the Hon. Otto Lang’s program? I say that it is an exact duplicate 

in every detail except for the final figures involved. I say that we should call a spade a spade. This 

two-price system for wheat that the Federal Government has announced is nothing more than a 

deficiency payment, an election bribe. I say the farmers of Saskatchewan will gladly take the money but 

in no way will we ever give them our votes again. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must warn the Member that he must speak just to the amendment because he moved 

the original motion. He will have to stay strictly to the amendment at this time. 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — That’s fine, Mr. Speaker, that was my intention. I can’t really understand the 

reason for the amendment because basically in the amendment it mentions the Grain Income 

Stabilization Plan. Now a short while ago we passed a resolution somewhat similar to this and if this 

amendment is adopted and passed tonight then basically we have passed two similar resolutions in one 

evening. I don’t think that it is necessary. I think that the amendment should be withdrawn and I should 

like 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1466 

to see the Government Members opposite have the courage for a change, to vote for or against a 

resolution that has been presented without bothering with an amendment. For some reason, as they will 

remember in my remarks when I introduced the Resolution, I said that I hoped that this House would 

refrain from involving any politics in this Resolution. It appears again that they are unable to do it. I 

think if I continue my remarks with reference to what I have heard opposite I may get on to the main 

motion itself and I believe that I cannot do this at this time. I feel though that I shall have an opportunity 

to close debate on the Resolution once the amendment is carried or voted down. I sincerely hope that it 

is voted down. 

 

I understand from the remarks made by the Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Hanson) that he 

will be voting against the amendment because I had the feeling from his remarks that he was not happy 

with the idea of how the payment will be made this year of between $300 and $500. I might remind the 

Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley that his Leader, the Premier of this Province made a remark in the 

January 23rd edition of the Leader-Post and I quote as follows: 

 

Saskatchewan’s initial reaction is that it should be distributed on the basis of so much per bushel 

on say the first 400 or so bushels delivered. This would mean a payment per farm rather than per 

bushel and would benefit small farmers more rather than the large producers who are the ones 

producing the surplus. 

 

I think this is the main idea of this two-price system of wheat in the way it is implemented this year. It is 

a plan that will benefit the majority of farmers in this province. I sincerely urge the Members opposite to 

reconsider this amendment in light of the fact that we already have passed a resolution this evening 

urging a Grain Income Stabilization Bill. I don’t feel that two are necessary. Again I ask the Members 

opposite to forget about politics. I think that this Resolution is a good one. I feel as well that what we are 

doing is commending a man for a job well done. Other than that, Mr. Speaker, I again urge the Members 

to vote against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, I will keep my remarks very brief. I feel now that we are not dealing with 

the Resolution which I presented, we are dealing with an amendment and I, in turn, Mr. Speaker, do not 

intend to vote for the Resolution as amended. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 4 – PUBLIC WORKS PROGRAMS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): 

 

That this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for action taken in bringing 

forward public works programs in the early fall of 1971 and in extending the supplementing 

Federal Government programs for the relief of winter unemployment; 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1467 

Expresses regret at the tardiness of the Government of Canada in announcing its 1971-72 winter 

employment programs and at the dilatory manner in which municipal applications under the 

Local Initiatives Program were processed by the Department of Manpower and Immigration; 

 

And further that this Assembly endorses the proposal for a joint examination of the existing 

programs, by federal, provincial and local governments, to evaluate the effectiveness of existing 

programs and to prepare criteria, guidelines and contingency plans for the winter of 1972-73 

under varying assumptions of unemployment levels. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line down to and including Department of 

Manpower and Immigration in the 8th line and substitute the following therefor: 

 

expresses its regret that the Government of Saskatchewan did not develop a Public Works 

Program in the fall of 1971 sufficient to alleviate the severe unemployment problem that existed. 

 

Mr. E.L. Cowley (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, I was interested the last day when we were debating this 

Resolution in listening to some of the comments from the Member from Moose Jaw North. I was 

particularly interested when at one part in his speech he praised the Government of Manitoba for the 

excellent use that they had made of Federal programs to promote employment and development in that 

province. He said, “Why not Saskatchewan?” “You know,” he said, “Saskatchewan in the last few 

months has been like an ostrich with its head stuck in the sand.” Well our problem was that it has taken 

us eight months to uncover the rest of the ostrich. One of the things which we have stated several times 

is that the province has not, in our opinion, made the best use of Federal programs and it is something 

which this Government is working to correct by setting up a department or a group of people who can 

investigate what Federal funds are available and to make the kind of use of those Federal programs that 

are being made by the Province of Manitoba. 

 

The Member for Moose Jaw North also compared the budget for Public Works in Saskatchewan with 

Alberta. I think when you take a look at the size of the total budget in Alberta and the size of the budget 

in Saskatchewan, and you compare the populations, it is not a particularly fair comparison. You may do 

it proportionately. I am sure the Member for Moose Jaw North would object violently if I compared the 

public works program in Saskatchewan with that of Prince Edward Island, and rightly so. 

 

He also mentioned that Saskatchewan’s public works budget this year was somewhat smaller this year 

than the figures for last year. But I should like to draw to the Member’s attention that these are actual 

figures and is what this Government anticipates spending, not figures inflated for the purpose of an 

election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to second the Resolution with was moved by the Member for Canora (Mr. 

Matsalla). This whole area is one which has been and which continues to be of real 



 

April 4, 1072 

 

1468 

interest and concern to myself. The Federal Initiatives Program which we have seen in operation this 

year was nothing short of chaotic. It was the result of the Liberal Government’s economic philosophy 

and approach to planning which is a 19th Century approach. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, some wit said that it 

wasn’t only a pre-Keynesian economics, it was a Pre-Cambrian approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government knew far in advance that there would be a serious unemployment 

problem this winter. That Government had over three years since the last Federal election almost four, to 

develop programs to deal with such a situation. That they were unprepared, that they waited until it was 

too late to take action, was a wanton disregard of their responsibility. Even when the program was 

announced and the applications completed and submitted, after waiting for six weeks for the forms to 

appear, there were long delays. 

 

You know some even suggested that the delays were so long that they appeared to be deliberate. Mr. 

Speaker, I cannot believe that a government would do this, even though it might result in the programs 

taking effect closer to a possible June election. I cannot believe that any government would play with the 

individual’s livelihood just to take programs nearer to an election. I can only assume that the delay was 

due to gross mismanagement on the part of the Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford this kind of lack of planning and mismanagement. For this reason I urge 

that the Federal Government, over the next few months, work closely with the provincial governments 

to develop a winter works program that will be set up to go in ample time next winter if necessary. And I 

hope they work in consultation with local government as well as they are obviously very directly 

involved in these programs. Even if such a program is not required next year, and I am sure that all 

Members of the House with this, that governments at all levels should annually plan, in advance and in 

co-operation with one another, a program which could be implemented when the need arises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased our Government took action as soon as it became apparent that the Federal 

Government’s program was insufficient. Even though this Government has had little time to prepare, 

even though the previous Government left no plans nor programs, even though the Federal Government 

chose not to consult the provinces or local governments on their program ahead of time, this 

Government took action. The plan that was prepared was not perfect but it was superior in many ways to 

the Federal program. 

 

I would like to compliment the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood) and his Department on their 

efficient handling of the provincial program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, in my constituency it was the Provincial Government’s program, and the 

Provincial Government’s program only, which had any effect. I am pleased to say that three 

communities in my constituency were able to take advantage of the provincial program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that this Government and the Federal 



 

April 4, 1972 

 

1469 

Government will take a serious look at who these various winter works programs are assisting. I have 

two concerns; one, that the programs are not saving local governments money, that they are simply 

resulting in inflated prices and secondly, that the communities which are most in need of financial 

assistance and more services, are seldom able to take advantage of these programs. 

 

To look at the second problem in detail – in order for a community to take advantage of these programs 

it must have planned in advance, it must be able to afford its share of the cost, and it must have a 

sufficient staff to be able to get through all the red tape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the vast majority of cases the disadvantaged communities cannot meet any of these three 

criteria. Usually they do not have any long-range plan for the development of their community. In many 

cases they have no extra funds and little or no borrowing power to expand their activities. They are often 

hampered by a lack of staff to investigate Federal and Provincial shared cost programs. Mr. Speaker, 

these are the communities which most need the additional facilities which could be provided by winter 

works. They are often the communities which most need winter works programs in terms of 

employment as well. I should like to see this Government and the Federal Government establish a 

program which will allow these communities to take advantage of winter works programs. Too often in 

the past I believe that this type of a program has benefitted only those communities which are already 

quite well off in terms of services and facilities. I am not opposed to them receiving assistance, I am 

simply asking that we improve our programs so that all communities can benefit. 

 

We need three things: 1. A special program which will cover 100 per cent of the cost for disadvantaged 

communities or long-term low interest loans to cover the community’s share of the cost. 2. Special 

assistance for these communities to plan the development of their community facilities. 3. Some special 

assistance to these communities in steering their proposals through all the red tape involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that our Government can develop a sound approach to winter works. I hope 

that we can receive the co-operation of all local governments and the Federal Government. Mr. Speaker, 

I will support this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden). 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


