
























































Hansard: March 10, 1972


505 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

12th Day 
 

March 10, 1972 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the 
Members of the Legislature a group of 41 students. They are Grade Eight students from the Glen Elm 
School located in my constituency and are seated in the West Gallery. I should like to welcome the 
students and their teacher, Mr. Fraser, to the Legislature. I have reason to believe that today will be a 
very information and educational day for them. Again, Mr. Speaker, I welcome them to the Legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to bring to the attention of the House 
a group of students whom you have already met. They are students from your constituency, from the 
Spalding School, 21 students who are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are accompanies by their 
teachers Mr. Reuten and Mr. Hetland as well as their driver, Mr. Fettes. I am sure that Members of the 
House will join me in welcoming them here today and wishing them a worthwhile and informative and 
enjoyable stay in Regina and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 50 Grade Six 
students from the Broadview School. They are in the East Gallery. They are accompanied by Shirley 
Jessop, Archie Novak, Edwin Pelletier, and their bus driver, Harold Pelletier. We welcome this group of 
50 future citizens to the Legislature. We hope they have an educational and an enjoyable day and a safe 
trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 50 students from the 
town of Aberdeen. They are here accompanied by their teachers Mr. Ginter and Mr. Peters. We had an 
informative session a few minutes ago. I am sure that you and all Members and all visitors to this gallery 
will welcome them here. I hope that the Premier will not shock them too much with all the tax increases. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. P.P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I too shall like to welcome the Grade Eight students of 
Aberdeen School who are accompanied by their teachers Mr. Peters and Mr. Ginter. I do so because 
many of 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
506 

them live in Hanley constituency. And I am sure that this Assembly hopes that their visit will be a 
satisfying experience and may they have a safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 
GRAIN SALES FORGONE BECAUSE OF LACK OF STOCKS IN VANCOUVER TERMINAL 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to beg the indulgence of the House to 
make a brief statement. 
 
Today’s announcement by the Minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, the Hon. Otto Lang, 
that sales of grain have been forgone because of lack of stocks in the Vancouver terminal is a serious 
indictment of both the Federal Liberal Government and the railways of this country. The facts of the 
matter are as follows: 
 
1. Heavy snowfall and severer rain have blocked the CPR and CNR lines to Vancouver during January, 
February and to date in March. 
 
2. I am informed by my officials that for weeks some 9,000 cars of grain stood idle in terminals and 
sidings each of the Rockies. 
 
3. Today, March 10, over 6,700 cars of grain are on wheels waiting to be moved to the West Coast. 
 
4. Today nine ships are loading, 16 are at anchor waiting to pick up some 11 million bushels of grain. 
 
This is the reason grain sales are forgone. This situation need not have happened. On February 3 the 
Government of Saskatchewan urged the Canadian Wheat Board and the appropriate Federal authorities 
to divert grain cars via the Pacific Great Eastern Railway whose line was not blocked into Vancouver. 
The PGE can handle 400 extra cars per day from Prince George to Vancouver or 800,000 bushels. A 
diversion over the PGE of over one-half of the 9,000 cars waiting east of the Rockies for a period of two 
weeks would have eliminated the crisis of short supply and enabled us to bid on all export sales offered. 
This Government and the farmers of Saskatchewan insist on receiving assurances from the 
Minister-in-Charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, the Hon. Otto Lang and the Federal Government that 
when a similar crisis occurs in the future all access routes to the port of Vancouver should be utilized 
and that the Federal Government do all that is in its power that is necessary to open the port immediately 
and get it back on full export production. 
 
Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, we have granted that the priority is required to 
improve the storage facilities as far as the grain producer is concerned. We think that action to build this 
necessary storage would be appropriate as soon as possible. We also find it very strange, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Attorney General on his trip to the Coast about two weeks ago failed to find out that the Pacific 
Great Eastern Railroad requires about an additional 23 miles of track to be able to divert grain. Mr. 
Speaker, we checked the situation there and we found out despite your great prognostications about how 
cars should be diverted that the railroad requires an additional 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
507 

23 miles of track at about $50 million expenditure to be able to make it feasible and make the situation 
practical as he suggests. We wish that he would have spent a little more time investigating the situation 
when he was there and come back with a little more factual information as far as the Pacific Great 
Eastern Railway is concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

WHEN WILL GOVERNMENT MEET WITH MR. CHILD OF BURNS COMPANY? 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, if I might be permitted 
a comment. I hope those flower children over there have a little more of those bouquets for the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan as well as for the NDP Members. Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). Yesterday there was an article in the paper and I should like to quote 
from a letter from Mr. Art Child, the President of Burns Company of Canada. 
 

As to a new plant, despite all the statements made by your mayor and provincial officials, nobody 
has arranged to come and see me. We can make some proposals for the building of a new plant but 
they would be so costly to all three levels of government that I would doubt very much they could 
be accepted. So far, nobody seems particularly interested in coming to Calgary to find out what 
might be done. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I called Art Child, the president of Burns this morning. He told me there was a half-hearted 
effort made by the Ministers four weeks ago after some bad publicity on February 8 and since that time 
no one in the Government of Saskatchewan has called to make an arrangement to see him at a time and a 
period when there are more unemployed walking the streets of Saskatchewan than at any time since the 
depression. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! You can ask a question but we mustn’t debate a question. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly don’t intend to, but I should like to point out to the House 
that this morning I made arrangements with Art Child to have Mr. Gordon Grant, the former Minister of 
Industry and Commerce for the Province of Saskatchewan to go down and do the Government’s job for 
them and to discuss what possible alternatives could be made. And I should like to ask the Minister of 
Industry, will he in the future go and make arrangements to see Mr. Art Child, the president of Burns 
Company to see what arrangements can be made to protect the jobs of 100 people in Saskatchewan and 
a growing agricultural industry in the future. 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry) — Mr. Speaker, the Member from Milestone is quoting from a 
news article that I have not seen but it contains a statement allegedly made by Mr. Child of Burns Food 
Limited which he made to me, that is that the alternatives he has in 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
508 

mind are likely too expensive for any level of government to consider seriously. May I just say that the 
concern of the Member for Milestone about the unemployed people is shared by the Government. We 
are exploring alternative methods of solving the problem. We have some reason to believe that we shall 
be successful in providing alternative employment for the people who will be unemployed when the 
Burns plant is closed on April 28. We think from our discussions with Mr. Child to date that he has no 
alternative to offer which is feasible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 

SPECIAL GUEST FROM FINLAND 
 
Hon. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I have a rather more pleasant task than usual to 
perform. I should like to introduce a special guest from Helsinki, Finland, Dr. Nels Sasara, seated behind 
the rail. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Dr. Sasara was until recently and since 1962, Director of Forest Division, Forest 
Industries, Food and Agricultural Organizations of the United Nations. He is not touring Canada 
studying the world forestry situation and preparing to do a study on the entire forest situation throughout 
the world and we are looking forward to his report. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

DISCUSSIONS WITH MR. ART CHILD OF BURNS COMPANY 
 
Mr. J.C. McIsaac: — In view of the recent comments that he has been making about the diversification 
and the expansion of the livestock industry in the province, I want to ask the Minister if he took 
advantage of the opportunity on February 18 when he sat at a banquet table with the same Mr. Art Child, 
the president of Burns, to try and arrange discussions with him at that time to see the continuation of 
meat packing facilities here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! The question asked by the Minister for Milestone (Mr. Macdonald) was 
answered by the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). We can’t permit a debate on it. We can’t have a 
follow-up repetition of the same question. I hope the Member will take it up sometime during the 
debates of this House. We can’t have the same questions. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Lieutenant-Governor transmits Estimates of Certain Sums required for the service 
of the Province of Saskatchewan for the 12 months ending March 31, 1973, and Supplementary 
Estimates of certain sums required for the service of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 
1972, and recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
509 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. R. Romanow: 
 

That His Honour’s message, the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates be referred to the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it has been traditional over many years for the 
Provincial treasurer when delivering his budget to wear a particular form of tie and I have resurrected 
the form of tie which I used just about ten years ago today when I stood in this House delivering the first 
budget that it was my pleasure to deliver. It was a tie of the Saskatchewan Tartan and this one turns out, 
as we now look at it, to be a very narrow tie, a very lean tie, a tie which reminds you of the lean fare 
which the taxpayer received during those seven lean and dark years. Ties, municipal are now a good 
deal wider and more expansive and I can assure the House that they are indicative of the wider and more 
expansive opportunities which will be open to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to present to you and to the Members of this House 
the first Budget of this New Democratic Government. Just over eight months ago the New Democratic 
Party received an overwhelming mandate from the people of Saskatchewan. In terms of popular votes, 
no party has received such support from the voters in the modern history of Saskatchewan. In terms of 
seats won, the victory was almost equally impressive. Forty-five of the constituencies of the province 
returned New Democrats. 
 
Our party offered to the people a clearly outlined program. Just before the election we distributed our 
four-year election program in summary form, our orange-colored program card. And some months prior 
to the election we published and distributed several hundred thousand copies of a booklet setting out our 
program more generally – the program which we pledged ourselves to launch during our first four-year 
term of office – our now well known Deal for People. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those were our policies when we were out of office and they are our policies now that we 
are in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We promised the people of Saskatchewan a New Deal for People and that’s what this 
Budget is all about. This Budget doesn’t cover all of the four-year program, naturally enough. If it did 
so, it would suggest that after the first year, we were going to become a stand pat Government and this 
we will not be. Saskatchewan, and indeed Canada, has had enough of governments which are unwilling 
or unable to grapple with the problems which beset us. Saskatchewan has had enough of governments 
and parties which oppose all ideas of change — 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
510 

which offer no new approaches and no new solutions to deal with the problems that confront our 
citizens. 
 
In its budget a government reveals its sense of priorities. In this Budget we set out our priorities. And we 
are confident that those priorities will be endorsed by the people of Saskatchewan. In our election 
platform we reaffirmed our faith that agriculture is the foundation of Saskatchewan life, economically 
and socially. This Budget underlines that faith. In our election platform we stated our belief that very 
much larger amounts must be paid by the Provincial Government to property owners who are now 
bearing the heavy burdens, not only of maintaining and improving their properties, but also of financing 
the cost of municipal and school systems. This Budget makes a massive move in that direction. 
 
In our election program we promised to upgrade the quality of education, to remove arbitrary 
pupil-teacher ratios, to set up a comprehensive student bursary program. This Budget makes impressive 
progress toward achieving all of these goals. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, point after point of our New Democratic election program of 1971 can, after the 
Throne Speech in July and after the Throne Speech which opened this Session and after this Budget, be 
checked off as done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we invite, yes, we urge the people of Saskatchewan to compare our 
record of performance in honouring our election pledges with the record of performance of the Party 
opposite in respect of fulfilling their election pledges after their election victories of 1964 and 1967. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We’ll be satisfied to be judged by the people of Saskatchewan on the basis of the 
facts that are now on the record. It is with confidence in their verdict that we offer this our first Budget. 
 
Before turning to the specific proposals contained in the Budget, let me outline the national and 
provincial economic framework in which this Budget is set. 
 
We hear a great deal about the revival of the Canadian economy. The final quarter of 1970, we are told, 
was the trough of the recent recession. There are indeed indications of some improvements in the 
Canadian economic situation. However, the present levels of unemployment and the present levels of 
prices provide little assurance that this rate of improvement in our economy can be sustained. 
 
Federal officials estimate that the Gross national Product in the calendar year, 1971 will increase by 
about nine per cent. Price increases will account for about one-third of that increase. In constant dollars, 
real growth was up by just under six per cent. 
 
The initial stimulus for this expansion came from government spending at all levels and from a strong 
level of exports. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
511 

This was accompanied by a rise in personal spending on goods and services. Increase in consumer 
spending drew heavily upon retail and wholesale inventories which, in turn, prompted greater 
production. 
 
Employment, however, did not rise at the same rate. Much of the increase in output was achieved 
through greater production per person employed. This meant only modest increases in the number of 
people employed. 
 
In fact, new jobs did not keep pace with increases in the labor force. The number of unemployed did not 
decline. The unemployment rate averaged over six per cent throughout 1971, and prospects for 
improvement are dim. 
 
Expansion in private investment lagged during 1971 because of unused productive capacity and because 
of uncertainties in markets. 
 
By fall the need for public programs aimed at creating jobs became abundantly obvious. And I say, as I 
have said before, it is unfortunate that delays by the Federal Government did not permit an earlier start 
on massive Federal-Provincial programs. 
 
Without doubt, unemployment is the foremost problem facing Canada in 1972. But inflation is still 
lurking in the wings. Canada has experienced a brief period of moderation in price increases. This 
moderation, however, was aided by factors which will not bring lasting relief. For example, when we 
unpegged the Canadian dollar in May of 1970, we increased its value. That was the result of the 
unpegging. This in turn reduced the impact of external inflation, in fact goods coming into Canada were 
lower in price, measured by Canadian dollars. This was a considerable factor in an ‘open’ economy such 
as Canada’s — but this is an action which cannot be repeated. We can’t again damp down inflation by 
seeing the Canadian dollar rise vis-à-vis other currencies. 
 
In summary then, Mr. Speaker, let me say that while we can anticipate growth in Canadian output in 
1972, the twin dangers of high unemployment and inflation must still be reckoned with. 
 
Governments must find some new methods of controlling inflation — methods which will not condemn 
hundreds of thousands of people to unemployment. We look to the Federal Government for leadership in 
meeting this challenge. 
 
Turning now to the Saskatchewan economy, our economy experienced qualified improvement in 1971. 
It appears that the provincial economy is recovering from its earlier downturn. However, due to the 
depths to which the economy had sunk in the past three years, must greater improvement is required 
before any real advances can be claimed. 
 
The Saskatchewan economy is dominated by the performance of the farm sector. There we had some 
improvement. Realized net farm income first had plummeted from $480 million in 1967 to $193 million 
in 1970 — just about one-third as a result of a drop in grain prices and a drop in grain sales. Economic 
activity in all sectors of the economy had slackened, retail trade had declined, construction ground to a 
near halt, and employment opportunities all but disappeared. Many Saskatchewan residents moved 
elsewhere in order to find opportunities 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
512 

and during this period our province suffered the greatest decline in population any province has ever 
suffered in peacetime. 
 
Now as I said the year 1971 brought a significant improvement in returns to farms — an increase of 87 
per cent in realized net income. While wheat sales remained like the main component of farm cash 
receipts, the expansion of other secondary field crops increased receipts from these sources by about 50 
per cent. 
 
Saskatchewan’s developing livestock industry continued to advance. Provincial inventories of cattle and 
calves in 1971 were third highest of any province in Canada. During 1971, livestock increased in all 
areas — cattle, calves, sheep and hogs. Some price problems were encountered, notably in hogs, but by 
year-end prices had improved and we look forward to these improvements continuing in 1972. 
 
Growth in non-agricultural production has been slow, and real gains over the pre-1969 levels have been 
small. Some industries haven’t yet regained their previous levels. The construction industry has only 
now, due largely to publicly supported programs, begun to show a noticeable revival. The increase in 
private investment in Saskatchewan, as in other provinces, remains sluggish. 
 
The gross value of mineral production in Saskatchewan rose up $421 million in 1971, up from $383 
million in 1970, up $38 million or 10 per cent. The major portion of this increase came in the 
non-metals, with potash price and volume increases responsible for most of the rise. Declines both in 
demand and price affected sodium sulphate production. Crude oil and natural gas are estimated to 
account for an increase of more than $22 million in the value of fuel production in 1971. 
 
Increased mineral production is predicted for 1972 because of improved market conditions and 
improved labour relations. Incidentally we lost some production particularly in the metal sector because 
of strokes in 1971. 
 
Retail sales have responded to the resurgence in farm income and increases in other components of 
personal income have similarly added to retail sales. Total sales of $1,121 million in 1971 were 10 per 
cent above sales in 1970. A further rise in retail sales is likely in 1972. 
 
The prospects for maintaining the present rising trend in economic activity are encouraging. The 
continued rise… 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I hate to interrupt the Premier but it is customary and traditional for 
Members of the Opposition to receive a copy of the Budget Estimates. I have just received a note we’re 
not going to until the conclusion of the Speech. Surely normal, common courtesies would be available to 
us. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I’ll just comment on that, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you what the normal, common 
courtesy was when I was budget critic for seven years and as I recall it two of those years I, as budget 
critic, got the Estimates and the Speech before the end of it and the other five years I had to wait until 
the end of the Speech before I was given the courtesy of a copy. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
513 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Before I came into this House today I delivered to the budget critic of the Opposition 
a copy of the Estimates and a copy of the Speech. I thought I was doing something that was far more 
gracious to the Opposition than they did for me. I have no objection to copies being circulated. I want to 
point out, however, that when we were the Opposition these courtesies were not extended to us and may 
I say I did not interrupt the Provincial Treasurer to ask for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The prospects for maintaining the present rising trend in economic activity are 
encouraging. The continued rise of personal income to an estimated $2,650 million in 1971 should aid in 
increasing the demand for consumer goods and services within the Province. Public pros are expected to 
stimulate higher levels of construction activity during 1972. A revival of the Canadian economy will 
hopefully result in increased demand for manufacturing and primary products. 
 
The prospects for continued improvement in the agricultural sector provide encouraging signs that 
income flows will be sufficient to revive demand and employment in 1972. 
 
But despite many encouraging aspects in the provincial economy, unemployment remains a constant 
problem. Programs provided in this Budget are designed to provide new stimulus to the economy and 
create new employment opportunities. 
 
Before outlining our budget proposals for next year, 1972-73, it is customary to review the fiscal results 
of last year, 1970-71 and the current year, 1971-72. I have for the record included this review in my 
remarks but, with the consent of the House, to include these remarks in the formal record without stating 
them, I will pass over last year’s results which are already in print in the form the Public Accounts and 
turn to results for the current year of 1971-72. 
 
One year ago the now Leader of the Opposition introduced a budget into this Legislature. The budget 
called for budgetary expenditures of $450.7 million with revenues of $451 million. 
 
At that time we in the Opposition termed the budget a ‘bogus budget’. It was not until we took office on 
June 30th that we learned how unreal certain aspects of that budget were. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Before describing the shifts in budgetary expenditures which our Government has 
been able to effect, I should perhaps recast the original budget to reflect what would have occurred had 
the previous administration stayed in office. 
 
The Provincial Treasurer of that day indicated that the Department of Public Works capital expenditures 
would be $15.8 million in an effort to ease unemployment and to provide work for our people. $15.8 
million, Mr. Speaker, talk about inflation! Never has a figure been more inflated than that 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
514 

particular figure. Mr. Speaker, there were no plans, there were not work programs, there was no possible 
way that $15.8 million could have been spent in this fiscal year by the Department of Public Works. 
Indeed a good bit of the money way, as the quaint saying goes, frozen, by which is meant it was not 
intended to be spent. 
 
Since taking office, our Government has accelerated the timing of construction projects to the 
maximum. Even so, we shall be able to spend only $8.3 million on these capital projects. Similarly with 
Education expenditures, the former government provided a cosmetic touch to the school grant figure. 
 
$81.8 million was provided for operating grants and then they propounded a grant formula which 
involved spending only $78 million knowing that they would, thereby, have a nice looking figure in the 
budget and save themselves $3 million. 
 
$9.1 million was provided for capital grants for schools, when only $6 million was required to meet the 
needs for the planned new facilities. 
 
We might ask then, how serious was that Government, about finding jobs for the unemployed, about 
shifting the municipal tax burden? 
 
On the other side of the picture certain expenditures were understated, and I call this to the attention of 
the Acting Leader of the Opposition (Mr. MacDonald). $35 million was provided for the Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan payments in 1971-72 when costs in the previous year were already at that level and 
rising sharply. In actual fact, costs will run to about $42 million or 20 per cent above the projected level. 
 
To summarize last year’s budgetary proposal: 
 

- Expenditures on public works and school grants were over-stated by almost $15 million. 
- Expenditures on welfare were understated by about $4.5 million on a net basis after giving full 

credit to Federal cost sharing. 
 
Since taking office our Government has made a number of changes in the spending proposals: 
 

- Mr. Speaker, we eliminated deterrent fees at a cost of $5.5 million. 
- We removed medical and hospital premiums for people over 65 at a cost of $2.5 million. 
- We increased spending in Agriculture by over $1.3 million. 
-We accelerated capital works by the Department of Public Works by over half a million dollars. 
- We increased Natural Resources capital expenditures by over $800,000. 
- We increased Highways capital expenditures by $2.5 million. 
- We extended house building assistance grants by an extra $800,000. 
- We expanded manpower training courses at a cost of $300,000, all designed to create 
employment for our people, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
515 

- We initiated a student bursary and loan program at a cost of $600,000. 
 
In addition to these shifts, Mr. Speaker: 
 

- $3 million will be paid into the South Saskatchewan Base Hospital suspense account to relate 
the expenditure more closely to costs incurred during the year. 
- $1 million will be required for the purchase of the Regina Grey Nuns’ Hospital. 

 
These changes, together with other miscellaneous over and under expenditures will bring our total 
budgetary expenditure to $461.5 million. 
 
In the current year we propose to provide for the complete settlement of the Athabasca Pulp Company 
commitment. You will be asked to provide $6.3 million in the current year to cover the gross figure for 
this purpose, bringing total expenditures to $467.8 million. 
 
Notwithstanding this increased expenditure, Mr. Speaker, the Budget will be balanced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Budgetary revenues will exceed estimated revenues by over $18 million. This is 
largely a reflection of the improvement in the farm cash situation. 
 
Personal and corporate income taxes will fall by some $21.5 million, due entirely to downward 
adjustments on account of overpayments in previous years. 
 
Mineral resource revenues will fall somewhat due largely to declines in bonus bids and to work 
stoppages in the metals industry to which I earlier referred. 
 
The growth in the equalization entitlement is sufficient not only to cover these decreases, but also to 
cover the over-expenditures which I mentioned earlier. 
 
Thus, as I say, Mr. Speaker, we anticipate a modest budgetary surplus in the current fiscal year ending 
this month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In reviewing the Province’s finances, I should like to outline the borrowing program 
which was undertaken in 1971 to finance non-budgetary transactions. 
 
The 1971-72 budget estimated the Government’s borrowing requirements to be $60.5 million. It now 
appears that only $44 million will be required during the current fiscal year. The Municipal Financing 
Corporation and Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation did not require borrowed funds in 
the amount originally provided. 
 
All debt incurred during 1971-72 was self-liquidating. Funds were advanced to the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
516 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications, SEDCO and the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board. If I may 
digress for a moment — perhaps to call advances to the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board as 
self-liquidating is to use poetic licence. 
 
That particular Liberal Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, and we have heard about the Tannery and the 
Shoe Factory and all about the combined losses of the Tannery and the Shoe Factory. But that Liberal 
Crown corporation, the Water Supply Board, can manage to lose more money in four months than those 
two did in their whole career. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — All borrowed funds were obtained by issuing debentures to the Canada Pension Plan 
which makes funds available to all provinces at favourable interest rates. The total amount of debt 
redeemed during 1971 amounted to $8.8 million of which Saskatchewan savings bonds accounted for 
36.7 per cent. 
 
The 1971 sinking fund contributions amounted to $22.9 million, bring the total assets held in sinking 
funds available for debt retirement to $161 million at the end of the calendar year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should now like to review the operations of Crown corporations during 1971. 
 
At the outset let me make clear that this Government will encourage the continued operation and 
expansion of Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And we very much hope that our record will be better than that of the Members 
opposite. We will develop our resources for the benefit of Saskatchewan people and where appropriate, 
this will be done through Crown corporations. 
 
During 1971, our Crown corporations provided employment for over 6,100 people. The corporations 
also paid $863,000 in dues and royalties to the provincial treasury, and over $3 million as grants in lieu 
of taxes to municipal governments. The volume of business done increased by over $8 million to a total 
of $204 million. 
 
The two major utilities, SaskTel and Saskatchewan Power, again accounted for a major part of total 
corporation revenues and recorded surpluses of $12.7 million and $20.8 million respectively. 
 
Despite an operating deficit of $267,000 incurred by the Saskatchewan Timber Board, the Government 
Finance Office group of corporations showed a net surplus of $956,000 plus a net income of $669,000 
on financial transactions, allowing the Government Finance Office to pay a dividend of $1 million into 
the consolidated fund in 1971, and to repay $1.2 million against advanced made to it by the Treasury in 
previous years. 
 
The two lending corporations, Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation and the Municipal 
Financing Corporation 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
517 

operated successfully, and the value of loan approvals by the two corporations increased significantly in 
the past year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now turn to our budgetary proposals for the forthcoming year. 
 
Today we hear a great deal about the increasingly complexity of our society and the pressures which this 
brings to bear on the individual and his relationships with his family, his friends, his social organizations 
and his work. 
 
These pressures are real and they are increased by the relentless advance of technology and 
communications and by the increasing pace of change. We need to find new means to deal with them 
individual problems — to develop new institutions and policies to cope with new social problems and 
social demands. 
 
Government activity has increased dramatically in size and scope during the last 25 years. And 
government, like other organizations, has become more and more remote as it has grown. 
 
The very institution in which, we as free individuals, have placed our confidence has tended to become 
an anonymous ‘they’. 
 
In this day of big government and complex living, we believe that we should do everything within our 
power to make government more accessible, less remote more humane and less insensitive, to the people 
it serves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — With this in mind, we propose a series of programs. We propose to establish a 
Government Information and Referral Centre with a toll-free hot line to give citizens ready access to 
information regarding government services and assistance in dealing with their problems. 
 
We propose to make extensive use of legislative committees to provide a forum for public discussion of 
important issues before policies become crystallized. 
 
We also propose to provide new avenues of redress for individuals who believe they have been wronged 
by an administrative action of their government. 
 
In 1964, the last year our party held office, budgetary provision was made for a special legislative 
committee to consider the possibility of establishing a commissioner for citizens’ rights, or Ombudsman, 
to provide citizens with an avenue of appeal from administrative decisions which they consider to be 
unjust. At this Session, legislation will be introduced and funds provided to establish the office of 
Ombudsman, responsible not to the Cabinet but to this Legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In 1964, this was a venturous proposal since the idea of ombudsman was not well 
established in Canada. Now many, many provinces have fallen into line since that time and 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
518 

I should have thought that all progressive people would share our view that the time has come to 
establish an Ombudsman in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — You will also be asked to provide funds for the establishment of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission to administer legislation which guarantees the basic rights of every citizen 
against discrimination in employment and accommodation. 
 
This year we will introduce an experimental program of court counselling to inform accused persons of 
their basic rights and privileges before they are brought to court. 
 
Individuals also find themselves in an unequal position not only in dealing with their government, but 
also in their daily dealings in the market place. We are therefore providing for a new Department of 
Consumer Affairs which will place greater emphasis on consumer protection and the development of 
consumer legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — But perhaps those in greatest need of assistance in dealing with public and private 
institutions are those who subsist outside the mainstream of our society. These people need special 
opportunities to develop their own voice — to learn to help themselves. 
 
To this end, funds will be provided for a Human Resources Development Agency. This Agency will 
undertake new approaches to working with people who suffer from cultural and economic isolation. It 
will provide economic and community development. It will provide a communications link with 
government. We believe that this will offer hope. This will offer assistance — real assistance — for 
some of the most disadvantaged people in our society. 
 
During this Session you will be asked to pass legislation to establish a new Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan and to vote money for this purpose. This Budget provides only for the nucleus of the new 
Department. In the future, it is planned to transfer to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
responsibility for major government services offered in northern Saskatchewan. This will involve 
significant transfers of staff and funds from the Departments of Education, Natural Resources, Welfare, 
Health and others. 
 
The grouping of most government services under one administration in the North should halt the 
fragmentation of government services and provide common direction for the delivery of those services. 
And how often in northern Saskatchewan or in any place remote from the capital have you seen one 
government agency seemingly operating at cross-purposes with another? 
 
We hope that this agency will, in addition, provide a focal point in Government to which the people who 
live in the North can make known their needs and wants. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
519 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Prior to taking office, our party repeatedly protested the downgrading of the 
Department of Labour. 
 
I can remember well making some budget presentations and reviewing the long, long list of government 
departments and finding that all of them had budgetary increases but the Department of Co-operation 
and the Department of Labour. Time and time again this was the picture. 
 
We believe the Department of Labour has an important role to play. The former Government’s 
interference in industrial relations crippled the collective bargaining process. We believe there is a more 
constructive road to follow. 
 
We have already taken steps to establish fair labor standards. We intend to take further steps to create a 
climate whereby collective bargaining can operate effectively without undue constraints. 
 
In this Budget you will be asked to provide money for a significant increase in the staff of a reorganized 
Department of Labour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In the newly structured Department four divisions will replace the existing 11 
branches. The four divisions are labour services, occupational health and safety services, research and 
administration. 
 
The Occupational Health Branch of the Department of Public Health and the Industrial Safety Branch of 
the Workmen’s Compensation Board will be moved to the new division in Labour. 
 
An executive officer will be added to the Labour Relations Board to act on behalf of the Board in the 
period between board meetings. This officer will be able to give temporary certification to unions and 
order votes, to do routine matters, thereby avoiding strike action. 
 
The addition of two more industrial relations officers to the Labour Relations Branch will permit more 
prompt attention to disputes, to request for mediation and conciliation. In an effort to prevent potential 
disputes the Department will also launch a program to review collective bargaining agreements before 
they expire. 
 
The staff of the Research and Planning Division will be doubled. This will permit expansion of research 
activities in major areas of concern such as manpower training, labour standards, industrial relations and 
conditions of work for female employees. 
 
Four labour standards officers have been added to the Branch in a continuing effort to provide greater 
protection to workers through the enforcement of labour standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have already referred to the problem of unemployment in Canada today. While 
unemployment is unlikely to 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
520 

drop significant on a national scale during the coming year, we anticipate that the recovery in the 
agricultural sector will provide some relief provincially. 
 
We are looking for a general improvement in housing construction with increased spending, both public 
and private, for this purpose. In addition, our capital works program will include $11.8 million in Public 
Works, more than $2.3 million in Natural Resources, $5.3 million for Agriculture and $51 million in 
direct spending or grants for highway and road construction. 
 
You will be asked to provide $1.5 million for a Provincial Employment Program. This program is 
specifically designed to provide jobs for our young people. 
 
We have urged the Federal Government to design a program for winter employment for next winter 
now… 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — …so that in the event of high levels of unemployment this coming fall, as I am afraid 
are all too likely — our local governments will have projects ready to go. 
 
The Provincial Government is currently planning projects which can be brought forward if 
unemployment is excessively high next fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not now burden the House with outlining what was wrong with this year’s winter 
works program. I have stated that only many occasions. All of us know that you cannot commence 
winter works programs for winters of Western Canada by announcing programs in October. We are 
accordingly, urging the Federal Government to act now. We are and they are committed to a conference 
in May which will lay out the strategy for next winter and, if this is done, we will have done far more 
next winter than will have been possible this year because of federal tardiness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: —Mr. Speaker, this Government proposes a new direction for economic development. 
We will support resource development, but without excessively public subsidy and only under 
conditions which preserve and protect our natural environment. 
 
We will put emphasis on those projects which involve further processing of our natural products and 
other raw materials. 
 
We will give new emphasis to manufacturing - manufacturing products for the prairie basin market. We 
had many such projects before and we can see them about us in steel mills and cement plants. We 
believe that this can be done again. 
 
We will promote the development of tourism and its associated service industries. 
 
To proceed with these plans, you will be asked to vote larger sums of money for the development and 
research activities of the Department of Industry and Commerce. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
521 

This balanced development, in our view, will create greater employment and more benefits for the 
people of this Province than they have enjoyed over the past several years when Government emphasis 
has been on big buck, big glamour projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Small businesses as well as small industries need direct assistance. The range of 
goods and services which they provide, whether in a rural service centre or in the city, are essential to 
our commercial and community life. 
 
To aid in this development and maintenance of small businesses, we are establishing, within the 
Department of Industry and Commerce, a Business Assistance Branch. 
 
This Branch will provide management advice as well as direct grants and direct loans to eligible 
business concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We intend to develop our tourist industry more fully. 
 
In this Province we have been blessed with vast expanses of natural beauty. The solitude of our 
northland is precious to those who seek a retreat from the rapid pace of urban living. 
 
The provision of tourist facilities and the promotion of our province’s tourist attractions are high among 
this Government’s priorities. We believe that a successful tourist industry will generate large returns for 
the people of the Province and particularly of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We recognize the need to expand public facilities if we are to build our tourist 
industry and if we are to provide our own people with recreational opportunities. Accordingly you will 
be asked at this Session to vote increased sums for expanded park and camping facilities. 
 
You will be asked to provide funds for: 
 

- Continued major development of the Cypress Hills Provincial Park. 
- Development of an improvement to campgrounds and picnic sites throughout the Province. 
- Clearance of wilderness trails in various regions of the Province. 
- Establishment of camping and picnic facilities at Lovering Lake. 

 
The addition there would provide many new facilities for almost every provincial park throughout the 
Province. 
 
We also propose to participate fully in the celebration of the Centennial Year of the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police in 1973. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
522 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we need more reliable information about the potential of our mineral 
resources if these resources are to be developed for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. And so 
we are starting on this route: 
 
A comprehensive survey of the coal resources of Saskatchewan will be started this year. This project to 
be shared between the Federal and Provincial Governments, will take two years to complete at a cost of 
$750,000. 
 
Since 1948, the Department of Mineral Resources has been carrying on a geological mapping service in 
Northern Saskatchewan. To date about 30 per cent of the Precambrian Shield area has been mapped. In 
1972-73 we intend to accelerate that program. The Budget includes $165,000 for the survey and 
mapping program, an increase of 32 per cent over last year. 
 
To further stimulate the development of the mineral industry and to encourage our own people to get 
involved, we propose to implement a program to train and assist prospectors. A Prospectors’ School will 
be conducted at La Ronge during April and May. We are providing $75,000 for the employment of 16 
prospectors for three months to provide practical training and experience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I say again the most important industry in this Province is agriculture. 
 
A buoyant agricultural economy means a buoyant provincial economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Although the agricultural industry has experienced difficult times in recent years, this 
Government has formulated programs designed to improve the economic position of farmers in 
Saskatchewan, and to enlarge their opportunities. Mr. Speaker, to promote and sustain family farms we 
propose to inaugurate a Land Bank program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Let me say that this is not the panacea for all our agricultural problems. 
 
The establishment of the Land Bank Commission will, however, encourage, and we believe may play a 
vital role in preserving the family farm as the basic unit of agricultural production in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The Land Bank Commission will offer an attractive option to the young farmer by 
eliminating the necessity of him 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
523 

raising large amount of capital for land purchase. It will offer an attractive option to the older farmer by 
providing him with an opportunity to retire in dignity at a time of his choosing. 
 
You will be asked to provide $10 million to be advanced for land purchases and approximately 
$600,000… 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — …we’re going to provide $10 million capital and $600,000 for the start up and 
operating expenses of the Land Bank Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The marketing of agricultural products continues to be one of the most perplexing 
problems facing farmers today. 
 
We are providing $150,000 to explore new approaches and to develop new techniques to increase 
marketing opportunities for new and present products. 
 
In addition to increasing the marketing opportunities we’ll be increasing the number of crop specialists 
to assist producers, we will also initiate a program to detect and evaluate the scale of field crop insect 
outbreaks. This should enable us to stop infestations before they reach the crisis stage. 
 
In the field of livestock and dairying we have a number of programs of assistance. We’ll assist in the 
development of an industrial milk processing industry. $400,000 is provided to make grants to milk 
producers for the construction or the conversion of their facilities to meet the growing demand for 
manufactured milk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — A anew program will provide veterinary inspection services to livestock markets to 
reduce the spread of disease among animals. In an effort to improve veterinary services in this Province, 
the Government will provide grants based on 50 per cent of the estimated cost of the construction of 
veterinary clinics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — the community pasture program will be expanded. A total of 60 pastures will be 
developed, improved or continued in operation with an increase in spending of more than $300,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The further development of irrigation works on the west side of the south 
Saskatchewan River Project will cost approximately $2.3 million. 
 
To encourage the commercial production of onions in the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project, 
an onion storage 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
524 

warehouse will be constructed at Outlook. 
 
To provide farmers with more management services the number of farm business management courses 
will be doubled in the coming year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in review, the combined ordinary and capital budget for the Department 
of Agriculture will amount to $18 million, a very substantial increase over the 1971-72 estimate of the 
previous administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Turning to crop insurance. It is our view that the crop insurance program is not 
meeting the needs of farmers. 
 
Consequently, we propose to make substantial changes for 1972-73. We will include all crop production 
areas in the program, the whole province in the program. We will include two additional crops — 
rapeseed and flax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We’ll provide increased coverage for grain crops and individual coverage adjustment, 
and we plan to institute an aggressive sales policy. 
 
We have provided for the sale of 20,000 contracts in the next crop year, it’s a very, very optimistic target 
but we certainly intend to shoot for it and if we achieve it we shall more than double last years total. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The administration of the expanded crop insurance program will result in expenditure 
totalling $692,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the importance to our province of a thriving rural sector is paramount. In the past few years 
unwise policies have sapped many rural communities of their vitality by making them surplus in the 
economic scheme of things. Almost all of our smaller communities have lost population in the last ten 
years. 
 
This trend must be checked. The family farm is the backbone of rural life and rural service centres are 
essential to the maintenance of these units. We believe that governments have a responsibility to act to 
slow down and, where possible, and if possible to halt depopulation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Many approaches are needed. One approach is to improve the amenities of life in 
these rural communities. The New Democratic Party has consistently advocated the improvement of 
amenities in smaller communities. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
525 

Prior to 1964 the government brought a level of health care to rural Saskatchewan unequal in North 
America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — That Government brought an acceptable level of education to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In 1956 the Government introduced an assistance program for the establishment of a 
system of all-weather grid roads. 
 
In 1960 we introduced the Municipal Water Assistance program under with communities received 
assistance for the installation of sewer and water systems. 
 
In that same year we established the Family Farm Improvement Branch… 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — …providing assistance to farmers to install water systems on their farmsteads. Many, 
many thousands of farmers — perhaps 20 or 25 thousand farmers — have made use of this program. 
 
We extended electricity to farms, towns and villages. We started to bring natural gas to rural 
communities. I am not suggesting that the Government that followed us in 1964 did not follow some of 
these programs, they did. They did not innovate many. The only one I can think of is perhaps the 
unserved areas of SaskTel and in that regard SaskTel will spend more than $2 million to continue the 
program of extending telephone service to previously unserved areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We propose a new program in this Budget to enable towns and villages to apply 
dust-free surfacing to their main streets. 
 
There has been a program of assisting small communities with street graveling. We think the time has 
come to move to dust-free surfaces. It is hoped that through this program our towns and villages will 
become more attractive places in which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — During the current year our Government introduced a Winter Works Program to 
complement the program introduced by the Federal Government. This program serves two purposes — 
to create employment and to provide much needed facilities for local communities 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
526 

I will take a moment to outline the three major elements of the program: 
 
First, the Province has allocated $6.9 million to provide low-cost loans to local government bodies. This 
is in addition to all Federal funds. And as with the Federal program, the Province will forgive 75 per 
cent of the on-site labor costs where the labor is undertaken prior to May 31. 
 
Second, we have initiated a program of outright grants for materials and other costs to communities who 
have borrowed under the Federal loan program or under the Provincial loan program. And these grants 
are equal to the on-site labor costs. $4.5 million has been allocated for this program. Thus, both on-site 
labor costs and an equal amount of material costs are covered by forgivable loans or grants. 
 
Third, we introduced a provincial Local Initiatives Program to provide grants for projects carried which 
perhaps did not involve capital expenditures or did not require loan capital and which didn’t qualify for 
the Federal program. $1.5 million has been provided for this program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that these programs will generate more than $15 million in 
additional capital investment at the local level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The additional employment created through these programs will be significant. 
 
In addition, the improvement of facilities in local communities will be enjoyed by the residents of many 
dozens of smaller communities for years to come. 
 
Let me illustrate with a few of these and the list is scores long. Let me give you a few: 
 

- A school gymnasium at Imperial. 
- A library extension at La Ronge. 
- Hospital renovations in Indian Head. 
- A veterinary clinic in the Rural Municipality of Langenburg. 
- A fire hall in Lemberg. 
- A rink in Buchanan. 
- A community hall in Kincaid. 
- Sidewalk improvements in Moosomin. 
- A museum building in Swift Current. 

 
These represent practical steps to improve the quality of life for many thousand of people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in this Session we will introduce legislation to provide property 
improvement grants. Under this program grants will be made to farmers, householders and small 
business for the purpose of improving their land and 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
527 

property holdings. 
 
Our party promised a New Deal on homes, farms and small businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In this Budget and in legislation which will later be brought into this House, we will 
make a giant step to fulfilling that promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Property owners now bear heavy burdens. They’re the burdens of owning and 
maintaining and improving properties. They are the burdens of taxes for municipal purposes. These 
average approximately 35 mills across the province. There are the burdens of taxes for school purposes. 
These average approximately 43 mills across the province. Homeowners who live in their homes receive 
some assistance from the Provincial Government in the form of homeowner grants. 
 
We propose a massive new grant program available for homes, farms and small businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The grants will be called Property Improvement Grants. 
 
It is the hope of the Government that these grants will be used to maintain and improve the lands and 
buildings of the recipients. Recipients will, however, be free to make their own decisions on what to do 
with the money received. 
 
Under the new program the grant will be paid and it will be the greater of two amounts: 
 
First: The grant which would be received under the present Homeowner Grant. Accordingly, nobody 
will suffer any reduction of his grant because the new program replaces the Homeowner Grant program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — He will get either that amount or an amount equal to 13 mills of the assessment of 
him home, farm or small business up to the maximum assessed values as follows: 
 

Homes  $ 6,000 
Small Businesses  $10,000 
Farms  $15,000 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that these are assessed values and they are of course only a 
small fraction of market values in most cases. We believe that these assessment limits 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
528 

will mean that the vast majority of homes and small businesses and a large majority of farms will 
receive the grant on their full assess value. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — A total of $23.4 million will be paid out under this program in 1972-73… 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — …almost double the amount paid out under the Homeowner Grant program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We believe this new grant will be welcome to all owners of homes, farms and small 
businesses. It will be particularly welcome to people who were not eligible to receive the Homeowner 
Grant. These grants will make a major contribution to assisting property owners in meeting the burdens 
they bear. We are proud to say that we promised to help property owners and we acted to do just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood) will be bringing in detailed 
regulations governing the new grants at a later date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the urgent transportation problems facing Saskatchewan in the 1970s are mostly under 
Federal jurisdiction. 
 
I refer to: 
 

- The inability of the rail system to move enough grain, with sufficient speed and reliability to 
export shipping points - particularly the point of Vancouver. 

 
- The impending rationalization of the grain transport system. 

 
- The continuing reduction of rail and freight services to rural points in this Province. 

 
- The high and inequitable freight rates which penalize our industries and our consumers. 

 
Our Government has taken steps — and will take more — to protect the interests of Saskatchewan 
farmers, businessmen and consumers in these matters. We will continue to oppose changes in the grain 
delivery system where they have merely the effect of reducing the railways’ cost and adding to the 
farmers’ costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We will continue to fight unacceptable reductions in freight services. We will press 
still harder for fair freight rates. 
 
And, above all, we will urge decisive action to modernize 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
529 

and expand the grain delivery system. 
 
Within the province, we look to continued improvements in our market road and highway system. 
 
With the virtual completion of the grid road system, launched by the CCF in 1956, emphasis has been 
shifted to farm access roads. Funds for this purpose will be increased substantially in this Budget by 
very nearly $1 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The previous administration placed heavy emphasis on new highway construction. 
All too often, this emphasis resulted in unplanned crash programs that increased construction costs 
rather than the miles of roads built. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In the year ahead we have made budgetary provision to continue our highway 
construction on an orderly basis at approximately the same level maintained over the past several years. 
We believe that by this means we will get better value, far better value for the taxpayer’s dollar – 
something long overdue in highway construction in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, compared to many other regions in North America, our air, water and 
soil are relatively clean. It doesn’t follow, however, that we have any reason for complacency. 
 
Our good fortune is more the result of delayed exploitation and slow economic growth than the product 
of virtue and foresight. To avoid the mistakes of others and to safeguard our future will require the 
combined efforts of individuals, organizations and governments. 
 
The right of people to live in a healthful and pleasant environment is as fundamental as life itself. To 
protect and assure this right is a primary responsibility of the Provincial Government. 
 
This Budget provides funds for the creation of a Department of the Environment which will have 
over-all responsibility for pollution control and the maintenance of environmental quality. This 
Department will prepare plans to ensure that future development conforms to established long-range 
public goals for the environment. 
 
Education, Mr. Speaker, is a high priority with this Government. It will receive the largest single share 
of total Government expenditures in 1972.73. The total of $166 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The educational needs of our province are changing. There has been a reduction in 
the number of students attending university while at the same time there has continued 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
530 

to be an unsatisfied demand for admission into technical institutes. There is, as well, growing interest in 
community colleges and we propose to establish a new Department of Continuing Education so that the 
whole area of education for these who have left the formal school system may be co-ordinated and 
educational opportunities broadened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — This Budget, Mr. Speaker, provides for an additional 450 student placements in the 
Institutes of Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. In Regina, the new Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences will 
be opened and will accommodate over 400 students in the health sciences. Mr. Speaker, 850 new 
technical institute spaces in one year, a record for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — During the past two years enrolment at the University has declined. The long-range 
forecasts of enrolment were made for approximately 10,000 students at each of the campuses by 1976 – 
a total of 20,000 students. The decrease in provincial population and developments in post-secondary 
education make it necessary to reappraise our university requirements in the years ahead. Current 
forecasts suggest that the total university enrolment is likely to reach only 15,000 by 1976 instead of 
20,000. 
 
This change will have a dramatic impact on the long-range construction program for the University. 
Decreasing enrolment suggests the desirability of even greater rationalization of educational facilities 
particularly between the Regina and Saskatoon campuses. 
 
The grant to the University for capital construction will be $8.5 million in the forthcoming year. This 
grant provides primarily for facilities currently under construction. 
 
The operating grant will be increased to $35.75 million in 72-73, by far the largest such grant in the 
history of the University. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — While the over-all grant increase over last year is 11.7 per cent, it represents, on a per 
student basis, an increase of 13.5 per cent. A very high figure. This grant provides for the 
commencement of a School of Social Work at the Regina Campus. 
 
In the coming year construction will be started on a $520,000 Vocational Centre in the town of Meadow 
Lake. This Centre will have a capacity of 220 students and will provide commercial and secretarial 
programs, as well as training in a number of trades. 
 
You will also be asked to approve a work-training program for the Meadow Lake area at a gross cost of 
$300,000. This program will provide approximately 2,750 students weeks of training. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
531 

Let me turn now to grants for schools. Operating grants to school boards will increase to slightly over 
$90 million in 1972-73. This is an increase of $8.2 million over the grant figure provided in last years 
‘bogus budget’, and it will be a $12 million increase over the grant levels actually approved by the 
previous Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — This increase of $12 million will be sufficient to offset the total increase in school 
board expenditures in 1972. As a result, the amount to be financed from local tax sources will not be any 
greater in 1972 than it was in 1971. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proposing a new formula for determination of school grants for 1972. The 
procedure in the last two years required the Department of Education to review school board budgets 
and approve them at a particular level. This in turn determined the size of the grant to be given to the 
school board. It was the Department of Education therefore, and not the school board, that made 
decisions on questions of the numbers of teachers and the items of equipment to be purchased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that these decisions should be left with the school boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Now our proposed formula is designed to achieve this objective. 
 
The new formula will provide each school board with a grant which will support a basic school program 
at an average mill rate level. 
 
If the school program is more costly than the provincial basic program, the ratepayers will be required to 
finance the program through higher mill rates. 
 
If, however, a school board chooses to have a program which is less costly than the provincial basic 
program, savings may be passed on to the ratepayers in the form of lower mill rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — This will mean that each school board will play a major part in determining the 
quality of the school program in its area and this is as it should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In the coming year, non-repayable bursaries will be available in amounts ranging 
from $50 to $500 to students qualifying for loans under the Saskatchewan and Canada Student Loans 
programs. This assistance will be available not only to university students and students enrolled in 
two-year technology programs at the Institutes, but also to students enrolled in pre-employment 
programs at various training centre throughout the province. This Legislature will be asked to approve 
$900,000 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
532 

for this program this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — This program will provide assistance to approximately 2,800 students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, Grade Twelve students will be pleased to know that the Government 
will remove a distasteful tax which they were formerly required to pay and which was doubled under the 
previous administration. Examination fees for departmental examinations will be totally removed in 
1972 thereby saving students $100,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In the coming year training allowances for adults enrolled in a provincially sponsored 
training programs will be increased by an average of more than $35 per month. 
 
The former CCF Government of this Province pioneered the development of public hospital and medical 
care programs in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The New Democratic Party intends to continue that pioneering tradition. The right of 
every citizen to health care is a right which we strongly endorse. We have indicated this in our actions 
on deterrent fees and on medical and hospital premiums for senior citizens. 
 
In this Budget $93.1 million is provided to continue improvement of our health services. This is an 
increase of 20 per cent over 1971-72. 
 
We have allocated $16.9 million for psychiatric services. This will allow increases in the staffs at the 
training schools at Moose Jaw and Prince Albert where the staff levels have been kept at a level which 
was quite unfair both to patients and staff alike. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — It also provides for the inauguration of a Certified Home Program for emotionally 
disturbed children. Approximately 20 children will benefit from this new program. 
 
The Alcoholism Commission will open a new In-patient Treatment Centre in St. Paul’s Hospital in the 
coming year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The former administration provided the Commission with space rented in the St. 
Paul’s Hospital at a cost of 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
533 

$4,000 a month and did not provide them with any money for the program and the space stood empty. 
 
The budget for the Alcoholism Commission will not only provide these funds, but will provide an 
additional $120,000 for a new program to assist the Native Alcohol Council with its work in the 
treatment of alcoholism among native citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in this Budget we have taken major steps to humanize welfare services. 
We believe that welfare and social security do not stop with financial assistance. 
 
The Regional Services Branch of the Department of Welfare administers the programs under the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. And all of us know that there have been many, many more welfare 
recipients in the last several years. The number of clients since 1968 has increased by 35 per cent, but 
the previous administration restricted staff increases to four per cent. 
 
It’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, that a four per cent increase in staff couldn’t adequately provide services to 
35 per cent more recipients. And as a result it became a process of doling out money without any 
counselling and without any individual consideration. This is an example of the disregard of the 
previous Government for the people of this Province who were suffering hardships and need assistance 
and need counselling, need something else than being berated by the Members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Our Government is increasing the staff of the Regional Services Branch by 62 
permanent positions. This amounts to 24 new positions and 38 positions which have been moved from a 
temporary to a permanent status. The previous administration had a little practice of maintaining people 
on temporary status, even though they were full-time employees some of them full-time as much as up 
to six years of service. This practice deprived the employee of security of tenure, of participation in the 
Government’s pension plan and of other benefits they had a right to expect as full-time employees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We have provided in the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan budget for substantial 
increases in food allowances. In some cases these increases will be up to 15 per cent. 
 
The welfare of children who are victims of social problems is a concern of this Government. We, 
therefore are budgeting for a special foster home program for children who suffer from the emotional 
problems. When it appears to be in the best interest of the children they will be placed in foster homes 
rather than in institutions. 
 
We are increasing the regular foster home payments to foster parents by 10 per cent. These rates have 
not been increased since 1969. 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
534 

This Budget also includes several new or increased provisions in the welfare area. 
 
$705,000 is provided for grants to assist in the construction of special care homes, an increase of 
$180,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — $84,000 is provided for a new work activity project in Regina to assist disadvantage 
persons in the development of basic life skills. 
 
$30,000 is provided for a new work-training program in Saskatoon to complement the rehabilitation 
programs in the Provincial Correctional Institutes. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, are some of the measures which this Government is taking to assist the less 
fortunate in our society. 
 
Let me turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the revenue side of the Budget. In estimating revenues for the next 
fiscal year, we have assumed a modest improvement in the economic activity. If there is a significant 
improvement the estimates before you today may prove to be conservative. 
 
Based on a continued improvement in retail sales, we anticipate that revenues from the Education and 
Health Tax would increased to $73.3 million in the coming year. This will be true if no changes are 
made in the tax base. 
 
But, Member we propose to make a change in the tax base. Effective April 1 we will eliminate the tax 
on meals of $2.50 or less. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — $2.50 or less. The elimination of the so-called ‘hot-dog tax’ will reduce receipts from 
the E & H tax by $750,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Gasoline taxes are expected to yield $55 million, individual Income Tax is expect to 
yield $70.8 million, Corporation Taxes $15.3 million. 
 
Due to changes in the Federal Income Tax and Federal Succession Duties, you will be asked to approve 
a Provincial Gift Tax and Succession Duty Act at this Session. 
 
Prior to January 1 of this year three provinces — Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia — levied their 
own provincial succession duties. By agreement with the Federal Government the remaining seven 
provinces did not levy a succession duty, but received 75 per cent of the Federal Succession Duties, 
estates taxes as they are called. 
 
On January 1, 1972 this arrangement was ended by the Federal Government. The Federal Government 
will vacate the entire estates tax field in favor of the provinces. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
535 

We should have preferred if the Federal Government would stay in the field, because this would ensure 
uniform legislation across Canada and provide the most effective means of levying a tax on wealth. 
Furthermore, we have maintained that a tax on wealth should be a national tax to be distributed amount 
all provinces. While wealth may rest in one province, its accumulation is likely to be the result of 
national economic activity and national growth. This has been the position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan for 25 years, regardless of what Government was in power. 
 
The Federal Minister of Finance acknowledged this point but would not reconsider his Government’s 
position. He did, however, offer to collect succession duties for the provinces which previously shared 
the Federal Tax if a uniform tax base could be developed. And on December 29 the six co-operating 
provinces, namely Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan issued a communiqué outlining the base, exemptions and rates of gift tax and succession 
duties. Discussions are continuing with these co-operating provinces and with the three other provinces 
which have succession duties, namely British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec to see if we can get 
something that will be more or less Canada wide. We will have nine provinces in the field as soon as the 
legislation is passed at these sessions. 
 
The taxes will, in all cases, be effective on January 1, 1972. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a tax on wealth, wealth represented by large estates, is in my judgement a fair tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The level of exemption was designed to allow the passing of medium-sized farms and 
businesses from father to son without the payment of any tax and fairly substantial estates with the 
payment of only modest tax. Generally the levels of tax proposed for Saskatchewan on transfers from 
father to son, for example, will be lower than almost any other province. 
 
Our Government believes that the vast resources of this Province belong to the people. When these 
resources are development, we believe that the owners of these resources should share in the fruits of 
production. In order to do this to a greater extent our Government re-introduced the net royalty type of 
oil and gas mineral land leasing. This has already meant that more companies are bidding and giving an 
intention that they are bidding. It will serve to encourage smaller operating companies to big for and 
acquire Crown mineral lands by paying a smaller bonus payment and a higher royalty rate. 
 
To increase resource revenues still further in the coming fiscal year we will revise tax and royalty rates 
to reflect a more equitable sharing of the profits for mineral production. The revised rates will yield an 
additional $6 million in revenues to this Province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We anticipate that revenues from minerals and 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
536 

mineral development in the year ahead will be approximately $39 million. 
 
In the forthcoming year, we expect our receipts from equalization payments under the 
Federal-Provincial arrangements to increase to $119 million. This increase is due to two factors. The 
first is changes which have been in the formula for 1972-73 as a result of vigorous representations made 
at Federal-Provincial conferences. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — This, Mr. Speaker, will mean an extra $10 million for Saskatchewan next year and 
we believe in almost every succeeding year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The second factor is an upward adjustment payment on account of underpayment in 
the previous years. Total receipts from other governments are expected to increase to close to $156 
million. Receipts from government enterprises will be to the order of $49 million. We are estimating 
total revenues to be $154 million. Our expenditure proposals will be $513.2 million, leaving us with a 
budgetary surplus of approximately $800,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, that is our Budget! 
 
In it we accomplish a great many of the objectives set out in our four-year program. The doomsayers 
representing the party opposite, Mr. Speaker, have said that our promises would either mean the road to 
bankruptcy or pie in the sky. They said our promises were either the road to bankruptcy or pie in the sky 
and they have used each term and both. These are neither, Mr. Speaker. In impressive numbers they are 
hard realities in New Democratic Saskatchewan. 
 
In many cases what we are now delivering are things which a few months ago the Opposition Party 
opposed vehemently on the grounds that to do them in four short years would bankrupt the province. 
They are not attempting to belabour us for not having done them in eight months. This tells us either that 
the party opposite is totally irresponsible and opportunistic in financial matters or that the financial 
fortunes of the Province have shown remarkable progress in eight months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — What can we say of a party which assured us only months ago for example, nine 
months ago, that our four-year health program would bring on bankruptcy, and now by formal resolution 
introduced into this Legislature, is recommending that this very program be brought in, not in a 
four-year program, but immediately? 
 
What can we say, Mr. Speaker, that the voters have not 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
537 

already said and indeed that some members of their own party are not already saying? Who could put 
any reliance on people who exhibit that measure of cynicism about public affairs. I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that until the Opposition alters its present stance of cynicism and opportunism and puts forward 
— for good or ill — its programs and its alternatives, this Legislature will not be able to discharge its 
full responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House will proceed to introduce our program. We 
are impressed neither by the Opposition’s former cries of “Stop, stop!” nor their new cries of “Hurry, 
hurry!” At the end of the Session and based upon this Budget we will be proud to report to the people of 
Saskatchewan on our election program. 
 
Let me give some examples of the progress we shall be able to report: Deterrent fees — abolished! 
Health premiums for people 65 years and over — abolished! Chiropractic care — under negotiation! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — For the sick and senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, we promised and we delivered. 
Increased minimum wages — done! Bill 2 — repealed! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Overhaul Workmen’s Compensation — partly done! Massive program to create jobs 
— in progress! This Budget does much more. 
 
For working people, Mr. Speaker, we promised and we delivered. Upgrade the quality of education — 
done, with more to come. Arbitrary pupil-teacher ratios — abolished! Bursary program — established! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — For our students and young people we promised and we delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Family farm protection — under way with many new programs! Land Bank 
Commission — established! Small business — promised program launched! Property tax — huge 
additional payments to homes, farms, and small businesses! For our farmers and small businessmen, Mr. 
Speaker, we promised and we delivered! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, resource give-aways — stopped! Department of the Environment — 
established! Resource revenues — a 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
538 

large increase in this budget. Mr. Speaker, we promised to protect and develop Saskatchewan resources 
for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, we promised and we delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in the judgment of any fair-minded person, this is an impressive record 
of performance, second to none in the history of this Province 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move, seconded by the Hon. 
Mr. Romanow, that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, it is traditional to receive copies of the 
Budget Address and the Estimates before the Budget Speech is given, as I under it, and I think the 
Premier, the Hon. Provincial Treasurer, for giving me a copy both of the budget Speech and the 
Estimates. I rather wish tradition had progressed to the point where all Members of the Opposition could 
have received copies prior to this and I regret the history in that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Now I am not as fluent as the Hon. Provincial Treasurer, because I of course have not 
had an opportunity to study this until we came in the House today. My remarks are not pre-written in the 
fashion that his were, so I shall not be quite so fluent but I shall be able to avoid, I hope, one or two 
errors that do creep in when the words that are printed become obsolete before they are delivered. There 
are one or two cases where that seems to be the case. 
 
The one other think that I should like to suggest is, and this without any uncomplimentary connotation 
whatsoever, is that this building be given more air conditioning particularly on days where we are to 
receive as long a speech as we have today with as many people in the House. I am not in any way 
suggesting that the air generated was warmer than on other days — I see nothing in the Budget to 
provide for air conditioning. 
 
I congratulate the Premier on his return to the post as Provincial Treasurer and I congratulate him on his 
very find presentation today. It is traditional to say something nasty about the Provincial treasurer. I 
discovered this upon looking over the Provincial Treasurer’s remarks and responses in the past 20 years 
and I find that they usually say something like ‘after the next election you will be over on this side of the 
House’ or that ‘the way this Province is going it may not be in existence long enough to have another 
election’. I won’t say that type of thing because I don’t believe in making that kind of remark. 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
539 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — I might also say that it is traditional to wear something unusual or exceptional at this 
time. Everybody who is my age and older remembers the Hon. C.M. Fines wore his cornucopia tie. He 
started by wearing it when it was in style, I recognize that it went out of style, but he kept wearing it 
long enough that it got back into style again. He is still wearing it in California. I understand he has now 
saved up enough money that he can buy another tie. 
 
The Hon. Dave Steuart wore a thrifty Scottish tie presented to him by Ian McDougall. I thought of 
wearing my other suit today but my wife want to mend it. I decided to go with the good one. It would, I 
think, be appropriate for me to have worn this suit with my pockets inside out after looking at the 
Budget. 
 
I cannot avoid commenting on the very pretty carnations that the Members across the way are wearing. 
It is not without significance that we have in front of us a budget that has the smallest surplus I have 
seen in years, it has less than one-fifth of one per cent of potential surplus, which is a pretty small 
surplus when you are talking about a budget of more than a half billion dollars. It is only appropriate to 
note that the colour of the carnations is red. 
 
What I intend to do, Mr. Speaker, in the debate today and more particularly on Monday, is to set forth 
the area of responsibility and the priorities which I intend to set in dealing with the finance matters as I 
see them. I shall deal with this substantially on Monday but today I should like to suggest how much I 
do appreciate the honour conferred upon me by my colleagues on this side of the House in appointing 
me to the office of financial critic. I shall do my best to discharge this responsibility to them, to the 
House and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — I will say that we intend to look at both the Throne Speech and the Budget because 
the Throne Speech tells what the Government intends to do and the Budget what they plan to do about it, 
and how they intend to accomplish what they set out to do. I would remind us all that a budget is a plan, 
it reflects the optimism of the man who prepares it, but it is a pretty illusive thing. It is easy to balance 
because all you do is fill in the blanks and you find that you can achieve the necessary balance. With a 
lot of forecasts these days a lot of things do not come the way you expect them or predict them. I was 
observing on the financial page the other day a statement that all wheat sales were dead, that it appeared 
that nobody wanted to have Canadian wheat, demand was drying up. Two days later the largest wheat 
sale of the year was announced by Otto Lang. That’s how forecasts tend to be out of date in rather a 
hurry. 
 
I want to point out four quick little booklets that relate to the Budget and how we shall deal with it. Of 
course we have the Budget Address, then we have the Budget Estimates. The address is what the Hon. 
Provincial Treasurer just gave and of course out of the address we get such words as ‘giant step’, 
‘progress’, words of this type. It is in the Estimates that the dollars and cents come in, and the financial 
statements coming in a year from now tell how we made out. 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
540 

I want to spend one or two minutes only on the last complete year of the Liberal Government. There are 
one or two people who believe that I haven’t totally been a strong supporter of that Liberal Government 
but the longer I go, the stronger I get. In 1971 I observe that in a year where every government in 
Canada — that is, all provincial governments in Canada — lost over $600 million, Saskatchewan 
produced a plus of $10 million, a surplus of $10 million during the time everyone else was losing $600 
million. 
 
I look at the Budget on page 8 as I have it here. I am interested to discover that despite a ‘phoney 
budget’ there was a surplus $1.4 million produced in the 1970-71 fiscal year. 
 
I look at page 34 and I discover that of the $40 million increases in the money received from the Federal 
Government this year some of that related to last year’s budget and ought properly to have been 
reflected in a larger fiscal profit for the Liberal year, the last one in office. I cannot help but note as I go 
by that of all the increased the largest part comes from increases in Federal money contributed to the 
province, $40 million more from the Federal Government to the Provincial Government…$50 million, I 
am sorry, $50 million more from the Federal Government to the Provincial Government, and that 
represents almost all the increased spending over last year’s budget. This is in fact a ‘poor cousin’ 
budget in which we in Saskatchewan appear to have been paid for our increases by continuing and 
increasing grants from the Federal Government. 
 
I only have a few more remarks to make today. I would remind all of us that the Budget address and the 
Estimates are presented with great pomp and ceremony. When we get the financial statements however, 
I believe that we shall probably get a messenger from the office of the Provincial Treasurer around 4:00 
o’clock in the morning, sneaking them under our door, because the revenues show precisely what came 
of the budget forecast a year prior. I cannot help but note at this moment that our highway program 
under the Liberal Government produced some of the very best roads in Canada, all over the province, in 
what is always known as a province with lots of miles of road for a very few people. In fact, I am told 
that Saskatchewan has more miles of road than the provinces of Manitoba, Alberta and British Columbia 
combined. We have today some of the finest roads in the country. I observe that the Provincial Treasurer 
does not see fit to improve upon the Budget in any way for road building, construction or maintenance 
except a small amount in the maintenance area. 
 
Let me just deal with one or two items. I wanted to deal with the school matter as it was shown in the 
Speech on page 28. Mr. Speaker, here is what the Provincial Treasurer said: 
 

The procedure in the last two years required the Department of Education to review school board 
budgets and approve them at a particular level. 
 

We have now changed the name, I understand. There is not a budgetary review, but a budgetary 
analysis. This may be something different but I suspect it is a change in name and not a change in what 
really occurs. 
 
And then he says it was the Department of Education and not the school boards which made decisions 
on questions such as the 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
541 

number of teachers and items of equipment to be purchased. The only problem that this poses with me is 
this: does the school board have any real power or not? I am wondering if the Department of Education 
or the local school board decided on the hiring or firing of a schoolteacher in the area of Moosomin, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One more thing I should like to mention, Mr. Speaker, is that the Hon. Provincial Treasurer said this: 
 

We believe these decisions should be left to local school boards. The proposed formula is designed 
to achieve that objective. 

 
I just have in front of me a photocopy of a commentary in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix dated March 8, 
1972. The headline is “Campus In Turmoil Over Budget Cutbacks.” 
 

The University Budget Advisory Committee has been meeting steadily since last Thursday, 
deciding how to cut costs to save some jobs threatened by a budget squeeze facing the university. 

 
It goes on to say that over 175 teachers are threatened. Estimates at the present time are that 20 to 40 
non-tenured faculty members will have to go, but they have given notices at the present time to over 100 
non-tenured teachers on the faculty because the University did not get the money it expected from the 
Provincial Government. 
 
What has happened is that the Provincial Treasurer has decided, and the Government of Saskatchewan 
has decided, that these problems are not going to be resolved. They believe that these decisions should 
be left to the local school boards. They will have their own problems to solve. They will get some 
money, not what they expect, and they will have to resolve their difficulties. 
 
Obviously the unemployment program has not improved. We went from the student temporary 
employment province called ‘STEP’ to the provincial employed program called ‘PEP’. I assure you it 
was not a step up, it was a step down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — It did not improve in anyway. The difficulty is this, Mr. Speaker, the STEP program 
provided $1.5 million for temporary employment in the summer. The PEP program provides for $1.5 
million for temporary employment in the summer. Each of them provided for payment of up to 50 per 
cent of the students or other person’s employment to a maximum of $150 per person. So far as I can see 
there is no real difference between the STEP program and the PEP program, the dollars allocated are the 
same, the amount payable to each individual is the same, but the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) has 
told us that it is a bigger and better program. I wonder how you can get bigger and better without getting 
bigger and better. I would appreciate, if some day, the Minister would tell me that. 
 
The one difficulty, of course, in our home is that I say that I am not getting bigger and better despite the 
fact that I am putting on weight. I thought that if the Minister of 



 
March 10, 1972 
 

 
542 

Labour could tell me how you could get bigger and better without putting on weight, I should be able to 
use the argument in reverse at home. 
 
In resource development it is quite obvious that they intend, very severely, to tap and alter the structure 
of development. They have said, and it is rather interesting, that they are going to revise the rates to 
make them more equitable i.e., pay more tax. That reminds me of a comment made by the Government 
some time ago when they announced the Succession Duty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they announced the Succession Duty they said as follows: 
 

Succession Duty to help small businessmen and farmers. 
 
Now it takes a lot of courage to suggest that you are going to help somebody by imposing a tax on them. 
I can see how we are going to improve everybody by making them equitably pay more money. I am sure 
they will appreciate this alteration in equity. 
 
The one thing that the Minister of the Indian & Métis Department (Mr. Bowerman) did when he talked 
about mineral resources – and that is not unusual in this House because yesterday we had the Minister of 
agricultural (Mr. Messer) talking in this House about pulp mills when he introduced the Margarine Bill – 
what he was talking about was the amount of production of our potash. Our position is very clear, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Potash, once you have mined it and once you have sold it, is gone forever. It cannot be brought back. 
The products of our forests are a repeating and regenerating resource. It has been said by Members 
across the way that we are raping our forests. As it has been said by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Steuart), he has never raped a tree yet. But I will say this, that if it did happen, it could regenerate itself. 
Its virginity could be restored. But such is not the case with mines. 
 
This Government has, as I see it in the Budget, made it clear that they do not intend to get more money 
out of renewable resources, but they intend to get their money our of resources which cannot be 
renewed, and once sold are sold and gone forever. That, and the Federal Government. 
 
Let me close by a few remarks on taxation. This is where the Speech is already out of date. Yes, in 
December the announcement was made. On the 29th of December an announcement was made that all 
these provinces were going to put together what amounted to a coincidental type of bill and a 
co-operative type of bill. 
 
Yesterday I read in the Globe and Mail a tremendous alteration in the taxation structure of the four 
Atlantic provinces and I shall read just briefly: 
 

The four Atlantic provinces have agreed to increase the exemption on Succession Duties paid by 
spouses to $500,000. 

 
That is, the provinces of Newfoundland, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island. These 
found provinces have now backed out of the deal. This was announced yesterday and I 



 
March 10, 1972 

 

 
543 

suspect that it will make a substantial change in the format and the relationship with the Federal 
Government because, as I understand it, the Federal Government would collect the taxes for the 
provinces if enough provinces want into a similar scheme. Four of them are out! 
 
I call on the Provincial Government to make a change in their structure, because basically Estate and 
Succession Duties are taxes on women and children. I don’t much care, I suppose after I have gone how 
much money goes to the Federal Government — but my wife cares. At the moment none will go to the 
Federal Government. The wife and children will then care how much goes to the Provincial 
Government. It is basically a tax on women and children. 
 
One of the big problems is the problem of passage of farmlands from fathers to sons. Let’s suppose that 
you have a father with two, three or four sons. A $150,000 exemption to them is meaningless. I call 
upon this Government to increase its exemptions, not to leave them at the $150,000 level that they are 
now, not to leave them at the $200,000 level promised in their election platform, but to go to a half a 
million dollars such as is the case in the four Atlantic Provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Well, it says $500,000 in this paper. 
 
Now the one thing that I noticed in the Budget is that the Premier criticized the last government for not 
spending money. I find it very difficult to hear a man criticize a government for not spending money 
when, in fact, they balanced the Budget and particularly when the Budget was made in the Legislature 
for the year commencing April 1st of last year, and which isn’t over yet, with less than three weeks to 
go. They criticized the former Government for not spending all sorts of money provided for in the 
Budget, which they were authorized to spend. Well, of course, they should spend it because they became 
the Government. 
 
It does seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that what has happened in this Budget is that the Premier and the 
Government have demonstrated that they do not intend to take an active part in the real development of 
our province. They do not intend to provide the hum of business activity, the hum of industry, that will 
provide jobs. They are prepared to spend, but they are not prepared to go about the things that will bring 
real business into the province without destroying non-renewal natural resources. As I have said, $50 
million increased dollars from the Federal Government represents almost the entire increase in the 
Budget. I therefore label this a ‘poor cousin’ Budget, and with that, suggest to you that I will continue 
this on Monday and beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:40 o’clock p.m. 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	STATEMENT
	GRAIN SALES FORGONE BECAUSE OF LACK OF STOCKS IN VANCOUVER TERMINAL

	QUESTIONS
	WHEN WILL GOVERNMENT MEET WITH MR. CHILD OF BURNS COMPANY?

	INTRODUCTION
	QUESTIONS
	Mr. J.C. McIsaac: — In view of the recent comments that he has been making about the diversification and the expansion of the livestock industry in the province, I want to ask the Minister if he took advantage of the opportunity on February 18 when he...
	MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	BUDGET DEBATE

