
























































Hansard: May 01, 1972


2103 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

47th Day 
 

Monday, May 1, 1972 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 
 QUESTIONS 
 
 AMENDMENTS TO THE LIQUOR ACT 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone):— Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Premier. 
 
I notice Mr. Premier that we have had introduced in the House amendments to The Liquor Act, whereby it 
permits Government liquor stores to stay open for longer hours, but there has been no Bill introduced which 
is related to the public needs of the community which expands hours or carries out the recommendations of 
the Alcohol Committee. Do you intend to introduce this Bill in this Session. 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I am happy to advise the House that that Bill is at the 
printers and I had hoped that it would be back by now. We are looking forward to it tomorrow, but we will 
see. Our results with the printers have not been what we would like and many of the Bills, I think, are going 
to have to be ITEK-ed in the next few days. 
 
The reason why I indicated that the Liquor Bill would be sent to the Non-controversial Bills Committee is 
that it includes a principle which will be in the Liquor Licensing Act which I thought would be fully debated 
and I thought that once we had debated The Liquor Licensing Act, the Liquor Bill would follow as tail with 
hide. It is our intention, very definitely, to bring a Bill incorporating, I think, a good number of the 
recommendations of the Liquor Committee. 
 
 ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
 EXPANSION OF EXPLORATION PERMITS ON OIL SHALE AREA 
 
HON. K. THORSON (Minister of Minerals Resources):— Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 
should like to inform the House of the latest expansion of exploration permits in the oil shale area north of 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Members will remember that about ten days ago I announced that Shell Canada Limited had taken under 
permit 1.7 million acres. Since then four other companies have applied for permits in the area. They are 
Hudson Bay Oil and Gas Company Limited Hewitt Oil (Alberta) Limited, Surf Exploration Limited, 
Roughbark Petroleums Limited. Shell Canada has expanded the number of acres it has under permit. So now 
the total number of acres under permit in that northwest section of Saskatchewan is 2.8 million instead of the 
former 1.7 million. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2104 

 ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
 SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that Bill No. 
109 - An Act relating to the Payment of Succession Duty be now read a second time. 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park):— Mr. Speaker, I thought perhaps we needed a moment of 
sweet reasonableness this morning so I thought I would speak briefly to this Bill. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, very frankly we regard as a threat to the farm and business community, to farm and 
business partnerships but we regard it as something entirely different from that in addition. The justification 
given by the Premier for the Act that it will effect only a few people. He says, "Only a few people in 
Saskatchewan will be hurt, less than 5 per cent and perhaps less than 2 per cent." 
 
If that were true and accurate we should not have a great deal to say about the Bill, although frankly, we are 
not sure that anybody can justify any action on the ground of the amount of people that will be hurt by saying 
that there won’t be many people hurt and therefore it is a good Bill. 
 
Frankly, the number of people that will be hurt will go far beyond those who pay the tax. The simplest and 
best example is the Smith-Roles example in Saskatoon. We aren’t going to get any money out of Mr. Roles 
in Saskatoon at all. He isn’t going to stay here so the loss is to the Treasury, whatever it is, will definitely be 
a loss. But what we will lose are the jobs produced by that business and the people of Saskatchewan who are 
going to be hurt are going to be the ordinary working people of Saskatchewan. The Succession Duty tax 
hurts people far beyond the numbers who actually pay tax. 
 
If the only person hurt was the person who paid a dollar in tax, the law would not be an insidious law at all, 
but the insidious feature of it is that it hurts many people who never will be forced to pay a dollar’s worth of 
tax. 
 
The Premier has said that this is not double taxation. I disagree with that. If you have a capital gain of $100 
you will pay a tax on it. Presumably your tax will be $12.50. Then you will pay a succession duty on the 
other $87.50 of profit. And the only part that is not taxed double is that part which is the first tax. The only 
thing that isn’t subject to double taxation is the tax itself but every other part of what we are talking about is 
subject to double taxation. I totally disagree with the Premier when he says there is no double taxation 
because, in fact, there is double taxation. 
 
There is a particular case where there is an unfairness that applies to husbands and wives. Where a husband 
and wife have worked together and have placed all their property in the hands of the husband instead of in 
both names, they find that under these Acts they are going to receive particular punishment for having done 
it this way. If a husband and wife work together to earn $300,000 and if, by chance, they placed it all in his 
name, this estate, upon the husband’s death, would bear a 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2105 

substantial tax. If during their lifetime they had been a little more careful in the handling of their affairs and 
placed it equally in the hands of the wife and in the hands of the husband that estate would bear no tax 
whatsoever. Very little reasonable planning of the estate would eliminate all tax and yet would give to the 
husband and the wife the total benefit of the entire estate during their lifetime and to the survivor on death. 
Any tax planner with any experience at all would see to it that neither party paid any tax, and yet they had the 
entire benefit of the entire $300,000 estate during the lifetime of both of them and during the lifetime of the 
survivor, and then as it is passed to the children it would do so tax free. 
 
On the other hand, as I say if in fact the parties had accidentally placed it in the hands of the husband - a not 
uncommon practice - a substantial amount would be paid in tax for the same situation except that they had 
made a slight change in the way they handled the title. Yet, the entire property may well be the product of 
their joint effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I oppose the Bill on three grounds. First: it is a threat not just to the people who pay the tax. 
That is the very smallest part of the threat. The threat is to the working man and woman in Saskatchewan 
who do not ever have to pay any part of the tax. Secondly, it is double taxation. There is no question about it. 
Thirdly, it will create an artificial unfairness which the Bill ought not to produce but which in fact it does. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.W. CODY (Watrous):— Mr. Speaker, it is always interesting to listen to the Member for Albert 
Park (Mr. MacLeod). I don’t think that it is even really worth starting to criticize the things that he has said 
this morning because it really didn’t make that much sense to me. 
 
The other day, however, he said that we could hold this Bill off for a year so that people could rearrange their 
affairs. The other day one of the other gentlemen said we should have a plebiscite on the Land Bank and 
another one said The Teachers’ Salary Agreements Act should have a six months hoist. I don’t know how 
many pieces of legislation that the Opposition here would like to see us hold off. 
 
MR. STEUART:— Most of it. 
 
MR. CODY:— But I’ll tell you that we have to do some of these things because the people of the Province 
of Saskatchewan want them and we are prepared to do what the people of this Province ask us to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise this morning in support of this legislation. I represent a constituency of fair-minded 
people, people that are willing to stand up and be counted in the face of Liberal criticism of an Act which 
will merely ask the wealthy people to share with others less fortunate than themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for any society which believes in fair taxation, succession duties are an integral part of its tax 
system. By taxing wealth which is passed from generation to generation 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2106 

we are maintaining our commitment to social equality. Succession duties are essential if we wish to check 
the unlimited concentration of wealth in the hands of only a small minority of our future generations. 
 
If we fail to tax great concentrations of wealth we can be guaranteed that future generations will not exercise 
equality of opportunity. To be against succession duties is to be against equality of opportunity. We cannot 
have one without the other. To be against succession duties, in my mind, is to say that you are against the 
small farmers. It is to say that you are against small businessmen and it is to say that you are against the poor 
in general. To be against succession duties will be to say that you want wealthy people to become even 
wealthier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the basic difference between the New Democratic Party and the Liberals. We, in the 
New Democratic Party, believe that all people should enjoy equal opportunity. We believe in helping small 
farmers. We believe in helping small businessmen and the poor in general. The Liberals are different. They 
believe that the rich should get richer and if you are poor you should be stamped on and become even poorer. 
 
In Canada and in other countries wealth is created by a society as a whole, not just by a chosen few. No one 
person can accumulate wealth without receiving assistance from other members of society. The businessman 
requires a great variety of services to be provided if he is to make a profit. He cannot do this alone. 
Considering himself a self-made man, the wealthy man likes to pretend that his labor alone produced this 
wealth and produced his good fortune. They are only telling a part of the truth, Mr. Speaker, because we are 
dependent on each other in order to make an income, it follows that the creation of wealth is not an 
individual matter but one that concerns us all. Similarly the passing of wealth from one generation to the 
next is not solely a private decision but one that affects us all. 
 
We are committed, on this side of the House, to providing opportunities for everyone. We have every right to 
reduce disparities of wealth in future generations by enacting gift tax and succession duty legislation. 
 
Contrary to the grumblings of big business and their defendants across the way, a succession duty does not 
constitute double taxation like the Hon. Member for Albert Park mentioned. 
 
The proposed legislation does not tax the estate as such. It taxes the beneficiaries. Consequently the wealth 
involved is unearned wealth to the beneficiaries. 
 
Society has every right to distribute part of this unearned wealth. It has every right to have some of the 
unearned wealth and income passed on to less fortunate citizens who need a helping hand. What the critics 
of the succession duties conveniently forget is that without them we would have to raise taxes in other areas. 
I think that was mentioned the other day from the Opposition. Are they in favor of more regressive taxation? 
Do they think that the poor should be taxed at the same rate as the rich? They don’t say so, but logically this 
is the only conclusion that one can come to. The profits of doom have argued that succession duties will rob 
the hard-working entrepreneur and destroy the family farm, just like the Member for Albert Park just said. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2107 

Let’s look at the facts. The Federal Government had an estate tax as early as 1941 under the leadership of 
that radical socialist, William Lyon Mackenzie King. Ontario has had succession duties going back to 1892. 
How heavy was that taxation? The effective tax rate on the highest estate under the Federal Government, 
under the Federal legislation, was a mere 18 per cent. Is a tax this low robbing the rich? In Saskatchewan it is 
estimated as the Premier outlined the other day, that about 3 per cent out of all the estates will be taxed under 
this new proposed legislation. A tax this mild can hardly be considered punitive. What about the family 
farm? It is estimated that the capital investment in the average Saskatchewan farm in 1970 totalled $63,100. 
This does not even include deductions for farm debts. 
 
Since the exemption to a prime beneficiary with a spouse under the proposed legislation will be $200,000, 
clearly the average farm will not be affected by succession duties. The Department of Agriculture estimates 
that less than 10 per cent of Saskatchewan farms have a total investment value of $150,000. Obviously 
anyone who suggest that a family farm will be destroyed by succession duties is not interested in the truth. I 
am afraid that we are going to have to say that about the Member for Albert Park this morning. 
 
What do tax experts say on this question? At the 23rd annual Canadian Tax Foundation Conference last 
November in Vancouver, one expert noted that it is difficult to think of a less efficient way of encouraging 
savings and risk taking investment than eliminating the estate tax. 
 
The elimination of the estate taxes is unlikely to have any significant positive impact on savings. Another 
noted that a tax system could not be properly based on ability to pay unless it includes a wealth tax. Finally a 
third noted that the so-called adverse economic effect of death duties were such weak arguments that they 
deserve little consideration. Three members in the experts’ field of taxation, that is what they said. 
 
I can’t think why the Opposition Members would get up and have something to say, obviously they are not 
experts in this field. The third member also noted that estate and gift taxes are among the best physical 
instruments ever designed. 
 
I think it is clear by now that there is no legitimate rationale for eliminating succession duties. If we are to 
maintain our commitment toward greater social equality we must continue to tax this form of unearned 
wealth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a succession duty does not constitute double taxation; it does not rob the hard working 
entrepreneur; it does not destroy the family farm and it is for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I think it is 
simply fair taxation based on equality and based on the ability to pay and I support the Bill wholeheartedly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, in rising to oppose this particular tax 
and this Bill, there are many questions that I think the Government should give serious consideration to 
when they come into 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2108 

considering this Bill in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
For example, is a cash estate and an investment estate, for example, one with shares in an active 
Saskatchewan corporation, to be treated the same. A cash estate can meet the payments but how does an 
investment estate meet them? Well obviously by liquidating the company through a sale or to strip the 
company so its operations could be jeopardized. I think that more serious consideration should be given to 
this aspect of this Bill. 
 
Selling the company to an outsider would clear the estate. Is it the intention to move control of bigger 
business enterprises, enterprises say over $150,000 or $200,000 into the hands of multi-national 
corporations. For example, in the hotel field, an international chain could purchase a hotel in Saskatchewan 
with the major shareholders of the international chain living in the United States. If, for example, the head of 
the corporation died, the hotel in Saskatchewan would not be liable for estate tax in Saskatchewan. Yet if a 
Saskatchewan citizen owned a hotel his estate would be taxed and taxed heavily. Is it better to be an outsider 
owning property in Saskatchewan than a Saskatchewan resident. This appears to be the philosophy behind, 
or at least part of the philosophy, behind this Bill. The unfortunate result of this tax could be, of course, to 
drive the control of more of our medium and large size businesses that are now owned by Saskatchewan 
people into other hands. 
 
Another question will be, people in business must ask themselves who come under this taxation, how think 
do you spread your capital. Again it could mean that only multi-national corporations can own our bigger 
businesses. I can understand taxing the cash part of an estate. Should the shares of a Saskatchewan company 
be taxed as long as the beneficiaries living in our province continue to hold them? This, in fact, would keep 
the capital in the hands of Saskatchewan residents. Shouldn’t capital invested in Saskatchewan get 
preferential treatment regardless of who is the beneficiary. I say it should. I think we have to ask ourselves 
will this tax force Saskatchewan residents to liquidate their holdings. I hope this isn’t the intent. The idea I 
presume is to distribute capital. I realize capital in shares and capital in cash is considered the same, but I 
question if it should be. Surely the incentive to develop should be greater than the incentive to buy savings 
bonds or debentures for example. Life insurance is now taxed. Couldn’t it be exempt if it was used to clear 
the estate tax on shares? This way the corporation could remain strong and healthy and yet the province 
would receive a tax benefit. I should sincerely hate, and I am sure that all Members of this House, would 
hate to see all of our bigger Saskatchewan companies owned by outsiders. There are few investors with 
$200,000 to place as down payments on hotels, apartments or shopping complexes, and here is an example 
of what could take place if no wife was involved as a beneficiary. In 1972 net value $200,000. In 1992 net 
value $1 million due to capital payments and inflation. The owner dies, the capital gains tax would be $1 
million minus $200,000, $800,000 times 25 per cent for $200,000. The estate tax on $800,000 minus 
$150,000 exemptions or $650,000 taxed as high as 42 per cent equals $273,000 or a total of $473,000. This 
would leave a little over $500,000 left to the estate. If the beneficiaries maintained this investment and over 
ten years once again built it up to $1 million and then died, the estates tax would be again approximately 
$375,000, leaving a 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2109 

net of $625,000 to the heirs. This means that ten years of building up an additional $473,000 investment 
would net them a total of $98,000. It might have been better off to sell and take the capital and retire. This 
surely isn’t our aim. Capital investment should be encouraged. Now couldn’t a different tax structure apply 
if the children kept the investment in a Saskatchewan company. Surely we don’t want to force them to strip 
these companies and jeopardize their future. This is a serious problem especially here in Saskatchewan, to 
spread capital to a reasonable extent and yet encourage investment. 
 
If this situation is to be solved it needs to be studied in depth. I feel that as a result of this tax, that is a 
possible result of this tax, the only owners of bigger business would end up being public, national or 
international companies and I hope that this isn’t the goal of the Government opposite. 
 
I think we need to take a look at the history of tax reform in Saskatchewan because this is all part of the 
entire package as far as Saskatchewan people are concerned. We had the White Paper introduced back in 
October of 1969. We had hearings, committees, representation, provincial conferences and then the House of 
Commons considered it, debated it in the resulting Bill. The result, a new system of taxation. The result was 
new rates, the elimination of hundreds of thousands from our tax rolls. The addition of capital gains tax and 
the elimination of estate and gift tax as part, and I emphasize as part of the package which was accepted. The 
result for Saskatchewan, however, which has eliminated 75 per cent of the succession duties is now to add a 
full and tougher tax which was not part of the tax reform. I feel this is a breach of faith for present and future 
earners and savers in Saskatchewan who accepted tax reform based upon the elimination of death duties or 
death taxes only to find out that these were not the terms that they thought they were accepting. I think it 
makes a mockery of tax reform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Federal Government has vacated the field that tax reform apparently intended to tax all increases of 
wealth by the income tax and corporation tax and the new capital gains tax which was levied at a 
progressively higher rate as a person’s income increased. On this philosophy which was considered an 
unnecessarily heavy burden to tax additionally a person’s life savings, every dollar which will have already 
been taxed sufficiently and in this regard it is in fact double taxation. Three provinces in Canada have and 
continue to have succession duty taxes, namely British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec. We know that B.C. 
and Ontario are considering lessening the tax by increasing exempt transfers from husband to wife and by 
increasing exemptions on total estates. Six provinces, including Saskatchewan, have invaded this field as a 
result of Mr. Benson’s offer to administer the tax collection temporarily and I emphasize temporarily. 
Already the Government in Nova Scotia has indicated this tax is a temporary revenue. Any withdrawal by 
one Maritime province could force withdrawal by others and the two socialist governments of Saskatchewan 
and Manitoba could find themselves alone with the necessity of collecting the tax themselves. Most 
important for Saskatchewan is that our neighboring wheat, cattle and oil producing Province of Alberta is 
staying out of this taxation. I think this is a very, very serious situation. They are staying out of this taxation. 
Already they have great growth and large revenues and offer 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2110 

their people a better standard of living and, in fact, in most areas a gentler climate. Alberta is a ‘have’ 
province, but similar in so many respects to Saskatchewan that our people can easily decide to spend their 
lives working there in order to keep their savings for their families. I’m sure that Alberta officials knowing 
all this are quietly laughing at Saskatchewan’s stupidity and rubbing their hands in glee at the prospects of a 
shift of productive population to their province. 
 
Now in all the years that Saskatchewan shared the Federal Estates Tax I don’t think we ever collected much 
more or even as much as one per cent of our total budget. So while the proposed tax is very heavy for some 
estates, the total collection has meant little to the province. Now, regardless of any person’s view on what 
should happen to estates, any tax which collects relatively so little I don’t think is a worthwhile tax when you 
consider the results that it might and I think probably will have. 
 
Now why has Saskatchewan collected so little. It has been a Saskatchewan economic fact of life that most 
people with productive careers who have earned and saved a lot of money have retired and moved to less 
rigorous climates to enjoy the balance of their lives. We only need to review this winter’s climate to know 
why. They also take their savings with them however acquired such as pension benefits, the result of the 
sales of their farms or business, sales of their house and all their insurance policies, investment in bonds and 
shares and all else that they have. As a result when in due course they die all estate tax, succession duties, are 
collected by other governments and none by Saskatchewan where the money was earned. Unfortunately 
every person who moves vacates a house, an apartment and a newcomer, if any, occupies what has been 
vacated. Hence the economic activity of a new house or apartment is created in provinces like British 
Columbia and Saskatchewan again loses out. Additionally all sales tax on furniture, the purchase of cars, 
clothes, other essentials are collected elsewhere. So, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan loses twice. 1. The estate or 
succession duty tax which we do not collect on the savings earned by former residents. 2. All of the taxes 
from the economic activity which leaves with the person and is lost to us for as long as they live. It is also an 
economic fact that the people with the largest businesses are also the people who can most easily move to 
milder climates. So now to the already rugged climate, if this Government adds a tougher economic climate, 
surely it guarantees that people whose death it is intended to tax simply will not be here to have their estates 
taxed. Indeed if they can move to B.C. where such taxes can be less, or Alberta where there is no such tax, 
why in fact should they stay. How this can help Saskatchewan which needs population, which needs 
taxpayers, is beyond me. It is clear, however, that this philosophy and this punitive taxation will help the 
provinces in Canada which are already better off than we are, based upon the obvious fact that such a tax 
chases people away. It chases away much needed investment from Saskatchewan and because they will 
collect a relatively small amount of money, the previous Government abolished, our Government abolished, 
the provincial share of the tax and not only gave our people incentive to stay but others an incentive, at no 
cost to the Treasury, to move to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s face it, the loss of just one head office is painful to Saskatchewan because we have so few. 
Every 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2111 

removal causes a loss of jobs, prospective jobs, not in Canada but in Saskatchewan. It seems that while wind 
and flood and snow, drought and grasshoppers and army worms and 45 below zero temperatures have failed 
to drive Saskatchewan people away the NDP will do this with one ill considered stroke of the tax pen. In fact 
the avoidance of this tax will offer a bonus for leaving. Our people acquire estates through many endeavors 
all of which involve saving and investing. Many save through pension plans, including the Canada Pension 
Plan, company plans and private plans. The latter will now be taxed. Additionally the payment on a house 
mortgage is an investment providing an estate. Others use life insurance, others take on debts and add to 
farm land and machinery to improve the economics of their farm and their livestock operation. Others 
operate and build small businesses and make them larger based on Saskatchewan rather than outside 
ownership. Surly we know the benefits of having Saskatchewan ownership rather than control being lodged 
elsewhere, Toronto or Vancouver or the United States of America. Now we know what inflation has done to 
values. Dollars worth less, houses are worth more of the cheaper dollars. Over many years this happens to 
farms, machinery and houses and buildings, in fact to almost all values. So that all of a sudden on death the 
deceased family finds that assets which only produced a modest income are now in the taxable bracket. For 
example a farm which has been slowly expanded to stay economic now has to be reduced or sold outright to 
produce succession money and is no longer economic. The manufacturing plant or a business has been 
expanded to keep up with costs, succession duties tax could require a total or partial sale. The result the 
whole farm or the whole business could be lost. It could be sold to the highest bidder and the capital may be 
from outside Saskatchewan and very likely will be. Any sensible person faced with a prospect of a breakup 
of his assets on death will dispose of them during his lifetime. Now who can guess when that final date will 
arrive so most will sell early and if their estates are taxable in Saskatchewan they will move and this 
Province will lose productive citizens. We will in fact collect no tax and face a loss of productivity, of the 
individual, and the investment capital as well. 
 
Now, I ask the Government to consider carefully whether a tax which people will attempt to avoid with 
success is worth the losses we will face on account of the tax. In Saskatchewan over the years savings have 
been thought to accumulate and are usually represented by assets, not cash. Those people who reach a 
taxable bracket after income and corporation and capital gains tax will be now faced with a tough new tax on 
assets. Why then will they continue to work hard to develop a value much of which will go to the 
government. Surely our values are reversed if we put a disincentive on savings. This becomes an incentive to 
work less and spend more. Will such people necessarily spend more in Saskatchewan, again much of it will 
be spent in milder climates and a great deal of it in the southern United States. How can such spending, I 
guess you could call the equivalent of expense account living, help the Saskatchewan economy? Not only is 
it a disincentive to save but you will in fact offer them a bonus to leave in the form of lower taxes elsewhere. 
What young person would not accept a big bonus to take a job in Alberta or British Columbia? Indeed what 
older person with a taxable estate will not do the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who can’t escape, who is tied down? Well, the 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2112 

fact is that it’s the farmer who can’t escape. He will end up paying the tax and what folly to add yet another 
tax to agriculture production in Saskatchewan while at the same time mouthing slogans that the NDP are in 
fact the friend of the farmers. This Government which claims to be so interested in people will praise our 
citizens while they live and feel their wallets when they die. What pious hypocrisy! Whose estate is intended 
to be taxed? Oh, this Government will answer, as we heard the Member from Watrous (Mr. Cody) say, the 
wealthy. Since we know that we have not too many of these people in Saskatchewan, those we have or far 
too many of those that we have, will arrange their affairs to escape this tax. Then who will pay? Mostly it 
will be small or medium-sized businessmen or farmers who can’t escape. We will not place, as far as the 
Liberal Party is concerned, our people in this position. A Liberal Government three years from now will 
repeal this tax. If this legislation is passed we can do nothing for Saskatchewan until a change of 
Government and we can only advise our people to stay alive until ‘75 and vote against this Government in 
the next election. 
 
This is a bad tax and regardless of the philosophy of the Government opposite or anyone that says, well it is 
not unreasonable to tax the wealthy estates when people die so we avoid the unfair act of accumulation of 
great wealth by individuals who didn’t earn it, regardless of that philosophy whether that philosophy is right 
or wrong, the hard fact of life is that we have a tax haven right next door in Alberta. If every province in this 
country charged exactly the same tax at the same rate of taxation this would be a different situation. Whether 
the tax was fair, or unfair, whether in fact it was double taxation or not we at least could say, they can’t 
escape. This would not be an incentive to drive them out of Saskatchewan into Alberta or into British 
Columbia where I think they will get treatment not as tough in this regard as they will get in Saskatchewan. 
But this is a fact of life so here we are struggling for people, struggling for capital, struggling for investment 
and by one stroke of the pen we are making it easier, much better, much more profitable and adding an 
incentive for people who are already drifting out of here under our government and under your Government 
to go at an even faster rate. I think this is an ill-considered tax, I think it is a sop. You are not going to collect 
that much money out of it. You are gong to force people out of this Province. You are going to force capital 
out of this Province. I honestly think you should reconsider it. If the situation was not such in Alberta then I 
think your argument and your case would be much stronger. The tax haven in Alberta - your case is so weak 
that it is almost destroyed. That’s essentially, Mr. Speaker, why we will not support this tax, why we will not 
vote for this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Hanley):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments in regard to this 
Bill, but first of all in reply to the Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) who said it would hurt some - 
well, I would prefer to look at it a little differently. I would say that it will really hurt no one at all, and that 
most of the people in the province will not be affected. When the Leader of the Opposition said that the 
Liberals would take this tax off in three years, I thought he was talking about Saskatchewan. Which province 
was that that he was referring to. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2113 

But first let me say that I am satisfied that the $200 maximum which could be inherited tax free by certain 
beneficiaries is a very reasonable figure indeed. I say this because, in my opinion, very few individuals in the 
province leave estates greater than that when they pass on. Therefore, once again, it will affect only a few 
and I am convinced that it will be for the common good. Mr. Speaker, I maintain that it is morally wrong to 
allow an individual or individuals to accumulate vast amounts, often - however, not all the time - unfairly 
and then on death pass on this accumulated wealth thereby perpetuating a closed shop aristocracy of wealth 
based not on effort or merit but on birth. And I want to go on record as saying that I am against automatic 
privilege of birth. We have too many people in this Province who came to this country to escape just such 
nonsense as that. We have too many people in our province who came here and took a lot of dirt struggling 
to get on their feet. Privileges, if you may call them that, were very often denied them. In fact, many of these 
sometimes unfairly contributed out of all proportion to the coffers of the rich at that time and the extremely 
rich of today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see the situation as a bit of a race, a race for wealth. Only there is one thing wrong. You see, a 
few have had a darn good head start. I don’t propose that the race be run over again but I do propose that we 
don’t perpetuate the inequities involved. Our Saskatchewan people, and I am talking about the people of 
Hanley constituency, and I have talked to many of them lately, can see no justification for the old - and it 
may be, I am not so sure, the Liberal laissez-faire attitude which Members opposite are so bent on sometimes 
thrusting down some throats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in talking about our Land Bank, the Members opposite made much of the fact that each 
generation of up and coming young farmers should be more or less on their own in acquiring land. Well, if 
they carry that to its logical conclusion, they will have to grudgingly support this Bill for it implies that 
inheritors will be allowed a good inheritance, but after that they will have to make it on their own. 
 
Therefore, I say to Members opposite, be consistent or openly support this Bill. If you do this, I am sure the 
citizens of the province will certainly not hold it against you. In fact, it is right, Members opposite, to admit 
to being wrong when fresh and relevant facts are brought to light. Again, I implore them to come to the side 
of what I will call in all sincerity, equity, morality and certainly 95 per cent of the people of this Province. 
Furthermore, if they do not support this Bill, one can assume that all of the other provinces of Canada are 
wrong with the exception of Tory Alberta which, incidentally, will be running up a deficit of nearly a couple 
of hundred million this year. And that was mentioned too. You know, the thing that amazes me when I go to 
Alberta, the province that has had all kinds of money thrown into the provincial coffers year after year, the 
thing that amazes me is not the development that they have there, but why they haven’t got a lot more 
development. Are Members opposite saying that Alberta is right in not introducing such legislation? Well, if 
they are, I can only assume that the Members opposite are really only old line Tories at heart. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2114 

MR. MOSTOWAY:— Mr. Speaker, I find it difficult to find any sympathy for those who would turn their 
backs on any province in which they manage to accumulate a vast amount of wealth. I can’t generate any 
tears for them. I find it difficult to think that some would, like the Irvings and the Trujillos literally say, "I 
knew the rules of the game when I started." Yes, and I’ll grant that many of them can say, "I have worked 
hard, but now I have decided that I don’t like the rules, good-bye." Can our farmers do that? Can our small 
businessmen or miners or laborers or housewives? To those who think of Alberta as a haven of escape from 
this Bill, well, I have heard it said that nearly 90 per cent of the total rebate money last year was given to two 
families. 
 
MR. STEUART:— No! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY:— All right, 89 per cent. Is this what we want in our province? And while I am at it, 
what will Members opposite tell prospective - this is the gist of what I get from them - when they tell 
prospective leavers of this Province about British Columbia, the land of mountains, forests, lakes, rivers and 
inheritance taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Liberal Government at Ottawa decided to get out of this field of taxation, it seems it 
was bent on, once again, giving certain portions of the country a good shellacking. When it did this, it 
stopped collecting taxes from eastern based firms which make much of their profits from sales on the 
Prairies. Now, because most of these firms accumulate their wealth in Ontario and Quebec from sales 
throughout Canada, now inheritance taxes are paid to these provinces only to be collected and spent entirely 
in these provinces. Now, I ask you if this is right? Should we not be sharing in these tax moneys seeing as 
how we on the Prairies helped toward the accumulation of this wealth? This is just one more example of the 
inequity that I mentioned earlier. Thanks to the Liberals whether they be in Ottawa or in this House. How 
much more morally proper it would have been for the Federal Government to continue the same policy 
which they saw fit to implement for the past many years. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the few people who have vast amounts of wealth at their disposal, I don’t 
think they are going to get too much sympathy from the people of this Province. They are going to say to 
those who would inherit, they are simply going to say, "They’ve had the cream of the crop already. They’ve 
had certain advantages and privileges that the majority of the people of this Province don’t have, nor will 
they ever have, nor will they be able to pass on to their children." I know this, Mr. Speaker, because I have 
gone out, as I mentioned before, in my constituency and people pretty well all over, having heard an 
explanation of this Bill, this proposed legislation, are behind this Government 100 per cent. I support the 
motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Milestone):— Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments to make this morning. First 
of all this Bill is typical and the remarks of the Members opposite is typical of the socialists. You know, they 
say, "We want to lift up the poor, and the way we want to lift up the poor is pull down the rich." Mr. 
Speaker, one of the 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2115 

major emotional problems in Canada today is the accumulation of Canadian capital. We hear our socialist 
friends opposite talking about the foreign ownership of Canada. They even bring in a Bill and disguise it, 
and call it foreign ownership because they know the emotional reaction of the people of Canada will perhaps 
make it a little more palatable. They know that foreign ownership of Canadian industries is a major problem. 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is no way that we can prevent foreign ownership of the Canadian economy unless we 
encourage the accumulation of Canadian capital. And the weakness of the Premier’s argument and the 
weakness of the two Members opposite argument is that they make no distinction between money and assets. 
No distinction whatsoever. 
 
We listen to the Member from Hanley stand up here and talk. He makes $20,000 a year. He puts away and 
he’s got a pension when he retires of $10,000 or $12,000 a year. But he has no assets. He is not subject to 
succession duties. Let’s take the farmer in his constituency that he is talking about. He spends a lifetime of 
trying to pay for those assets that he possesses. He may live on $2,500 or $3,000 a year. In fact, in the last 
four or five years, he has been living on a four and five bushel quota. How many times do we hear that the 
farmer is money poor and assets rich. He starves all his life in order to build up his property. And when the 
Premier talks about money and wealth, it isn’t wealth in an apple box, he can’t pull the dollar bills out and 
throw it in and pay the succession duties. That wealth is assets, it is made up of land, of property, of 
equipment. And the only way those succession duties can be paid is to destroy those assets. 
 
You take a fellow like Smith-Roles . . . 
 
MR. BOWERMAN:— How many are there like Smith-Roles? 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— That’s the problem with you. I don’t care if there is only one because it is a man like 
Smith-Roles that hires 70 people. We don’t have many entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan. We don’t have very 
many people that have the imagination and the drive and the hustle to go out like Smith-Roles and put every 
cent he makes back into his business, to turn around and hire 70 or 80 people, that buy bread at the grocery 
store, that go on the bus in the morning, these are the people that we are talking about. And it’s the four or 
five or six or 10 or 20 people that make Saskatchewan tick. It’s those people that build Saskatchewan. And 
when you talk about 5 or 10 or 20, I don’t care if it is 30 or 40, don’t tell me that $3 million is only a few, it 
is quite a few. If you remember the weakness of the arguments of the socialists, they think that wealth is 
made up of money in an apple box, that it is made up of stocks and bonds, it is made up of the millionaire 
with money in the bank and that he can write a cheque to pay his succession tax. That is not what estate tax 
and succession duties are going to be paid on. The vast majority will be paid on assets, on property, on 
equipment, on jobs. That’s what’s going to hurt Saskatchewan. And to say that we are only going to tax a 
few and that this is a terrible thing to build up wealth, it is a terrible thing to accumulate money, a terrible 
thing to accumulate property, a terrible thing to build up a factory, a terrible thing to build up an industry, an 
industry that is an asset, that’s what’s going to be taxed on succession duties. And don’t say it is going to be 
money and 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2116 

the wealthy and the rich with dollar bills in an apple box, because that just isn’t true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a few more remarks to say on this and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that Bill No. 
108 - An Act relating to the Payment of Gift Tax be now read a second time. 
 
MR. K. R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park):— Mr. Speaker, when the Hon. Premier introduced the Bill 
he mentioned that it was a companion to The Succession Duty Act and much of the things that can be said 
about the one can be said equally about the other. 
 
The Hon. Member for Watrous (Mr. Cody) in speaking to the last debate mentioned that wealth is created by 
society as a whole. And he is right about that. And he suggests that succession duties and gift taxes are fair 
taxation as instruments of social equality, or words to this effect. And that’s right, we don’t quarrel with that 
at all. He suggests that society will somehow be disturbed if we fail to tax great concentrations of wealth, 
and I think in the broad principle that is true. But we are not going to be able to tax great concentrations of 
wealth in Saskatchewan because we aren’t going to have great concentrations of wealth in Saskatchewan 
because of the economic decisions made by the NDP Government. 
 
They are very impressed by the number of people that are affected by both of these Bills. Two per cent is the 
word. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, it’s 100 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan that are affected by these Bills, 
which are economically poor decisions. 
 
I am in agreement with much that is said over there, on the philosophy of it. I know that we are not all going 
to end up the same way and I agree that we should all have the same chance at the starting gate. But the one 
thing that we cannot do is control the Alberta decision. We may well assume that Alberta is wrong in not 
having a succession duty. I would personally like to see Alberta have a succession duty. Then the argument 
on the Bill in Saskatchewan would take an entirely different turn. I do not regard it as sound and reasonable 
financing of the Alberta economy that they should let themselves go $200 million into debt this current year. 
I would oppose that kind of conduct if it occurred in Saskatchewan. But the assumptions which are being 
made by the NDP are totally false. They are assumptions based upon what Liberals are doing and what 
Liberals are saying and they are total misrepresentations. They have totally missed the point. Now they do so 
either because they don’t understand it or don’t want to understand it or because they are motivated by 
narrow, political prejudice and are interpreting our words in such a way as to give a political connotation 
satisfactory to them and for narrow, political reasons only. 
 
Now, I suggest to them, quite frankly, that these two Bills hurt 100 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan. 
They hurt the working man who may never be forced to pay succession duty or 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2117 

gift taxes. They hurt all of us. They hurt us because many people have an opportunity to make a reasonable 
decision about whether they will go to Alberta or go to Saskatchewan. When businesses have the right to 
choose, and all other factors are equal between Saskatchewan and Alberta, there is no question about it that 
the presence of the statutes we are talking about this morning will tip the scale in favor of Alberta. And that 
is the gist and substance of our argument. And those on the other side who say otherwise are totally 
misrepresenting what we are saying over here. 
 
I should like to see all of Canada have identical taxes in this area. And if they did have identical taxes in this 
area, the decision-making would be on other matters, on other grounds. We would be able to attract or not 
attract business on the soundness of other policies. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, it is a bad economic decision 
which the Government of Saskatchewan is making. They are making it for narrow, political reasons and I 
suggest that in the broad context, they are making the wrong decision and in the end they are making a bad 
decision because in the end the people will realize that they have done it in the name of social equality, the 
same sort of thing that occurred in Spain at the time of the Spanish Inquisition. All good things seem to be 
done in the name of goodness and religion and in many cases those are the very worst things that could be 
done. 
 
I notice that the Member for Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) in talking about examples of wealth did not give 
examples of wealth in Saskatchewan. Any huge concentration of wealth that he can discuss will be a huge 
concentration of wealth somewhere else. He cannot point to Rockefellers and Eatons and Irvings and people 
of this sort in Saskatchewan. We don’t have them here. And I should like to have them here. I should like us 
to have economic policies that would attract them here and then in due course hopefully we could apply the 
kind of succession duty that would bring to us the kind of money and social equality that we talk about. 
 
Now dealing simply and briefly with some of the details, the one thing that they have said is that there is not 
double taxation. They have quoted experts on other parts of the Bill but when it comes to double taxation, 
Mr. Speaker, they won’t get experts to say it is not double taxation because the experts aren’t saying that. It 
is, in fact, double taxation and any reasonable discussion and calculation of what occurs will prove that it is 
double taxation. There are some oddities in the Bill which bother me that is that The Gift Tax Act applies to 
everybody. And it applies to people even when those people aren’t going to be troubled by The Succession 
Duty Act. Even if a man has an estate of less than $200,000 or $150,000 or $100,000, and is able to pass it 
on to his wife and children without any succession duty he is still subject to The Gift Tax Act. He may have 
a total estate of $100,000 and decide to give a large part of it away to his children. He will be subject to gift 
taxes. The children will be obliged to wait till father dies before they get the benefits of the exemptions 
which are in The Succession Duty Act and not in The Gift Tax Act. 
 
I do give credit to the Government Members for not saying that the Federal Government got out of the gift 
tax and estate tax field in favor of the provinces. They have at last come to the right situation there. They 
have identified the fact that the Federal Government didn’t get out of these two areas in 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2118 

favor of anybody. The Federal Government got out of them and applied a Capital Gains Tax believing that in 
that way they would charge a tax on a large part of the estate. 
 
One of the basic problems we have is the way the law was put into effect. People by law are presumed to 
know the law. If a man was very seriously ill on the 15th of January and went to his lawyer and said, "I 
would like to revise my affairs so that I could take advantage of the Succession Duty and Gift Tax Acts as 
they now exist in Saskatchewan," the lawyer would say to him, "Well, I know that I know the law, because 
the law says so and I know that you know the law because the law says you know the law," but in fact 
nobody knew the law because changes were still being made up until the time it was presented to the House. 
If that man died on April 15, he would have died legally knowing the law which didn’t even exist at the time. 
That is one of the evils of having retroactive legislation. 
 
If a man wanted to give $10,000 in bonds to his wife he would find that he couldn’t do that unless he spread 
it out over a period of time. Because if he wanted to give $10,000 to his wife and if that was his entire estate, 
it would still be subject to gift tax. The Gift Tax Act applies even in cases where there is no possibility of a 
tax being applied on the estate or the succession when a man dies. Now to make myself very clear, I am 
suggesting to the Government what they have done in these Acts is fostered their prejudice. They have put in 
The Succession Duty Act, not for the revenue, but so that they can go around the country and tell everybody 
that they believe in social equality. And I suggest because of their economic decisions they are confirming us 
in a social inequality or at least a social equality at a very low level. They want Saskatchewan to be equal in 
poverty. The entire procedure of this Government has been to demonstrate that it is more concerned with its 
own political philosophy than it is with the welfare and the well-being of Saskatchewan as a province and of 
its citizens individually and as a group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I regret because of the actual situation which exists in Canada namely, the presence of our 
greatest competitor next door, Alberta, without the kind of statutes that we have, I am obliged to oppose the 
Bill. And I state this very clearly so that if they are going to misrepresent me they will know in fact they are 
doing so deliberately. If the Province of Alberta had a Gift Tax Act similar to this, if they had a Succession 
Duty Act similar to this Province, the comments and the arguments that I have made would have been 
entirely different. Mr. Speaker, because of the realities of life and the condition of laws in other provinces I 
am obliged to oppose the Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I think that most of our debate could and should 
perhaps be on the Succession Duty Bill since I believe these are companion Bills and I therefore will not 
detain the House at length. 
 
May I just comment on the difficult position which the Opposition seems to be trying to take. They assert, if 
Alberta had a different position our position would be, quote, "entirely different." They don’t indicate what it 
would be. They had an opportunity on many, many occasions to say what their position would be. When the 
Federal Government withdrew from the Estate 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2119 

tax and gift tax field, they had an opportunity to say that they opposed that. They in fact were the 
Government of the day when that was announced. But they didn’t oppose that then. They didn’t oppose it 
then because they believed then and they believe now that wealth should not be taxed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Their opportunity was abundantly clear when Mr. Benson announced in June of 1971 
that the Federal Government proposed to withdraw from both of those fields. They had a full and complete 
opportunity either during the campaign in which they were all candidates or from the Treasury benches 
which they then occupied, to state that in their judgment this would be bad for Canada, that in their judgment 
estate taxes and gift taxes should be collected nationally and distributed nationally. But they failed to take 
that position. That is the position that should be taken by any responsible person in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— That is the position which I believe every province in Canada should be advocating 
because I believe that large pools of wealth are accumulated by the work of all people in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— In believe that these estates, whether held by a person who is about to die or part of 
the estate on death, whether the subject of gift taxes or estate taxes, have been accumulated by the economic 
activity which takes place from sea to sea. It seems to me perfectly clear that we in Saskatchewan, whatever 
our Party, should be advocating the national collection of those taxes and the national distribution of those 
taxes. And I say it was the position of our Party, and in times past it was the position of the Liberal Party, 
that these taxes should be collected nationally and distributed nationally. It is only recently that the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party has departed from those principles which are good for Saskatchewan, and has 
adopted principles which are good only for the wealthy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— There is no doubt, whatever, and I invite Hon. Members opposite to present a 
counter-argument, to our position that these taxes should be collected nationally and should be distributed 
nationally. Mr. Speaker, they had a full opportunity to advocate their position. They did not advocate it when 
they had the full opportunity and when it might have had some effect on their Federal Liberal colleagues. 
And when they no longer had that opportunity, when the people of Saskatchewan dispensed with their 
services, they then come into this House and say, "Oh, if Alberta had it, our position would be different. If 
Alberta had it, we would then favor a gift tax." Or did they say that, not quite. No, of course, they didn’t. 
They didn’t say anything about what their position was. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2120 

MR. BLAKENEY:— They didn’t say anything about what their position was. 
 
MR. STEUART:— Our position was clear. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) demonstrates that he 
doesn’t know what Bill we are on. When every second, every second of the time that he occupied the 
Treasury benches there was a gift tax in Canada and a gift tax more severe than the one which we now have 
before us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— And so far as I am aware, he in his position as Provincial Treasurer and Deputy 
Premier never advocated that that be changed by the former Liberal Government. I note the position of the 
Members opposite as being one where they are afraid to state their positions. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— They are afraid to say whether they would be for or against a gift tax. They are afraid 
to say what their position would be if Alberta had a different position. They simply say, "My comments 
would be different. I won’t tell you what they are and I don’t want you to misrepresent them but my 
comments would be different." 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Shame! My goodness, Ken. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, it is perfectly clear that they have no position on principle. They did not 
oppose gift taxes when they were in power, they did not advocate the national collection of succession duties 
and gift taxes. Their only position is, if it hurts the wealthy, oppose it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— That is their clear position. They have had a full and complete opportunity to state 
other positions. They have had that opportunity and will have it again in this House. And I will invite them 
to use it but until they do so we are entitled to draw appropriate conclusions from their positions and that 
conclusion is this. They do not advocate the collection and distribution of these taxes nationally, which any 
person should if he has the interests of Saskatchewan at heart. They do not advocate a gift tax in 
Saskatchewan even if Alberta had one. All they advocate is that if it hurts the wealthy don’t do it. That is 
their position. We are fully entitled to conclude that from what they have said this morning. That may be 
their position, it is not our position. This is a fair tax and a just tax and we’ll support. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2121 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Snyder that Bill No. 
105 - An Act respecting Trade Unions and the Right of Employees to organize in Trade Unions of 
their own choosing for the Purpose of Bargaining Collectively with their Employers - be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill should be renamed, it 
should be called an Act to Give the Trade Unions a Monopoly or Total Control over their Membership. It 
will, in fact, strip a great deal of their rights, a great many of their rights and the freedoms that are now 
enjoyed by the individual members of trade unions, this Act will remove them. It is called an Act Respecting 
Trade Unions and the Rights of Employees to organize in Trade Unions of their own choosing. This is 
patently false. For the purpose of bargaining collectively with their employer, that last part of it is correct. 
Now the Government claims this is legislation dealing with trade unions and therefore this legislation gives 
rights to trade unions. This Bill is not drafted to take into account, 1. The general public. 2. The employers. 
3. The employees, those individual members of trade unions or those people who are working people who 
are employees who don’t happen to be in the trade union movement. Now they can’t give some of the rights 
that they have given in this Bill to the trade unions, the entities, the corporate entities or if they are not called 
corporate entities they should be, and the entities of trade unions without denying and taking away some of 
the rights of the general public, the employers and the employees. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Did he say they should be corporate entities? 
 
MR. STEUART:— Yes, I do say trade unions should be corporate entities incidentally. Yes, they should be 
entities, they should be legal entities, maybe not corporate entities but they should be legal entities, the same 
as anyone else. I say that, I have always said it. And you say they shouldn’t be because you are afraid to say, 
you believe it yourself. But by granting certain rights to trade union organizations this Bill has without a 
doubt denied certain rights to the general public, the employers and the employees. The Government has 
again failed to recognize that good labor relations are a two-sided street. That there is, in fact, not just the 
rights of the trade unions and those rights should and must be recognized, but not just their rights but the 
rights of the employers should be recognized as well. On top of that a Trade Union Act, one should 
remember above all else, is labour legislation. And any legislation dealing with labour should be designed to 
assure the individual the maximum possible protection and freedom. The very name of the Bill states that 
employees have the right to organize in trade unions of their own choosing. Now once they have chosen that, 
their rights under this Bill almost cease to exist. Under the Act, once employees have chosen a union, they 
may in a practical way, almost never get rid of it. There is, in fact, no practical method of having it 
decertified. Or, in fact, of guaranteeing the freedom of the union members if they become dissatisfied with 
that particular union, to belong to another union of their own choosing. Under the Act that is being amended, 
the individual members, the members of the union had three methods under which they could have a union 
decertified but not now. One, if they showed evidence, that is 40 per cent of the employees 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2122 

they no longer wish to be represented by the particular trade union, the Labour Relations Board would 
conduct a free vote to determine the issue. So 40 per cent which is a very large and certainly should be 
recognized as a very serious and adequate number of members of the trade union decided they wanted to 
choose another trade union, the Labour Relations Board under the old Act would have a free vote, and only 
if the majority chose, would, in fact, that union be decertified as the bargaining agent of that particular group 
of employees. 2. Upon amalgamation or take-over by a new trade union, an employee under the old Act 
could apply to the Labour Relations Board to determine if the new trade union had acquired the rights, the 
privileges and the duties of the old trade union. Again, a free choice for the individuals. Under the old Act 
unions couldn’t barter, trade the employees in a trade union as if they were chattels. They can under this Act. 
3. Under the new Act an employee may lose membership in the union. He may lose membership in the union 
and if he does then he could lose his job, because once a union has been certified and you are a member of 
that union it is a condition of employment within that industry that you be a member of the union. 
 
And so if the union removes an individual from the trade union he could, and under the law would, lose his 
job. What are the conditions under which this man could be placed outside of the union? And I ask the 
Members opposite, especially the farm Members, to read this Act very carefully, because I say to you very 
seriously that the rights that you people talk about, that you people boast that you are so interested in, the 
rights of the individual are seriously threatened and they are, in fact, taken away under this proposed 
amendment to The Trade Union Act. 
 
Under the new Act, as I said, an employee may lose membership in the union and his job if; 1. He engages in 
any activity against the trade union. In other words his freedom of speech, if he doesn’t like the way the trade 
union or the bosses of his trade union are acting, if he wants to advocate a new union or advocate some 
change, it could be considered that he was talking against that particular trade union and he could be put out 
of the union. If he is out of the union then his job is in jeopardy. 
 
2. He could also lose his membership in the union if he engages in activities on behalf of another trade 
union. It is therefore impossible if any employee is not satisfied with his union to get any support from his 
fellow workers, to get even a decertification vote. How can he go out and talk to his fellow workers and say, 
we are not satisfied with this union? Look what they failed to do; look what they are doing and look at what 
they are not doing, if, in fact, the threat of expulsion from the union hangs over his head, backed up by the 
law of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Under this Act the union members becomes chattels of the union and their freedom - as I said earlier - will 
be stripped and taken away and they will be, in fact, handed over. The individual employee will be handed 
over under this Act to the union that now represents him or her, they will be handed over to that union, lock, 
stock and barrel, body and soul. 
 
Formerly when a union was formed under the old Act, the employee had the choice of joining or not. From 
that time on any new employee was forced, as a condition of work, I think, to join that union. Now if the 
union is formed and some employees 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2123 

don’t want to join they don’t have to but they are forced to pay the union dues even though they don’t join. 
 
Again, under the old Act, if there was a strike on and the strike had been called and it was taking place, 
employees or the employers themselves, could ask for a vote to see if that strike should continue. And if the 
majority of the union members voted to accept the offer of the company then the strike would be ended. This 
right has been taken away from them. We have the situation at Hudson Bay where one of the leaders of the 
International Woodworkers of America came out from British Columbia and a strike was called. The 
company wanted to continue negotiating, this union official left and couldn’t be found. A number of the 
employees indicated that they wanted to see that strike ended as it was causing terrible hardships. The 
company had made new offers and they at least wanted to sit down and consider it. They couldn’t find the 
official and as a result in spite of what people in that area considered to be the wishes of the majority of the 
union, the offers of the company were not even considered, they weren’t accepted and the strike dragged on 
to the detriment of everyone. 
 
This right to vote in the middle of a strike has been taken away from the membership in the union. 
 
Now again they have changed the Act. The way it was before was that before a strike could be called the 
majority of the membership had to vote in favor of the strike. If you had 100 employees in the plant, 100 
union members, then 51 of them had to vote in favor of a strike. Now they have changed that. They say, now 
it is merely if the majority of the number of members who vote. Now we have seen some funny business go 
on in this kind of vote where they hold meetings in small halls or they call meetings here or there. What have 
they to fear? A strike is a very serious business. What have they to fear if, in fact, they get a guarantee that all 
of the union membership vote and only if a majority of all those members . . . 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Did 51 per cent of the voters vote for you? 
 
MR. STEUART:— 51 per cent of the people in Prince Albert didn’t vote for me, Mr. Snyder, no, and they 
didn’t vote for a lot of you people either, but let me tell you this. Many years back when you held the 
Government, 51 per cent of the people didn’t vote for you. 
 
That is a totally different thing from voting whether I lose my job or I lose my pay check. This is a totally 
different thing, Mr. Snyder, and if you don’t see it then the union movement and the labor movement in this 
Province is in trouble, and I think they are. 
 
When a strike vote is called, surely the individual members would have the right to vote on whether they 
lose their pay check, whether they go on strike - and it may drag on for months and months and break them 
and cause them to lose their homes and cause them tremendous financial setback and heartache as well. 
What the situation was before was that at least the majority of the union membership had to vote in favor of 
a strike. Now you have changed that. Why have you changed that? 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2124 

You haven’t changed it, I think, because a great many a strikes were denied, that 40 per cent of the people 
voted for a strike or they couldn’t get the people to vote, so there wasn’t a strike called. Whenever the 
membership of a union want a strike I suggest they get one. I am not denying that. I am saying that today, 
under this Act when it passes, there is no longer any assurance that an employee will be given the 
opportunity in voting in a strike vote. So I say to the Government, if you insist on this change then I call on 
you to have Government supervised strike votes. Government supervised strike votes with fair and impartial 
people seeing that the vote is carried out openly, that the place where the vote will be held in is fully 
advertised and it is convenient for all people on various shifts to get out to vote for or against that strike and 
see that they have the secrecy of the ballet and all the other protection that we have fought for for so long in 
this country to protect the rights of individuals when they are expressing their own free will. Have a 
Government supervised strike vote if you insist on making that change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think another thing that is a very sad commentary on the Government opposite in regard to the 
development of this Bill, is that although many employer groups, the other side of the equation, the 
employers and their representatives have asked to meet to negotiate. Oh, they have been met occasionally by 
the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), but to meet to negotiate in a meaningful way about the clauses of this 
Bill. The Minister has refused. 
 
MR. SNYDER:— . . . did in 1966. 
 
MR. STEUART:— All right! He has refused and has said in effect that this isn’t any of your business, this 
is a Trade Union Act and it is not the business of the employers or the general public or, in fact, it really isn’t 
the business of the individual membership of the union as well. It is obviously only the business of the 
Minister of Labour and the heads of the organized labour groups that he intends to sit down with. 
 
To me, Mr. Speaker, this is another example of the war on business that has been started by the NDP 
Government when they took over office, 10 or 11 months ago, and it has been perpetuated and stepped up, 
and the Minister of Labour is one of the leaders in this war on business. 
 
If the trade union movement can bring so many blessings to the employees - and I say they can - if you feel 
that confident, Mr. Minister of Labour and the NDP Government, then why do you have to hedge and give 
so much power to the unions themselves? Why are you taking away the rights of the individual union 
member? Why are you saying, in effect, to the union member, whatever union he is, you have practically no 
rights to get out of that union and any democratic rights you have are gone? I see the Attorney General (Mr. 
Romanow) shaking his head. I suggest that he read this Bill very carefully because you point out to me, Mr. 
Attorney General, that if I am a member of a union, if I am working for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and I am a member of the Oil Chemical and Atomic Workers, or I am working for MacMillan 
Bloedel and I am a member, or Simpson Timber Company and I am a member of the International 
Woodworkers of America and I don’t like that union, surely to God this is my right not to like that union. So 
I say to myself 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2125 

and two or three of my fellow workers, I think we would be better represented by the United Steel Workers 
or by some other union. Surely this is a freedom that we should have, that those workers should have, to 
have representing them the union of their choice. 
 
Now they start out to talk against the union. Surely if you want to change your union you must be unhappy 
with the union that now represents you. So you start out to develop a campaign against the union just as you 
have the right to develop a campaign against the NDP Government or the Liberal Government or anyone 
else. The Act now says that you can lose your membership in that union. Would you point out how a 
dissatisfied union member, in a practical way, or a group of union members in a practical way, can get rid of 
or get that union decertified as their official bargaining agent and invite another union to come in or form 
their own union? 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it does not exist in a practical way in this Act. So I say that this Act will give 
existing unions - actually the leadership of existing unions - a monopoly and the power of almost economic 
life and death over the present membership. I say that it takes away the individual rights and the civil rights 
and the liberties and the freedom of the individual members. I think that the Members opposite should take 
another look at it and they should recognize that this is a bad Bill. It is bad for the economic climate in this 
Province, but what is more important, it is bad for the union membership of this Province and for the 
working people. I am intending, and the Members on this side are intending, to oppose this Bill as it is now 
written. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health):— Mr. Speaker, the speech given by the Leader of 
the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) comes to me somewhat as a surprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that on June 24th, the day after the election, Liberal Cabinet Ministers met in a 
moment of soberness and sober thought and asked themselves this question: Why did we get defeated? I 
understand the answer came out loud and clear, in reply, whom haven’t we offended? That was the question 
posed and one after the other said, "Look there isn’t a group in the Province of Saskatchewan that we haven’t 
offended." And that is the reason for the defeat. They finally realized it. 
 
They offended the teachers, they offended the farmers, they offended the students, they offended religious 
groups, they offended the workers. The Liberals attacked everyone in the Province of Saskatchewan and they 
conceded that on June 24th. 
 
I thought, Mr. Speaker, that ten months after, the Leader of the Opposition would have had some further 
sobering thoughts and that he would have looked a little more thoroughly and a little more deeply into the 
reasons for the Liberal defeat. Because if there is anybody that the Liberals attacked, they attacked the 
working people. 
 
Over and over again, session after session, they brought more and more restrictive legislation against the 
Trade Union Movement, against the working people of the province. The 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2126 

working people recognized what the Liberals did to them and they voted overwhelmingly in support of the 
NDP and worked to defeat the Liberals. They made that decision very deliberately because they knew that 
their rights under the Liberals were being stripped every day. 
 
When the Leader of the Opposition talks about workers being stripped of their rights, under this Act, I doubt 
very much whether he has taken the time to read this Bill. I refer him to page 3, Section 3 and it says, 
employees have the right to organize in and to form or join or assist trade unions and to bargain collectively 
through a trade union of their own choosing. 
 
MR. STEUART:— What happens then? 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, let’s carry on. Let’s take a look at Section 5. The Board may make orders 
to determine what a trade union and what constitutes an appropriate bargaining unit, determine what trade 
union if any represents the majority of employees in an appropriate unit. That guarantees the workers the 
right to determine what union they want. There is provision in the Bill for votes to be taken if 25 per cent of 
the workers in a particular plant indicate that they want a trade union. They can apply to the Labour 
Relations Board and the Labour Relations Board can then conduct a vote. And the truth is, and this is in the 
Bill, the way the workers got into a union they have exactly the same procedure to follow to decertify a trade 
union. 
 
MR. STEUART:— Show us. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Well, all you have to do is examine the Bill. It is in the Bill. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Read the Bill. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— I have read the Bill. Under the Liberals there was a double standard. If the workers 
wanted a union then at least 40 per cent had to indicate and a board could have considered a vote. But in 
order to be certified automatically, over 60 per cent had to indicate a majority. But if there was a 
decertification application then the 40 per cent rule didn’t apply. To get rid of the union a 25 per cent rule 
applied. Now, Mr. Speaker, why is it that for certification purposes, the Liberals established a different rule? 
The truth is that Liberals did everything possible to help the anti-labor employers to get rid of trade unions. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— And that was the whole purpose. 
 
MR. STEUART:— What percentage . . . 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— 25 per cent and the same kind of procedure . . . 
 
MR. STEUART:- Oh, no. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Oh, yes it does. They can 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2127 

make application to the Labour Relations Board to establish their case in the same kind of way for 
decertification as for certification. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am thoroughly familiar with the law that existed 
prior to 1965 and the same procedure is to apply from here on. What we have done basically, Mr. Speaker, in 
this Bill is restore the trade union rights that existed prior to the Liberals massacring The Trade Union Act. 
These are the basic changes. Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at 20 years of record under the NDP. The story is 
conclusively written and recorded that during those 20 years under an NDP Government or CCF 
Government at that time we had virtual industrial peace. There was good harmony and good working 
relationships between employers and trade unions. 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Milestone):— How could you, you didn’t have any industry? 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Well, you sure didn’t attract them during seven years. 
 
MR. STEUART:— We sure did. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Name them. 
 
MR. STEUART:— People went for seven years. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, during the seven years of Liberal administration there was an outright war 
declared by the Liberals on trade unions and trade union organization. They brought in Bill 2, they took away 
the workers’ right to strike, they forced compulsory arbitration on the workers. They established rules that 
made it virtually impossible for workers to organize and to form unions of their choice. They stripped the 
Department of Labour of any effective people within the Department to assist unions and to assist employers 
in the area of collective bargaining. They practically did away with the research branch of the Department. I 
want to commend the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) for his 10 months of hard work in restoring . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— . . . confidence within the employers and trade unions by the Department of Labour 
because he has demonstrated that with a new approach of working co-operatively, with higher qualified and 
additional staff that we can have industrial peace in the Province of Saskatchewan. The truth is that in the 
last 10 months, Saskatchewan has been almost strike free. It is because there is a willingness on the part of 
the Minister and a willingness on the part of the Department to work co-operatively with employers and 
employees. Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) referred to 30 day strikes, 
or votes after 30 day strikes. The truth is that that provision really guaranteed that every strike in 
Saskatchewan would last a minimum of 30 days. That has been the experience with that particular section, it 
proved to be totally ineffective and we are getting rid of it. 
 
MR. STEUART:— You are getting rid of it. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— That’s right. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2128 

MR. STEUART:— What are you replacing it with? 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— We believe that . . . 
 
MR. STEUART:— What are you replacing it with, nothing? 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— We believe that if free collective bargaining is going to take place then it is a matter for 
the employees and the employers to work out a relationship. Mr. Speaker, all we had to do is take a look at 
what the Liberals did to the hospital workers, the number of disputes and strikes and conflicts and boards of 
conciliations and arbitration . . . 
 
MR. STEUART:— How about the Bills? 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— . . . that were carrying on for a period of seven years. What the Liberals did was not 
provide the funds necessary for the hospitals to pay the employees decent wages and establish decent 
working conditions. Similarly in case of the Government employees, the Public Service. Now when I took 
office and was given the job of Minister-in-charge of the Public Service Commission there were dozens and 
dozens of grievances pending to be referred to boards of arbitration and conciliation. Mr. Speaker, I am glad 
that we were able to clear them all up. We entered collective bargaining in a spirit of co-operation. We were 
able to enter into bargaining agreements within a matter of a few days after negotiations started. 
 
This Trade Union Act is to be a charter for industrial relations. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— It is going to be another first in a number of areas. It is going to update industrial 
relations legislation to the 1970s. The Liberal legislation dealt with industrial relations on the basis of the 
dark ages. The Liberals were completely out of tune. They refused to reorganize the need for modern 
legislation. We shall have to deal with problems in industrial relations in the current period of time. Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you this that I have dealt with many employers. When it came to Bill 2 and much of the 
former Government’s other restrictive legislation that they introduced, employer after employer really was 
opposed to that legislation. Because good employers resist and do not accept compulsory arbitration. In fact I 
know that the Hon. Member from Regina Lakeview (Mr. McPherson) on one or two occasions expressed his 
views that he was opposed to compulsion, Government compulsion in labour relations. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to commend the Minister (Mr. Snyder) for bringing in this particular Trade Union Act. It is good 
legislation, it has the support of the working people and the majority of the employers. True, there are those 
employers that have some objections to particular items of the Bill. When the Hon. Member says that we 
have refused or a Minister has refused to meet employers, that is just not true. 
 
MR. STEUART:— He didn’t say he met them. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2129 

MR. SMISHEK:— He has met with them, he has heard their views and he has considered their 
representation. Mr. Speaker, I believe this is a good Bill and I urge the Members on both sides of the House 
to give this legislation unanimous approval to set a new charter and establish a new climate for industrial 
relations in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. STEUART:— Will the Member permit a question before he takes his seat? You pointed out very 
clearly certain sections of the Bill indicating you had read it, about 25 per cent of the vote to get into a union. 
Then you said they had the same rights to get out of a union, would you tell us what section, because we 
have missed it, I am sorry. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Page 7 Section 6 and page 8. The powers of the Labour Relations Board and 
representative votes. 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw):— Where does it say anything in there? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Stop making speeches of . . . 
 
MR. STEUART:— No, no, show us. It is just nonsense, Mr. Speaker, it says nothing about them voting 25 
per cent to get out of a union. 
 
MR. G. B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park):— It is quite evident after listening to the last speaker that 
there is quite a bit of opposition to this Bill and as several Members wish to speak to it I ask leave to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Snyder that Bill No. 
134 - An Act respecting Technological Changes and their Effects on Employees be now read a second 
time. 
 
MR. D. F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North):— Mr. Speaker, in continuing the debate on Bill No. 134, I 
should first of all like to define the problem as I see it. Rapid change has become almost a way of life in 
today’s society and I think we all recognize this fact. As I see it the Government of Saskatchewan in this 
legislation has a duty to perform in this respect. First, we must encourage technological change in our 
businesses and industries in Saskatchewan, if we expect to compete successfully in the years ahead. 
Secondly, we must recognize that these technological changes may seriously dislocate or adversely affect 
those employees involved. And we must attempt to assure that these effects are minimized. If we accept that 
we have these two duties to perform regarding advancement of technology then I think it is obvious we must 
be moderate in our attitudes regarding management or labor interests. We must not create a climate through 
legislation which might cause detrimental effects in our industrial relations. Rather we should encourage the 
stabilization of the collective bargaining relationship. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2130 

On the face of things it appears we are confronted by two conflicting goals. First, that business needs 
maximum freedom in this age of rapid technological change in order to inject new ideas and innovations 
thereby maintaining its competitive position. Second, is a workers’ need for protection or a reasonable 
guarantee that they will not be thrown out on the street when these changes mean loss of jobs. We are here 
today to find some solution to help resolve the problem as these two seemingly conflicting goals meet head 
on. I believe that we must seek provisions that will encourage management and labor to deal with the impact 
of technological change of employees at the bargaining table. We must also provide encouragement so that 
these negotiations take place at the normal time for negotiating of a collective agreement. In this manner 
precedent has proven that by working co-operatively, labor and management can introduce technological 
changes in a harmonious manner. Intelligent management has been doing so for a long time and it is the duty 
of this Legislature to provide encouragement for all management to act in this responsible fashion. I think 
that in considering this Bill, this Legislature should keep in mind that there is another aspect besides the 
labor management crisis as a result of technological change. And this is, the achieving of a more human and 
secure community in these times of rapid technological change requires the effective involvement of 
governments, both Provincial and Federal in a whole range of social and economic areas. In this regard I am 
fearful that the Saskatchewan Government is not willing to accept this responsibility. It appears that the NDP 
Government hope to see all issues settled through the adversary system without any government input. 
 
Our Government seems to believe that this is strictly a labor management issue. While it is obvious that 
labor and management are directly concerned, I think that it should be just as obvious that the Canadian and 
Saskatchewan public has a great interest also. This is why this Government has a direct responsibility to 
serve the public interest. I should like, for the benefit of this Assembly, to spell out what the public interest 
is. First, the public has an interest as a beneficiary of an efficient and technological competitive industry. 
Second, the public has an interest as a victim of an inefficient industry that is protected by tariffs or 
subsidies. Surely, we in western Canada recognize this fact. Third, the public has an interest because it 
supplies the tax base which is used to assist industry to make technological changes or to assist the 
employees affected by these changes. Fourth, the public has an interest as a victim who is inconvenienced by 
an industrial strike arising out of failure of labor and management to reach agreement. Mr. Speaker, 
provisions in Bill 134 will not serve the public interest very well. This Bill encourages head on encounters 
over technological changes. This is going to produce industrial relations strife which will end in strikes. 
Because of Bill 134 management will not be willing to negotiate technological change when they know that 
the contract can be opened at any time. It is also possible that management will be forced to undertake 
technological changes at the time when contracts are normally negotiated and this will result in an inefficient 
industry or business in Saskatchewan. 
 
I said the other day that I could not support this Bill unless changes were made to include provisions so that 
the collective bargaining process is not nullified. This collective bargaining process is far from a perfect 
instrument but at this point in time it is the best we have and we must strive to see 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2131 

that it becomes more effective. 
 
In order to encourage negotiation during normal bargaining I would suggest that two provisions be 
incorporated into this Bill. One, is that bargaining could not be commenced during the closed period of a 
contract if the collective bargaining agreement contains provisions that are intended to assist employees 
affected by any technological change to adjust to the effects of the change. Second, bargaining should not be 
commenced during a closed period of a contract if the collective agreement specifies that the contract cannot 
be opened during the term of the collective agreement. It can be seen that both these provisions are 
negotiable. Neither provision need be incorporated into a collective agreement but either provision may be. 
These two provisions will encourage labor and management to discuss fully and negotiate technological 
change. If the two parties to the agreement are prepared to take advantage and settle these issues as a part of 
the overall agreement then we will avoid later confrontations. I think it is also fair to say that Bill 134 should 
not affect any collective agreements that were entered into before the coming into force of this Bill. Those 
agreements were made in good faith and unless exempted this Bill would force an overburden on one party 
who thought that he had bargained in good faith. To impose further obligations on one party makes a 
mockery out of the negotiations that he went through in order to get that agreement. Mr. Speaker, if these 
provisions were added to Bill 134, I suggest that it would become legislation that would be fair and more 
acceptable and would enhance the collective bargaining process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to contemplate the practical effects of this Bill. It will, to a large extent, depend on 
the Minister of Labour. There is an absence of objective criteria in this Bill like so many others presented to 
this House. The Minister is given power to specify by regulation. I should think that in many cases it might 
be better off in the hands of the Labour Relations Board or at least on recommendations of the Labour 
Relations Board. Such is the case with the Federal Labour Code. I think before passing this Bill, all Members 
of this Assembly should consider the possibility of adverse results occurring to the general public as a result 
of Bill 134. We are faced with the need for technological change to be efficient and competitive and the need 
for employer security as a result of this change. If our business and industry does not remain technologically 
competitive then it is obvious we won’t have any jobs or any employees. I say this not to try to convince 
anyone that we should forget about the problem and let it work itself out but rather to urge all concerned to 
use a moderate approach. I also suggest here that the amendments I have proposed are a moderate and a 
sensible approach and I urge the Assembly to adopt them. 
 
Before taking my seat I should like to urge this Government not to proceed at this time with Bill 134 or The 
Trade Union Act 105. These Bills are examples of hasty and ill-considered legislative changes. These Bills 
are a risk to the good relationship based on mutual acceptance and respect that most employees have with 
their employers in this Province. These two Bills should not be read a second time at this Session. The 
Government should withdraw the Bill or else let it stand until a fall session. The Government should 
immediately announce its intention to establish a representative committee to review The Trade Union Act 
. . . 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2132 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— . . . and the Act respecting technological change. This is exactly the method used in 
1965 by the then Liberal Government. It is the duty of Government to consult with the affected parties before 
enacting legislation which will result in an imbalance in existing conditions. It is the duty of this Legislature 
to take this moderate and fair-minded approach and allow representation to be made concerning Bills 105 
and 134. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health):— Mr. Speaker, I am surprised at the remarks of the 
Hon. Member from Moose Jaw. When The Trade Union Act was introduced a few days ago, he said that he 
didn’t like it because the Act didn’t deal with the problems of technological change. The intention of the 
Government was to bring in Bill 134. Now that there is a Bill to deal with technological change, he says he 
can’t go along with it because he doesn’t like it and he doesn’t like The Trade Union Act. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Typical Liberal, Walter. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, he talks about the need for committees to be established. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to industrial relations, the Liberals had established two or three committees. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, some of the recommendations of the committees that were established are finding their way 
into legislation now. The Liberals refused to act on the very committee and the recommendations that the 
committees made. We are acting on those recommendations. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the question of 
technological change I would commend to the Hon. Member the study by the Federal inquiry under the 
Judge from Manitoba, Judge Freedman, who made a study on technological change and who made 
recommendations. I am glad, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Labour has brought in legislation, the first 
legislation of its type in Canada to deal with the problems of technological change. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, when the Hon. Member talks about restrictions and that the public interest 
isn’t going to be protected, what about the employee’s right to be protected? What about an employee who 
may have worked for 20 or 30 years under the present system and is subject to layoff on seven days notice, 
he is subject to be thrown out on the street because there is no protection for him. At the present time when 
an employer decides to automate and mechanize and bring technological changes. He says that the only time 
that there should be collective bargaining is when the collective bargaining expires. Can he give us assurance 
that employers aren’t going to introduce automation except when the collective bargaining agreement 
expires? His argument is totally invalid. Certainly it is not the intention of the Bill to supersede a collective 
bargaining agreement. All it does in the area of technology is require the parties to bargain and what is 
wrong with that? The fact is that where you have good industrial relations, collective 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2133 

bargaining is an ongoing thing. It just doesn’t happen once every two or three years. I know that because I 
have been involved in collective bargaining more than anybody in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— The fact is that where you have good industrial relations, the collective bargaining 
process is an every day thing, in terms of dealing with grievances, in terms of dealing with interpretation of 
collective bargaining contracts, in terms of changing some things in a collective bargaining agreement 
because . . . 
 
MR. STEUART:— By mutual consent. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— That’s precisely. And remember this, that Judge Freedman made it very clear that 
technology should be part of collective bargaining, not only at the time the collective bargaining expires but 
should be an ongoing thing, And, Mr. Speaker, that principle is recognized here. And if you are going to deal 
with technological change and give the workers some rights then surely, Mr. Speaker, it has to be when 
technological change is taking place, not after it has taken place when the collective bargaining expires. 
Obviously, the Member knows virtually nothing about industry and nothing about collective bargaining 
when he brings in this kind of an argument. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how one satisfies the Members of the Opposition. First of all they argue that you 
need to bring in legislation to deal with technological change. After we bring in legislation which they don’t 
understand because they know nothing about industrial relations, they say you shouldn’t introduce it. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way this Government is going to do business. We know that there is need for this 
kind of legislation. It is good legislation. I congratulate the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) for bringing it in 
and urge all Members to support it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse):— Mr. Speaker, again we have had some astounding words from the Minister of 
Health (Mr. Smishek) and I must say that his second speech improved a bit more from his first one. But it 
has prompted further debate and I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
 WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. L. COWLEY (Biggar):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to this 
House a group of 34 students seated in the Speaker’s Gallery from Delisle School in the Biggar constituency. 
The students are from the Delisle, Donovan and the surrounding area. They are accompanied by their teacher 
Mr. Andy Choloa. I would like to wish them a pleasant stay in Regina and at the Legislature and hope that 
this afternoon as they watch us going through Estimates, they find the procedure interesting and 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2134 

informative. I should also like to wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. J. E. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon-Mayfair):— Mr. Speaker, it is a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the other Members of the Chamber a group of students from Westmount 
Public School in the constituency of Saskatoon-Mayfair. They are located in the west gallery and they are 
accompanied by Mrs. Hindmarsh and I see by Mr. Krohn as well. This has a special significance to me 
because both my boys go to Westmount School. As a matter of fact, one of them was here last year with the 
visiting group of students. I hope the students find this afternoon’s business of the House of some interest to 
them and I know that we all wish them a safe journey back to Saskatoon-Mayfair. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K. R. MacLEOD:— Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislature, I would like to introduce to you an 
outstanding group of people in the Speaker’s Gallery, a group from the University of Laval in Quebec - 
Bachelor of Administration students. There are, I think, about 35 to 50 all together in the group, half of 
whom, I understand are from Regina. The trip from Quebec is a return visit - sort of a hello back to a group 
that had visited in Quebec from Saskatchewan a year ago. They are in company with an outstanding person 
from Regina, Miss Marilyn Tames, who is with the group and who has assisted in the organization of this 
visit. We welcome these students from Quebec and we wish them Bon Voyage. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
 SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 135 - An Act to amend The 
Medical Profession Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, there are six main provisions in the Bill to amend The Medical Profession Act. 
All of these provisions are designed to ensure that legislation affecting practising physicians in 
Saskatchewan is consistent. Moreover provisions in this Bill will further promote the best possible care and 
treatment of our citizens. At the same time the Bill will strengthen the protection of the rights of practising 
physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to remind the Members of this House that this Bill will be sent to the Committee 
on Law Amendments and delegated Powers. This Committee will be able to discuss the provisions of this 
Bill directly with the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the Saskatchewan Medical Association and 
any other interested parties. I shall keep my remarks brief because I know that the Committee hearings with 
the profession represented will be a more appropriate occasion for discussion of the implications of these 
amendments from the viewpoint of the medical profession. 
 
The first amendment will make it easier for a physician 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2135 

from Australia, New Zealand and the Union of South Africa to establish practice in Saskatchewan. The 
present legislation recognizes that where the skills of practitioners from these countries is comparable to our 
own, it is desirable that these foreign licenced physicians should be allowed to move to Saskatchewan, 
obtain a licence to practise and establish their practice in the province. However, the existing law also states 
that the Saskatchewan College of Physicians and Surgeons cannot grant a Saskatchewan licence to practise 
to these doctors unless a reciprocal arrangement with the counterpart organizations in New Zealand, 
Australia and the Union of South Africa exists. That is, we in Saskatchewan cannot accept qualified doctors 
in Saskatchewan from these other countries unless the other countries will sign an agreement whereby they 
will licence our doctors. The reciprocal licensing agreement is not particularly important and can be to the 
disadvantage of Saskatchewan in individual cases. A similar reciprocal provision was removed by the former 
Minister, you may recall, in 1967 with respect to the registration of British physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second amendment provides for a legislative division of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and the College of Physicians and Surgeons. Throughout Canada, the desirability of having a 
legal separation between the functions of the Medical Association and the functions of the licensing body 
has been recognized. This amendment to The Medical Profession Act will bring Saskatchewan into line with 
the accepted method of medical professional organizations. You may know, Mr. Speaker, that the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons acts as a regulatory and licencing body of medical practitioners and through its 
functions the College protects the public. The Medical Association functions to protect and advance the 
interest of physicians. Clearly, these two functions may, on occasion, give rise to a conflict of interest and it 
is important that the associations are completely separated. The Saskatchewan Medical profession has 
recently taken steps to separate the two organizations, that is, the SMA and the College have become 
separated by their own actions. The amendment proposed in this Bill contains the legal provisions to 
facilitate the development of the two independent organizations. 
 
The amendment to The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act which already has been passed in this 
House will ensure that the Saskatchewan Medical Association is able adequately to finance the costs 
associated with the negotiations carried out by the Medical Association. The negotiation of physicians’ fees 
is one of the primary functions of the SMA. Membership in the Medical Association will be voluntary. 
However, all physicians who benefit from the negotiations carried out on their behalf by the Medical 
Association will be required to contribute toward the cost of these negotiations. The College of Physicians 
and Surgeons is the licensing body for the physicians in Saskatchewan and is able to collect fees as part of 
the requirements in obtaining a licence to practise. The College has a primary responsibility for maintaining 
the standards of practice in the province and for protecting the public interest through its licencing and 
disciplinary powers over practising physicians. The Medical Profession Act presently states that the 
physician is guilty of professional misconduct if he co-operates in the provision of health services with a 
person who is not registered under The Medical Profession Act whereby the patient requires professional 
discretion or skill. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2136 

The third major amendment to The Medical Profession Act allows physicians to co-operate with 
professionals registered under other Acts of this Assembly which entitle the other professionals to provide 
services to the sick or to the injured people. The existing law could be used against a physician such as the 
radiologist or the pathologist who co-operated or provided a report, say to a chiropractor or an optometrist or 
even a dentist. The Members of this House have previously indicated their support for the citizens of the 
province who wish to use chiropractic services. This amendment will assist chiropractors in obtaining the 
best possible services for their patients. 
 
The fourth major amendment in this Bill establishes an appeal tribunal to hear appeals by physicians from 
the disciplinary action taken by the College of Physicians and Surgeons. The discipline committee of the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons through the Council of the College has wide powers in disciplining 
members of the medical profession. This is the existing law and allows for an appeal from the Council’s 
decision to be made to a judge of Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
The establishment of an Appeal Tribunal will enable the appeal to be heard by a body which will have 
greater knowledge and background to adjudicate the issues under appeal. The Appeal Tribunal will have full 
authority to examine all the circumstances associated with a case. 
 
Under the present law the Court of Queen’s Bench is entitled to review the action taken by the Discipline 
Committee of the College of Physicians and Surgeons. This amendment states that the appeal will be a new 
trial. What appeared during the hearings of the Discipline Committee need not affect the hearings by the 
Tribunal or its conclusion. 
 
The Appeal Tribunal will consist of a judge from the Court of Queen’s Bench, a member appointed by the 
Minister of Public Health and a member appointed by the Dean of the College of Medicine of the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The provision of psychiatric services, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan is different than other medical 
specialities. Most psychiatrists are employed in the Public Service. Because of this it is possible and 
necessary to recruit psychiatrists from many parts of Canada and the world, to practise psychiatry in 
Saskatchewan. The fifth major amendment to The Medical Profession Act provides for psychiatrists working 
in the Public Service to be licensed by the College of Physicians and Surgeons for the practice of psychiatry 
in Saskatchewan. The proposed legislation requires that the speciality qualifications be obtained in 
designated countries which are recognized by the Saskatchewan authorities as having suitable standards. 
 
Because the psychiatrist is working in a Branch of the Public Service of the Province, in close association 
with other professionals, it is desirable that greater latitude be permitted in the licensing of these persons. A 
licence issued to a psychiatrist under this provision of the Act will be automatically cancelled when a 
psychiatrist ceases to be employed in the Public Service. 
 
The final amendment to this Act would allow for graduates of the Canadian Medical Schools to provide 
service in Saskatchewan on a temporary basis even though the graduates are not yet 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2137 

fully qualified to practice medicine. This amendment will clarify the authority to allow recent medical 
graduates to serve patients when practising physicians are on vacation or are otherwise unable to provide 
service. This will contribute to the continuity of patient service in Saskatchewan. 
 
Where a recent graduate receives a temporary licence to practise under this provision of the Act, a fully 
licenced physician would supervise the work of the medical graduate. This amendment was proposed to the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons and is in line with the existing practices elsewhere in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hope that this amendment will have the effect of helping patients by making it easier to 
assure continuity of medical service, of helping practising physicians, especially those in solo practice and 
rural practice, by making it easier to provide alternative medical coverage for their patients for short periods 
of time, and of helping new medical graduates who are gaining experience in medical practice. And, finally, 
of helping Saskatchewan by providing one more incentive to retain or remain in Saskatchewan to serve our 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the basic amendments to this Act. I move that this Bill be now read a second time and 
referred to the Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 
 
MR. G. B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park):— Mr. Speaker, just a few remarks about this Bill. 
Generally speaking we are in agreement with it and I particularly appreciate the extension of the registration 
privileges, I think this is all pretty good. 
 
The Appeal Board referred to by the Minister leaves something to be desired, I believe. He used the 
expression that these appeals would be dealt with by knowledgeable people. This depends on the people 
named to the Appeal Board and they could be all non-medical people, namely, a judge, one named by the 
Minister and one named by the Dean of Medicine. There is no stipulation that they are necessarily 
knowledgeable about the medical ethics. 
 
This is a matter which can be discussed in Committee and I believe the College will be speaking in this 
regard. There is one entire section that I really can’t see the purpose of it being included and I refer to 
Section 39 (a) where it is spelled out that the College of Physicians and Surgeons can’t do certain things and 
I believe it was distinctly understood between the College and the Minister that they would withdraw from 
this area where they formerly participated, through the Saskatchewan Medical Association and would 
provide for it in their bylaws. I feel that Section 39 (a) is almost superfluous, bearing in mind that agreement. 
 
The reference to psychiatry I believe is good. We have always had a little difficulty in the retention of 
psychiatrists here in Saskatchewan. The rate of turnover, I guess, is higher than in any other medical practice. 
Although the practice followed by the College up to the passage of this Bill has had some advantages in that 
quite a number of these psychiatrists, because of the strict requirements, did pass the necessary examination 
and improved their status while in Saskatchewan. But likewise I realize there were a good many who didn’t 
bother to 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2138 

come to Saskatchewan, or only stayed here for a short time because of the strict requirements of the College 
of Physicians and Surgeons and this particular Act. 
 
We will be supporting the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, just one or two questions that were raised by the Hon. Member, in case of 
Section 39 (a) the College and the SMA have reached agreement on the separation and the intent of the Bill 
is to establish the actual legal authority or provision for that separation. 
 
In case of the psychiatrist I might advise the Member so that he might refresh his memory, why the section is 
really being proposed. At the present time while the College has granted permits to practise, the permit to 
practise has been for a period of two years only. Thereafter extensions from time to time were granted. It is 
described by the psychiatrists as the guillotine provision. I had a chance to meet with the profession to 
discuss this particular section and we have agreement between the Department and the physicians that this 
particular section is important. 
 
In case of the Appeal Procedure you may be aware that Section 87 of the Act does provide that in case of a 
physician being disciplined he may appeal to the Discipline Committee for a review. He may ask the 
Minister to use his influence to have a Board of Arbitration established, but the Board of Arbitration can 
only be established providing the College agrees to establishing the Board of Arbitration. And then there is 
an appeal to the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
What is provided in Section 50 and 51, is to establish an expert appeal body in this regard. Now it is true it 
doesn’t set out who must be named. There is one person to be named by the Minister, one by the Dean of 
Medicine, and the Chairman must be a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench appointed by the Chief Justice. 
We believe that this is a reasonable appeal procedure being provided. We shall be likely hearing more views 
from the College and the SMA on this when the Bill is considered by the Committee of Law Amendments. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
HON. E. I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 120 - An Act 
respecting Rural Municipalities. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the incentive of the House to allow me to proceed on second 
reading of this Bill. 
 
I realize that the Bill has very recently - this afternoon - been laid on the Members’ desks. Just this evening I 
have laid on the desks of the Members of the House a resume of the changes in the Act. This is a very thick 
Act and I would not expect the Members of the House would be desirous of reading it all the way through to 
compare it to the old Act to see what changes there were in it. So we have provided for some a summary of 
the changes and the additions to the Act. These four pages that have been laid on your desks will show the 
Hon. Members what the changes are in the Act. There may be some small changes in the wording besides 
these, but my staff has told me that these are the only changes that make any difference in 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2139 

regard to the meaning of the Act. 
 
I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the officials of the Department convened a meeting on February 11, 
1971, which was attended by the members of the Executive of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, for the purpose of redesigning, updating and consolidating The Rural Municipality Act. 
Subsequent meetings were held on two occasions at which representatives of the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities and the Rural Municipal Secretaries Association attended and participated in the 
discussion on suggested changes in the Act. 
 
This Bill is primarily a consolidation of the Act, but certain changes and additions to the old Act are 
proposed. These changes have been collated in a separate document to which I referred a minute ago, with a 
brief explanation on each section. A copy of this document has been distributed to each Member of the 
House. 
 
We continued, even after the Bill was approved for printing, to discuss possible solutions to problem areas in 
the Act and during our review of the Bill in Committee I will be proposing a House amendment to amend the 
legislation which governs the sale of grain on which there is a lien for arrears of taxes. The proposed 
amendment will remove the need to prepare an elevator list and will place more responsibility on the 
producer when he is selling grain which is subject to a lien for taxes. 
 
I do not feel that any of the proposed changes in this Bill are controversial because all of them have received 
the approval of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. I would suggest that any questions on 
the Bill could be better dealt with in Committee. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
 THIRD READINGS 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier) moved third reading of Bill No. 85 - An Act to establish The 
Department of Culture and Youth. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I asked that this Bill be held on third reading since I wanted to make a comment 
which I hope the House will permit me to make. I think it is germane and it is certainly topical and timely. I 
would like to make a brief statement in my dual capacity as - I was going to say Premier, but perhaps I 
should say President of the Council and Honorary President of the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 
 
The youth section of the new department, of course, will not be directly concerned with professional sport. 
But we do hope it will be able to encourage the development of the kind of spirit and enthusiasm around 
amateur sport and recreation which characterizes that miraculous organization, the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders. 
 
I say miraculous, Mr. Speaker, because it defines all the known laws of survival for professional football 
teams. How many times have we in Saskatchewan been told that we shouldn’t be in the Canadian Football 
League. Ask any Easterner and he 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2140 

will tell you. He will say that the population is too small. He will say that Taylor Field is inadequate. He will 
say that there is not enough money in Regina to support a CFL team. He will say that we can’t compete with 
the big city clubs for players. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people from Eastern Canada and from Vancouver, certainly in the past and I suspect 
again in the future, will say that there is no place in the league for the Big Green, it just can’t work. That is 
what they say, Mr. Speaker, it just can’t work. Except that in fact it does. 
 
It works, Mr. Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan want it to work and they make it work. The 
Roughrider organization is a community organization, and the people support it in good years and bad at the 
box office, in fund raising affairs and along coffee row. And many prominent citizens of Regina have given 
many, many hours and days to the affairs of the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 
 
I won’t single out any of them, but I would mention now the Member for Lakeview, Don McPherson, who 
has been a consistent and exceedingly valuable supporter of the Saskatchewan Roughriders for many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t call them Saskatchewan Roughriders for nothing. They draw support and good will 
from all corners of this very large province. So as the Roughriders embark on another season in the Canadian 
Football League, I invite all Members to join me in wishing them well and in urging the people of 
Saskatchewan to continue their unflagging support for this truly provincial football team, the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— We look forward to a successful season, in fact we look forward to seeing the 
Roughriders at the Grey Cup. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. M. McPHERSON (Regina Lakeview):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to thank the Premier for the 
very kind words about a football team that we are all proud of in Saskatchewan. I have been connected with 
the football club for 23 years. I joined the executive in 1949 and I have been on the management committee 
ever since that time, having been president for two years and being very interested in football. 
 
I might say to the House, Mr. Speaker, that we were formerly called up until 1951 the Regina Roughriders, 
but we decided, and wisely so, to change the name to the Saskatchewan Roughriders, and this we did. We 
have had help and fans from all over Saskatchewan. Fans have bought season tickets from up as far as Prince 
Albert and come to every game and from all areas of the Province. I might say for the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Roughriders have been in football longer than any team in Canada, we started in Regina in 1903 and 
have been going ever since. A fact that is not known to many, in the early years we travelled many times to 
play the Grey Cup and we have been to the Grey Cup more than any football club in Canada. This is 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2141 

something that is not recognized too many times. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McPHERSON:— We have had junior football players come up through the ranks in Saskatchewan 
from many small towns, playing high school football, then coming on to join the Saskatoon Hilltops or the 
Rams and then eventually taking scholarships to come on to play with the Saskatchewan Roughriders. We 
have had a lot of Canadian players that have come from Saskatchewan and they have really been the 
backbone of our football club. It is truly a Saskatchewan team as far as the fans are concerned, and as the 
Premier said, it is remarkable how we keep going on year after year. We have seen a few lean years, Mr. 
Speaker, when we have lost quite a bit of money. All in all over the years with the tremendous support we 
have had and the way the league is going, we have come through and our team is in good financial condition 
at this stage and we are very happy. 
 
Among all teams in Canada, I would point out, that the Saskatchewan Roughrider team draws more fans to 
the other ball parks in Canada than any of the other eight clubs and this is another record for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McPHERSON:— We hope to sell this year, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, some 9,000 season tickets, this 
we have set out on a goal to do, and I am quite sure we will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again should like to thank the Premier for his very kind words about a football club that is 
very dear to my heart and very dear to all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Now that we have had the comments on this Bill, I wonder if one of the Ministers will 
move third reading. Third reading has not been moved yet. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Good point, Mr. Speaker. I move third reading of Bill No. 85, an Act to establish the 
Department of Culture and Youth. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
 ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
 SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill No. 
110 - An Act to facilitate the Acquisition and Disposition of Farm Land in Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. J. C. McISAAC (Wilkie):— Mr. Speaker, a day or two ago when we adjourned debate on this 
particular Bill I had referred to the comments of the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). At that 
time he had spent a few minutes in the course of his speech eulogizing the 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2142 

people and the author, the originator of the idea. I believe he suggested to the House that the idea and the 
concept went back 30 some years. Well I am sure that the Members opposite, didn’t go back 38 years for this 
particular idea. But I wondered at the time if many Members of the House realized where the NDP did get 
this idea of a Land Bank from. As a matter of fact, I should like the Attorney General to tell us, I’d like to see 
him in the debate later on here. They got this idea and the concept, Mr. Speaker, from that same Federal Task 
Force Report that they have talked about so often in this House, the Task Force Report that was supposedly 
to reduce the number of farms in this Province and across Canada. One of the measures suggested in that 
Task Force was the implementation of a Land Bank. Here from the very report that they have condemned so 
highly, so often and so many times in the House and around the Province, they take this suggestion, bring it 
in as a great new thought of theirs. 
 
One of the objectives of the Land Bank Bill that has been espoused, certainly more so before the election 
than afterwards, it has been stated that the Land Bank Bill will be a very effective means of facilitating land 
transfer from father to son. Oddly enough in the course of the debate to date on this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
Members opposite haven’t been referring particularly to this particular aspect of it. Instead, we have listened 
to Members give us illustrations and examples and figures to indicate what a great advantage and what a 
wonderful thing it is for a young farmer to lease a piece of land and lease it from the Government for the rest 
of his farming life. In this respect, Mr. Speaker, I am convinced, that this legislation when implemented, and 
I have no doubt the Government opposite will implement it, will result, not in an increase in the number of 
family farm units, in Saskatchewan, it will result in a decrease in the number of family farm units operating 
land in Saskatchewan. It will result initially in dozens of older farmers seeking to sell their land to the 
Commission and I will guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that there will not be a comparable rush of younger 
farmers to engage in farming. Initially, of course, I think the Government, I am sure, realizes that much of 
the land that will be offered to the Commission will not be the prime land of the province. It will most likely 
be the land that for one good reason or another, the present owner is experiencing some difficulty in selling. 
This certainly will be the kind of land, the type of land generally that will be offered to the Commission and I 
have no doubt that the Commission will be proceeding to try to negotiate to purchase. Therefore, for any 
Member opposite to suggest that the Land Bank will increase the number of family farm units in rural 
Saskatchewan is nothing short of pure nonsense. 
 
The preservation of the family unit in rural Saskatchewan is an objective that most certainly is supported by 
the Liberal Party. As I mentioned, one of the particular problems in this objective is the transfer of land from 
father to son. We are all familiar and all well aware, both sides of the House, regardless of political stripe of 
the high cost of credit, of the increasing cost of retiring parents to live off of the farm, of the kind of down 
payment that is required by the Federal Farm Credit Corporation. I am sure again that practically any 
Member, particularly the rural Members, know of people who sold their land eight, ten maybe even five or 
six years ago and moved to the local town or the local community, or perhaps Saskatoon and today are 
finding themselves in financial trouble due to 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2143 

inflation and due to the rising cost of living. 
 
In the election campaign last year, Mr. Speaker, I think many people accepted the NDP promise of a Land 
Bank as some magical solution to this problem of father-son transfer. Now the Minister, and I regret that he 
isn’t here this evening, had a number of very large meetings around the province. Many people attended, I 
personally wasn’t able to attend, but I certainly did talk to many people who were at those various meetings. 
I can tell him if he hasn’t realized it himself that most of those attending came away disillusioned and 
disappointed. In no way was the kind of meetings the Minister had around the province the kind of 
consultation that he should have had with farming people of this Province. 
 
One of the major disappointments, one of the major disappointments of the many hundreds of farmers who 
did attend those meetings was the fact that the proposed Land Bank scheme did not in fact help in any way 
the father-son transfer. That was certainly one of the major disappointments of the people who attended 
those meetings. They learned it was going to be a two-stage process, father to Land Bank, yes, at the price 
the Government wished to negotiate; but Land Bank to son, perhaps possibly, five years down the road, 
providing the son paid a high cash rent, providing he behaved in accordance with dozens of regulations, 
many of which we don’t know about yet - they were left to Cabinet to bring in later - providing the son 
doesn’t offend the local land committee, the chairman of the local land committee, providing he pays his 
compulsory crop insurance, providing he keeps his local tax paid. At the end of that five-year period, the 
Government would consider allowing the son to buy the land. Well, Mr. Speaker, those prospects are not 
good enough for the average farmer of Saskatchewan and the average young farmer of Saskatchewan, who is 
interested in taking over his father’s farm. As the Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) put it so 
well, that just hasn’t been the kind of tradition upon which agriculture has been built in Saskatchewan. The 
Commission may or may not agree to his request to buy that land at the end of five year’s time. They have 
ultimate power in this regard, there is no question about that as I read the present Bill. 
 
When he does have that option if it is decided that he should receive it, what will he pay for the land? First 
of all, he will have to pay cash. Will he pay the same price the father received for his land, Mr. Speaker? Not 
necessarily, not necessarily. He will pay the going price at that time. There is every likelihood and Members 
opposite must be well aware of this, that the price at that time will in all likelihood be higher than the price 
his father or his parents received for that land five years previous, if for no other reason, we are going to see 
some continuing inflation, no government as yet has been able to stop it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Government really wants to facilitate land transfer from father to son, they would allow 
the son to buy that land immediately and begin making payments on behalf of eventually owning that land, 
particularly if it was his parents’ farm, particularly if it was the boy’s father’s farm that he was buying. The 
Government will find out if they haven’t already, that this most certainly is still the wish of Saskatchewan 
farmers, they want to own their own land. Not only that, but the pioneers of Saskatchewan who are now 
wanting to 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2144 

retire, wanting to sell that land, whether they take cash or take an annuity, whether they head for the local 
community or head for the larger cities, they will not want to sell their land to the Commission with no 
assurance whatsoever that their son is indeed going to be able to buy it and own it and eventually take it over 
and operate it. This, I think is one of the basic reasons, Mr. Speaker, why the Land Bank will not do what the 
NDP speak so piously about, namely be the great vehicle for transferring land from father to son. 
 
If the Government was really sincere in this regard in facilitating effective land transfers then there would be 
no simpler method than the idea and the suggestion proposed in this House and this debate earlier, and in the 
Throne Speech Debate by the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe). Very simply, Mr. Speaker, that idea asks the 
Government to guarantee the credit of the son to the Federal Farm Credit Corporation. The Member for 
Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) in his remarks amplified that suggestion to a very excellent degree. I might 
only add here that we are not talking about setting up another provincial farm credit corporation, as I gather 
some Members opposite concluded, not at all. We are talking about using the existing personnel, the existing 
field staff offices and so on of the FCC. But as I say because the Government opposite will not proceed in 
that direction, Mr. Speaker, we are left with one conclusion in this regard with respect to the Land Bank, and 
that is that the Blakeney Government, the NDP Government opposite is more concerned about state 
ownership of land than they are about transferring land from father to son. I am convinced they are more 
concerned about nationalizing land than they are about transferring it from father to son. They are more 
concerned about the pipe dream of a handful of urban dwelling wafflers than they are about the farmer on the 
"back forty" in this Province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McISAAC:— They are more concerned about NDP Cabinet power than they are about horsepower or 
farmer power. I think this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is another illustration of the kind of powers we have seen a 
number of illustrations of being taken onto itself by the NDP Cabinet. Here we have waited for weeks during 
the course of this Session for the Bill, for the legislation to see the details, to see how it will work, to see 
how it will apply to the people affected, the seller, the lessee and how it will apply to various sectors of 
farming in the province, and we still do not know. We still do not know the details, the working sections of 
the Bill, I think about a dozen or more sections are still left to Cabinet regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this that as far as I am personally concerned, I am in favor of a Land Bank scheme 
that would buy and sell land of older farmers wishing to retire, providing that the Government would 
immediately turn that land over to young farmers wishing to begin operations or to farmers on smaller 
holdings who wish to expand their operations. If indeed the Land Bank would assist the father-son transfer 
which it won’t, I would be supporting it. Because, Mr. Speaker, the scheme doesn’t really tackle the 
problems of the family farm operator in Saskatchewan, because it doesn’t do any of the things that the 
Federal Land Bank proposal in the Task Force Report originally suggested, it doesn’t do any of the things, 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2145 

Mr. Minister, and because it instead as I read it, proposes only to begin a state land scheme, I will most 
certainly be opposing the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. CODY (Watrous):— Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride that I rise in this debate this 
evening. I am proud because we in Saskatchewan again are pioneering the field in progressive legislation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— We in the New Democratic Party are again fulfilling a promise to the electorate of this 
Province. 
 
I was quite interested in some of the remarks from the Hon. Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) and I take 
his remarks differently than a lot of the other Members because I know about 80 per cent of the Hon. 
Member’s constituents, which helps. 
 
First of all he says that the idea of a Land Bank is set out in the Task Force Report. Well I can assure the 
Hon. Member from Wilkie that if the Land Bank scheme is the same kind of a Land Bank scheme that Otto 
Lang is trying to set up we don’t want any part of that or any part of the one that’s in the Task Force Report. 
 
He also went on to say that we are going to have a decrease in farmers by the Land Bank scheme and he says, 
"I’ll guarantee you have a decrease in farmers." Well, I don’t know how big of a decrease we’ll have and I 
am very doubtful that we will have any kind of a decrease which is anywhere near the same kind of decrease 
we just saw in a Moose Jaw report. There is no possible way that you could have a worse decrease than that. 
 
Another thing he says is about the Land Bank meetings that were held by the Hon. Minister of Agriculture 
(Mr. Messer). He says, I don’t know of a person who went out of these meetings who wasn’t disillusioned. I 
don’t know of one and I know of dozens of people from your own constituency, Mr. Member from Wilkie, 
who were at the North Battleford meeting and whom I spoke to from Wilkie, Unity and Handel and Leipzig, 
towns which are loaded with Liberals and there isn’t a one whom I spoke to that said he didn’t favor what 
they heard that day. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— He also went on to say that . . . 
 
MR. McISAAC:— Now I know why you left. 
 
MR. CODY:— You never know with the new boundaries I might be back. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— He went on to say that he would rather see the Government guarantee credit to the son for 
transfers of land. 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2146 

Well we have that very thing happening today and what do we see, we just have the sons of rich farmers who 
are able to be guaranteed. How do you think I, as a farmer, could have started with my father owning a half 
section of land? He couldn’t guarantee anything. He didn’t have the money to guarantee anything. The 
province couldn’t guarantee anything because he didn’t have anything and as a result there was no possible 
way and it would only help the man who already is large. There is no question in my mind about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I travelled throughout the constituency during the election campaign if there was any one 
thing which could be signalled out during the election campaign of 1971 that was significant in the minds of 
the people of the Watrous constituency, it was that we were going to have a Land Bank Commission. The 
people were proud and the people of the Watrous constituency spoke loud and clear and with enthusiasm 
endorsing this new progressive piece of legislation. They said so before the election, they said so at the 
election and they say so now. And they say with clarity that it was time that we had a government with 
foresight and imagination to bring forward the kind of legislation which will truly enhance the position of the 
family farmer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think really what we just heard before and what we heard for the last three or four days, in my 
mind, is sheer hypocrisy. There is no question about it. When Members of this House oppose the Land Bank 
Commission on one hand and say they are protecting the family farmer on the other hand, there is no 
possible way that you can do that. Any Member of this House, in my mind, who does not support this Bill 
stands condemned in the eyes of the farmers of this Province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— It shows that they have no commitment to rural Saskatchewan and I really think that they 
should go out and resign their seats. That’s really what they should do. They should resign their seats so that 
their constituencies could be represented by a person with some feeling for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. LANE:— Call an election then. 
 
MR. CODY:— I’d resign my seat and run against you any time. Mr. Speaker, it is the same tired out old big 
business dominated Party which has opposed every progressive piece of legislation ever to come to this 
Province, that we have been seeing in the last two or three days. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— In the 1930s when the Wheat Board was formed the old Liberal self-centred Party said, you 
can’t do this to the farmers, what are you doing to us now? This is Communism, that is compulsion, that is 
dictatorship. They said you will destroy competition. The farmer would soon lose control of his farm. The 
same words as we heard the other day. The same old tired-out slogans that are being echoed in this House 
again today. 
 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2147 

In 1947, what did we hear when automobile insurance was introduced? There was a furious cry by the 
Liberal Party. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— Tell us about the Land Bank. 
 
MR. CODY:— We don’t have to tell you about the Land Bank. You heard it all the other day. How many 
times do you people have to be told? We are just telling you that you are the same kind of Liberal Party we 
knew in this Province for a hundred years. You oppose everything that is progressive. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— In 1947 when The Automobile Accident Insurance Act was being introduced there was a 
furious cry by the Liberal Party of compulsion. "The communists are here," they said. "They are taking over 
all the businesses." I have a clipping here from the Leader-Post, February 26, 1946. One of their great friends 
at that time, I didn’t know the gentleman, whether I should say fortunately or unfortunately, I don’t know . . . 
 
MR. STEUART:— What’s his name? 
 
MR. CODY:— A fellow by the name of Mr. Proctor. He goes on to say, "An example of socialistic 
paternalism and socialistic class discrimination which opens the field for the most vicious interference and 
political influence." Identical words said by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) the other day. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— Regina Leader-Post, April 3, 1946. What do they say here? "Insurance Act graft." The title 
is purely misleading. It sounds just like the Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod). He said, 
"You’re misleading the public by this kind of title." Yeah, same words, same outfit, same place. What do we 
have then? 1960, during the election campaign when the CCF Party included in its platform a prepaid 
medical care plan, just like the New Democratic Party did in 1971 with the Land Bank Commission, we 
heard the same cries from the Liberal Party as we hear today. And I have a clipping here from the Prince 
Albert Herald, Prince Albert Daily Herald, dated Thursday, February 25, 1960. A Member who still sits in 
the House, unfortunately not too often but he is still with us occasionally, the Member from Prince Albert 
West (Mr. Steuart) and the headline says "Criticizes CCF for methods of handling Medicare Plan." And what 
does he say in this article when speaking at a house meeting of local Liberals. He said, "The CCF would be 
ramming state medicine down the throats of the majority of the people whether they liked it or not." Exactly 
the same words he used the other day. He said, "You are going to ram the Land Bank Commission down the 
people’s throats whether they like it or not." Same speech. He used the same phrase the other day as I just 
mentioned. He said another little phrase that he seems to always bring out. You’ll never forget it. He says in 
the same article, "Medical Care Plan an ill-conceived scheme." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
May 1, 1972 
 

 
2148 

AN HON. MEMBER:— That’s new. 
 
MR. CODY:— 1960 to 1972, 12 years and they are still on the same old kick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member sat on this side of the House for seven years. Why did he not get rid of these 
ill-conceived schemes he was talking about? Why did he not turn around and say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, "The CCF rammed this state medicine down your throat, we are going to give it to you in 
another way. We are going to give you an opportunity to opt out. We are going to give you an opportunity to 
say whether you want it or not." No, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t do that, he knew at the time that the plan was 
good and he knows it now and the same thing will happen with the Land Bank Commission. They’ll never 
go back to the people and say we can’t have it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— He knows today, just like he knew in 1960 that the plan which we have is a good plan for 
the farmers of this Province. And if we should ever have the misfortune of having this group on this side of 
the House, he won’t touch the plan. He won’t touch the plan just like he didn’t touch Medicare, just like he 
didn’t touch automobile insurance, just like he hasn’t touched any progressive piece of legislation which was 
brought in by the socialist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this Province are tired of that Liberal party and their old slogans. They are tired of 
the Liberal Opposition saying, this is a land grab scheme, that it is a scheme to communize all farm lands. 
They are tired of you people and it is about time, it is about time that you listened and found out you can’t 
operate that way. We showed you on June 23rd you couldn’t operate that way and we’ll show you in every 
successive four years until kingdom come, I am sure. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— I don’t know how long we’ll have to listen to this kind of garbage, to be very honest with 
you. Surely by now the Opposition should know these old tactics don’t work. It didn’t work in 1947, it didn’t 
work in 1962 and it won’t work in 1972. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— Mr. Speaker, in the RM of Bain in the centre of the Watrous constituency . . . 
 
MR. FARIS:— Surrounding Bruno. 
 
MR. CODY:— . . . surrounding Bruno. We have 245 farmers who have an average land size of 
three-quarters each. The largest farmer in this district is 10 quarters. And we have only 6 farmers this size. It 
is a known fact that three-quarters of land, as I have heard Members say, is not a viable situation in today’s 
society. Now in order to make the farmers of this RM reasonably viable, let’s say at four-quarters, we’ll be 
giving 



 
May 1, 1972 

 

 
2149 

them one-quarter of land each, approximately 125 of these farmers will have to obtain one more quarter of 
land to be in a position where they can continue farming. 
 
MR. McISAAC:— What are you going to do, make the RMs bigger? 
 
MR. CODY:— What we are going to do is make the Land Bank operate like you don’t want it to. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY:— The Land Bank, Mr. Speaker, will do this job. If we do not have this scheme this area will 
be literally wiped out. And I ask the Liberal Party across the way, Mr. Speaker, if this is what they want. Is 
this really what you want, to wipe out another 125 farmers in a matter of two townships? 
 
MR. McISAAC:— You want to wipe out Bruno. 
 
MR. CODY:— Man! I have never seen anything like it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously there is far more to say about this Land Bank Commission, this Land Bank scheme, 
this progressive legislation and for that reason I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:11 o’clock p.m. 


