




















































Hansard: April 17, 1972


1779 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

37th Day 

 

Monday, April 17, 1972 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

LOW SPRING RUNOFF AND ITS EFFECT ON COMMUNITY PASTURES 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). In the light of the fact of the low spring runoff and 

the effect that this is having on some of our community pastures and provincial pastures, is the 

Department of Agriculture planning a well-drilling program or any program at all to alleviate the 

shortage of water in our pastures? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, we are aware of the problem in 

regard to water for a lot of community pastures. We are however, more concerned about the lack of 

grass in the community pastures to carry the capacities that most of these pastures would normally carry. 

We are considering all alternatives that are open to us to make the best use of these pastures. I can’t be 

precise as to whether the alternative will be in some of the pastures to provide alternative sources of 

water through the drilling of wells. In some of them this may well be the case but we are concerned and 

we are going to try to utilize the pastures to the largest extend possible and by any means possible. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 99 – An Act to 

amend The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act was introduced prior to 

Government insurance programs for hospital and physician services. The Act established the 

requirements for an association to operate a mutual insurance agency for the sharing of the cost of health 

services among the members. With the introduction of Government programs for hospital and physician 

services the legislation respecting these associations became outdated. In most cases the associations 

ceased to function since the service they primarily provided had been taken over by the Government. 

Some of the community health associations established in the early ‘60s were incorporated under this 

Act. Specifically, the Health Association in Regina and Saskatoon and Lloydminster are incorporated 

under this Act. Community health associations operating in other parts of the province have been 

incorporated under The Co-operative Association Act. 

 

Our Government is concerned with the rising costs of health services and intends to experiment with 

new methods of providing and paying for these services. One such innovative step being 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1780 

taken by the Government is to pay for group practice clinic services on a global budget approach. This 

approach is essentially the same as that which is used for payment of hospitals instead of paying for each 

service provided. These costs will be established by reviewing the budget and expenditures necessary in 

achieving the agreed upon output level. Payments will be made on a regular basis to the association as 

long as the range in volume of service actually provided does not deviate from that used in estimating 

the budget requirements. We feel that there are many advantages in this approach and that it may 

contribute to both an improvement in the health service and to control the costs of providing these 

services. The Government will make payment directly to the governing board of the association. The 

association will then arrange payment to physicians and other members of the staff as well as payment 

for any other expenditures required in providing health services. This amendment is required since The 

Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act specifies that the association will receive their 

funds from the members. This amendment will clearly authorize the association to receive funds from 

the Government. 

 

Related amendments to The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act and The Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Act will be introduced later in the Session. These subsequent amendments which I hope to 

introduce shortly facilitate administrative changes in making payment by the Government for these 

services. Because of their experience in financing hospital operations on a similar basis we intend to 

make provision for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan to be responsible for all payments to the 

associations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 99 be now read a second time. 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this Act, I want to 

remind the House of some of the points that have been raised during the question period about the effect 

of this Bill. Also the item of news this morning from the Saskatchewan Medical Association expressing 

concern that they felt that there hadn’t been adequate consultation in connection with this Act. They also 

expressed concern that it could result in the lowering of the quality of care. 

 

The Hon. Member suggests that this is a step toward possibly slowing down the escalation of medical 

costs. I doubt very much myself whether it will result in this. I am a little concerned that the relationship 

is between the Minister and the association rather than between the Minister and the medical practitioner 

and I believe this was the understanding, rightly or wrongly, of the Medical Association, that it would be 

a more intimate relationship than exists. I question the legality of the Minister’s actions since March 1st 

even though he does make comparisons between the clinic and I believe he named about three or four 

hospitals and, in my opinion, the community clinic does not necessarily fall under the definition of a 

hospital even though the definition of a hospital is quite broad. I feel that the action on the part of the 

Minister has been hasty and has not had adequate consideration. I have further remarks to make about 

the Bill and I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1781 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 97 – An Act to establish 

the Department of Consumer Affairs. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce second reading of Bill 97, a Bill to 

establish the Department of Consumer Affairs. Mr. Speaker, all Members will know that the 

Government’s interest in consumer affairs has been on the increase for the last several years. This is, I 

suppose, for a number of reasons. One of the most important reasons for Government involvement in 

consumer affairs is the increasing complexity with which consumer transactions develop and evolve in 

North American society. We have now a multiplicity of contracts for the purchase and resale of various 

goods and items. We have sophisticated and complicated selling techniques. We have products which 

sometimes can be of dubious value to the interests of the people of a particular country, products that 

may be hazardous, products that may be unsafe. No longer does society accept the principle that the 

market place should go totally unregulated and that the consumer’s interest should not be heard in the 

councils of government. 

 

As I have said, the last several years, governments, provincially and throughout Canada have sought to 

recognize this important consumer involvement by the establishment of ministries of government 

designed specifically to look after the interests and concerns of the consumer. Members will know that 

the Federal Department of Consumer Affairs has been set up now for at least two or three years if not 

longer. Both Provincial Governments in Alberta and Manitoba have Departments of Consumer Affairs. 

Saskatchewan, I submit, is somewhat behind in the need and somewhat behind in the time in this 

particular area. 

 

We feel that a Government with a minister to speak for the department is absolutely essential if 

consumer interests are to be protected. We need it for a number of reasons including those I have 

already outlined. In addition to these, to use it as a method of co-ordinating the activities that go on as 

among the other provincial departments and the Federal Government. In the ten months of Government I 

have had some responsible experience with the Department of the Provincial Secretary which has over 

the last two or three years of the former administration acted in effect as a Department of Consumer 

Affairs. Although I commend most of the personnel and staff there for doing a good job, it became clear 

to me in the ten months that it was absolutely essential for Saskatchewan to step up into a Department of 

Consumer Affairs and thus this is what this Bill, in fact, does, the embodiment of a department to look 

after the interests of Saskatchewan’s consumers. This will ultimately end up in the appointment of a 

separate Minister to report to the House and to report to the consumers of our province. 

 

Now, with those introductory remarks, Mr. Speaker, a few words about the Bill itself. First of all, 

Section 4 of the Bill outlines in broad terms the scope of the Department. Section 4 assigns to that 

Department all matters relating to consumer affairs that have not already been assigned to any other 

department. This is a broad enough interpretation. It is preferable not to have a separate listing of the 

various Acts with respect to this type of Bill because very frequently these Acts become outmoded and 

requiring further amendments to the enabling legislation for the Department. 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1782 

Under Section 5, Members will see that the Department has some specific duties. The Department shall, 

for example, have general supervision of consumer affairs. The Department shall make inquiries and 

report upon consumer affairs legislation in Canada and elsewhere. The Department shall investigate 

complaints. The Department will disseminate information with respect to consumer affairs matters and 

perform such other tasks as may be assigned to it by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council or in other 

words, the Cabinet. 

 

Under Section 6, Mr. Speaker, wide powers are given to the Minister with respect to inquiry and 

investigation pursuant to the matter that arises as a corporate or consumer affairs matter. I should 

indicate to the Members that this Bill does have two or three sections which give some considerable 

strength to a Minister, Section 6 is one of them. In effect, it says that the Minister or anyone duly 

authorized by him will have authority to make inquiries. The person making the inquiry has the power 

by this Bill to inspect books and records and to demand their production. That is, in effect the sum total 

of Section 6. This is absolutely needed because when we are investigating any particular consumer 

transaction where a bill or a particular mode of operation has to be looked at in detail we have to give 

some meaningful strength to the Minister of the investigating authority. 

 

Under Section 8, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has wide powers to order any person to do the following, 

 

1. To cease any form of advertising, 

 

2. To cease using any form of contract, 

 

3. To cease selling any goods or services. 

 

Provision is made for a hearing at which those affected by the ministerial order stopping any one of 

these three forms of activities can state their objections. This is indicated further by application to an 

appropriate judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. The order lasts for a period of five days only with 

respect to a contract or with respect to an advertising technique. The Minister must seek to give that 

order some degree of permanency by an application to the Court of Queen’s Bench or failing that, the 

cease and desist order has no further legal effect and ceases to continue itself. A decision can be 

appealed from the Court of Queen’s Bench to the Court of Appeal. 

 

Section 9 sets out penalties with respect to any person who contravenes that particular section of the 

Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like also to draw the attention of the Members to Section 10 of this Bill. I 

think section 10 is a rather unique section with respect to some consumer legislation that we see in 

Canada. Section 10 gives the Attorney General the right to maintain a civil action against anyone who 

has committed an offence against the Act. This includes the Departmental Act or any Act administered 

by the Department, or against any person who is in breach of a contract which has been approved in 

form by the Department. Members will know that there is a fair number of licensing Acts that require 

forms of contracts to be approved. It is done in The Motor Dealers Act and in various other statutes of 

this nature. Now the Attorney General, under Section 10, can launch the action on behalf of a class of 

individuals or, if the case warrants it, on behalf of an 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1783 

individual person to recover damages and costs that may have accrued to a specific individual as a result 

of a consumer involvement. This is an unusual power. Some states of the United States of America give 

the Attorney General the right to launch an action for recovery of damage. For example, in the State of 

New York about a year and one-half ago there was an involvement with what was described as a 

pyramid franchise operator. The scheme had progressed to such a point where, according to newspaper 

reports, in another month or so they would have had eight salesmen of franchises for every one resident 

of the State of New York. Obviously, that was an unfair scheme which was designed and succeeded in 

taking advantage of a particular group of consumers. People who has purchased the pyramid franchises 

had invested a considerable sum of money in order to obtain the right to resell the franchise and in order 

to resell the product which was attached together with the franchise. I am giving just an example of 

consumer involvement. Once the scheme was uncovered, the company apparently maintained some of 

its offices in New York but on balance no effective remedy could be taken against the company for the 

substantial sums of money that individual people put out to buy the franchise and resell the products. 

What happened there was the Attorney General of the State of New York, by a power similar to the kind 

that we have written into Section 10, proceeded to take a class action against the company involved and 

recovered something like $1.8 million. The money was used then for distribution on a pro rata basis 

among those consumers who properly made out a valid and legitimate claim. Now, Section 10 says that 

power is given to the Attorney General and Members will note that is only given to the Attorney General 

because it involves a law suit. The rest of the powers reside with the Minister of Consumer Affairs who 

will likely be a different person. 

 

The rest of the provisions of the Bill relate to procedures and to costs, Mr. Speaker, and I think on 

balance cannot be thought of as being unusual or being unfavorable to any of the interests or purposes of 

this particular Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend Members of the House the passage of this Bill setting up the Department of 

Consumer Affairs. As I said at the very beginning, we owe a duty to our citizens to protect them from 

the ever growing and increasing multiplicity of consumer arrangements, if I may call it that, in the 

market place. I don’t believe that it can be said that the principle caveat emptor fully applies any more, 

that the principle that the buyer beware is not the real principle in today’s market place. Surely, we’re 

not the first Government to recognize that. The Federal Government has long since recognized that with 

its Department of Consumer Affairs and the various associated statutes, so have a number of the other 

provinces. 

 

Having outlined the general purposes and principles of the Bill I conclude by again reiterating the two or 

three sections which I have highlighted to the Members, giving these powers to the Minister of the 

Government. The Bill includes that authority for the Minister to move quickly to stop a fly-by-night 

operator who happens to be wheeling through the Province of Saskatchewan and safety measures so that 

the Minister of Consumer Affairs does not abuse his power. All in all, a Bill which will be a Magna 

Carta for consumers in Saskatchewan. 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1784 

It gives me great pleasure to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I am almost afraid to speak on this in 

case the Members opposite will immediately brand me as a reactionary but regardless of that I am going 

to say it. 

 

I get a little concerned about all the protection legislation that seems to be rolling out of governments 

these days and the one to your right, Mr. Speaker, is no exception. It seems that we have reached the 

stage of concern for the consumer where we feel we not only have to protect them from cradle to the 

grave but from morning to night, 365 days a year and in every phase of business activity. What concerns 

me is that we overlooked some other hazards, in my opinion, which are probably greater than some of 

the exposures that the so-called consumer – and we are all consumers – are exposed to. It is left entirely 

to the individual’s initiative to safeguard his interests. I refer to three that come to my mind 

immediately. One is our exposure to ‘harm’ that can result from some of the low class movie 

productions that we have these days and I would strongly suggest that the Minister of Consumer Affairs, 

whoever it turns out to be, take over this responsibility from the Labour Department, because believe 

me, we haven’t done what I consider is required for a number of years. 

 

Also I don’t know of any protection that we have against certain religious exploitations and there are 

certainly exploitations going on in this country but nobody seems to get very uptight about that. When I 

see some of the junk coming over the television, I sometimes feel that it would be a blessing to Canada 

if the CBC would stay on strike for eternity. And they aren’t the only ones but they are the big offenders 

in my opinion. So this is an area that would come under the wing of protection of the Department of 

Consumer Affairs. 

 

MR. GUY: — It will eventually. Give Roy time. 

 

MR. GRANT: — I can appreciate the Attorney General’s concern about certain types of operators 

which he enumerates but, once again, it seems to me that we are bringing in legislation of a blanket type 

and while it may be sincerely felt by the Government opposite that they will not apply this type of 

legislation except in places of dire necessity or dire need and the legitimate businessman will not feel the 

effect of it, nevertheless, it is there. It is just another hatchet hanging over the neck of the businessman 

and we have recited various ones that have been brought before this House during this Session. 

Individually, I suppose, it could be argued that they do not have that great an effect on the attitude of the 

individual businessman. But collectively, I am confident that they certainly do have an effect on the 

attitude of the businessman. I am not going to say it is restricted to Saskatchewan. It is happening across 

the country. I think that it is high time that governments across Canada realized that while it is the 

responsibility of government to make the rules of the game for business and for the conduct of good 

citizenship, that there surely must be a limitation to these 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1785 

extensions of restrictive measures and protective measures to the point where, in some cases, it would 

seem to me that the consumer is gradually losing a lot of his initiative to look after himself and as soon 

as he finds that he has not received what he considers value for his money, he immediately thinks of 

running to the Government. No wonder we need an Ombudsman because this type of legislation, I think, 

encourages problems in that area. 

 

I feel that it is time that we did more of an educating job in educating the public and I think the 

consumers’ association has done a good job in this regard of educating the public to be alert to the 

possibilities of exploitation, not only by pyramid franchised people but by so-called legitimate operators. 

As we have more to say about this Bill on this side of the House, I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 98 – An Act to 

amend The Hospital Standards Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, these lengthy amendments to The Hospital Standards Act provide for four 

important changes. 

 

Each amendment will contribute towards ensuring that the Members of this House will recognize the 

merit of the changes as they are proposed and I will not, therefore, take the time of this House now to 

explain in detail the amendments. 

 

The four changes provided in this Bill are: 

 

 1. Authorization for chiropractors to have their patients use out-patient facilities of a hospital. 

 

 2. Establishment of an appeal board to hear physicians’ complaints concerning hospital 

privileges. 

 

 3. Authority for the Government to appoint a public administrator of a hospital in certain 

restricted situations. 

 

 4. Authority for the Minister of Public Health to withhold payments to hospitals which are not 

complying with this Act or its regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government has previously indicated that it supports the right of people to seek the 

services of a chiropractor and have the cost of this service covered by a public agency. This amendment 

will enable chiropractors to obtain out-patient hospital services for his patients. At the present time, 

patients can make use of public hospital facilities and services only when they have been referred by a 

physician. If the patients happen to be under the care of a chiropractor this referral process entails 

additional expenses and time for patients, physicians and government. It seems right and just that the 

chiropractic patients who would benefit by the use of certain hospital facilities and services should have 

access to the service at the discretion of their attending chiropractor. 

 

This amendment makes this process of direct referral possible. The hospital services most frequently 

required by chiropractic patients would be x-ray and laboratory tests as 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1786 

well as physiotherapy treatment. 

 

The most important provision in this amendment is the establishment of an appeal board to hear 

complaints by physicians concerning hospital privileges. The proposed amendment will ensure that all 

physicians in all parts of the province will be treated equitably in obtaining the right to public hospitals. 

Unfortunately it has come to my attention recently that there are still situations in which fully qualified 

physicians are having difficulty in obtaining privileges in our hospitals. 

 

I believe it is important to remember where public funds are being used to provide a service that all 

members of the community and their attending physician should be treated equitably and without 

discrimination. The right to appeal is recognized to be an important part of justice. A study recently 

completed in the Province of Ontario recommended the establishment of an appeal board similar to that 

which is contained in this amendment. 

 

The appeal board will be established by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council and will be able to act 

quickly and uniformly with all the cases that may arise in our province. I should point out that the appeal 

board will be able to review both those cases where a physician has been refused privileges and also 

those cases where hospital boards unduly delay the granting of privileges after a physician has filed his 

application for hospital privileges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third provision of this amendment gives the Minister the right to appoint a public 

administrator to take charge of a hospital if a situation develops which threatens the safety of patients or 

a situation which is not in the public interest. I hope this provision will never be used but I feel it is 

important that the Government has the proper and full authority to deal with any serious situations which 

may develop. 

 

We have had occasion where hospital boards have threatened to resign en masse. Consider such a 

condition. We must ensure the safety of the patients by appointing a public administrator who will be 

responsible for the operation of the hospital until such time as normal management and control can be 

restored. I can assure the Members of the House and members of the public, members of the hospital 

community, that we have no intention of using this provision except under very serious circumstances 

such as the ones that I have just mentioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the information of the House, I am sure that many Members are aware that in the case 

of our municipal Acts, both urban and rural, such authority is provided in that legislation in the event 

that councils resign or other serious situations develop, authority is granted under municipal Acts for the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs to appoint a public administrator until things are restored to normal 

operation. 

 

It seems to me that this amendment is in keeping with that principle which has long existed in our 

Saskatchewan laws. I might also mention that other provinces in the last while have also enacted this 

type of legislation because of problems arising from time to time where that kind of authority is 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final change provided for in this amendment 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1787 

gives the Government the right to apply a penalty against a hospital which is not complying with the 

provisions of this Act or the regulations made under the Act. The penalty which is provided for is the 

withholding in whole or in part of the funds for which the hospital may be eligible. Like the provision to 

allow for a public administrator of a hospital, we hope that this penalty provision will not have to be 

exercised. However, where hospitals are failing to provide the standard of care which is required it is 

imperative that the Government have some means available to see that a hospital meets adequate 

standards. 

 

These hospital standards have been developed for the safety of the public. We must not allow situations 

to develop which would reduce the effectiveness of the hospital standards in maintaining the high 

quality of hospital service in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to report that this Bill was discussed with the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Association and as well with the Saskatchewan Medical Association and they have agreed in principle to 

the provisions of Bill 98. 

 

I now move second reading of this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, this Act really has two areas of concern 

that are quite serious. One is that it has financial implications and I refer to the provision for chiropractic 

services and the other is that it provides wide powers to the Minister. I think both of these have to have 

serious consideration. 

 

I was a little concerned or puzzled when the Minister said that there have been hospital boards 

threatening mass resignations. In the period of 1964 to 1971 I don’t believe that a single hospital board 

threatened resignation even when we suggested that we were going to close them. I am wondering if he 

really meant the plural of that because I am only aware of one. It does seem to be pretty wide authority 

to deal with one problem of this type in the last 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have further comments, I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. I.W. CARLSON (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to the Members of this 

Legislature, a group of students in the east gallery. There are about 65 of them from St. Paul’s School in 

Yorkton. I am sure that you will all join with me in extending a welcome to them. They are 

accompanied by their Principal, Mr. Al Bauch, teachers Mr. Gordon Pittner, Mr. Andy Ballabarda, Mrs. 

Laube and their bus driver, Mr. Clarence Westerhaug. 

 

They have already toured CKCK-TV, the Leader-Post and the Museum of Natural History. This 

afternoon when they leave here they are going to visit the RCMP barracks. I am sure they will look back 

upon this tour in years to come as being part of 



 

April 17, 1972 

 

 

1788 

their education and a real asset to them. I ask all the Members to join with me in welcoming them to this 

House. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce a 

fine group of students from Melfort Division III. They are accompanied here today by their teacher, 

Mrs. Marion Price-Jones, Mr. Walber Blush, Mrs. Elva Clark and Mr. Walter Garchinski. I have a little 

trouble with this one, the bus driver, Ted Bechbil and Mr. Lyle Cox. I want to say that half of the group 

is in now. Some of them are touring the city at present and I hope that the rest of them will be able to tell 

them about it. I am sure that their trip here this afternoon will be one that they will certainly remember. 

Certainly, they will have a better understanding of democratic government. With this I should like to say 

and ask the Members to welcome them and also wish them a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.M. McPHERSON (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to 

Members of this Legislature, 45 students from Athabasca School situated in the constituency of Regina 

Lakeview. They arrived at 1:15 o’clock touring the building. They are here with Mr. Kozey and I am 

sure that all Members will join with me in hoping that they have a good day in the House. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Chairman, I want to join with those Members 

who have spoken in welcoming students. We have with us a group of 52 students from St. Gerrard 

School in Saskatoon. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Melynuik. They are, like the other 

students, getting a chance to observe the democratic process of Saskatchewan in action today. I am sure 

that what they will see and hear from their visit in Regina will be entertaining and informative. I too 

would like to wish the students from St. Gerrard School a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


