



















































Hansard: December 13, 1973


504 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

11th Day 

 

Thursday December 13, 1973 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

BILL 42, SECTION 28 
 

MR. J.C. McISAAC: (Wilkie) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Premier. In view 

of the concern and the alarm that has been growing and mounting over the last several days by all 

classes of people in the province, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of classes of people outside of this province, 

over Bill 42 and in particular the confiscation section, Section 28. Is the Premier prepared to review and 

reconsider this Government’s apparent decision to ram through this Bill 42 before we adjourn for 

Christmas. In other words is he prepared to leave it as he announced originally, the Government did, that 

the purpose of this Fall Session was to put this kind of legislation before us and leave it sit for a period 

of time. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, as I will indicate in the debate on the Bill, my 

estimate of the loss to the province in not having this Bill on the statute books exceeds $1 million a 

month and I think that under those circumstances it would certainly be inappropriate for us to delay this. 

We hope that there will be in the usual course every opportunity for debate, but a long layover I think 

would be inappropriate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Is the Premier telling this House that $1 million a month is enough to have to pay 

for people losing their rights, their rights to property, a principle and the seventh commandment. The 

seventh commandment says ‘Thou shalt not steal’ and it seems to me that the Premier is saying that is a 

pretty cheap rate to pay for breaking that commandment. Is he telling us that he is putting money before 

principles in this regard, Mr. Speaker? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think a question is in order but I think to debate the merits of what is in the Bill 

should be done when the Bill is before us. I am not too sure that even questions relating to the Bill when 

the Bill is on the floor for discussion is really relevant but I am prepared to tolerate some but I don’t 

think we should get into discussions of the pros and cons of it when the debate is before us. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — But I am talking about the strategy of the Government and I think that is very, very 

key to this Bill at this time. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

505 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I hope to deal with some of the points raised by the Hon. Member 

in remarks in this debate which I hope will be later this day. I am sure other Hon. Members will wish to 

address themselves on this point of whether or not the Bill should be proceeded with at this time. 

Accordingly I don’t think it is appropriate for me to attempt to answer the Hon. Member’s question. 

 

STATEMENT BY NDP COLLEAGUE 
 

MR. T. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I also have a 

question to the Premier. Does he agree with the statement of his colleague in the NDP, Mr. Saltsman, as 

reported in the Leader-Post? According to the report Mr. Saltsman urged Ottawa to take a tough line 

with the provinces on energy resources and also he indicated that unless provincial governments take the 

needs of the country into account, the Federal Government should step in. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t seen the report but generally speaking, I would certainly 

agree with a statement by any Member of the House of Commons that provinces, when they are dealing 

with resources, should take the concerns of the whole nation into account. We certainly hope we are 

doing that. 

 

SEDCO LOAN TO PRINCE ALBERT PULP COMPANY 
 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

direct a question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). Is he aware SEDCO is making a loan to the 

Prince Albert Pulp Company to consolidate the purchase and to make some expansion to a chemical 

plant that was owned in Saskatchewan but is now owned by the Pulp Mill which is 70 per cent owned by 

Mr. Karl Landegger, a rich American capitalist who according to some of the people opposite have been 

ripping this province off. Is he aware that SEDCO has lent them over $1.5 million again? 

 

HON. K. THORSON: (Minister of Industry and Commerce) — Mr. Speaker, I thought Mr. 

Landegger was a friend of the Leader of the Opposition. I didn’t think a friend of the Leader of the 

Opposition would go around Saskatchewan ripping anybody off. I’m surprised to hear the Member from 

Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) even suggest that that is the kind of man that Mr. Landegger is or that that is 

the kind of activity he would take part in. I don’t know why the Member from Prince Albert would 

suggest such a thing in this Assembly or even outside this Assembly to anybody. I thought he really was 

a friend of Mr. Landegger as well as Mr. Landegger being a friend of his. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Did you lend him the money, that’s the question. 

 

MR. THORSON: — Oh, that’s the question. Oh I see! Well, Mr. Speaker, for many months the 

chemical plant in Saskatoon that was owned formerly by Interprovincial Co-operatives, had only one 

market



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

506 

for its product and that was the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. According to the contract that had been entered 

into between the seller and the purchaser of the product, the chemical plant constantly lost money. It 

constantly lost money because the only market it had in terms of the contract it had with the pulp 

company which made it impossible to meet all of its costs. The conditions from the time the contract 

was entered into, and the Member from Prince Albert West will undoubtedly be familiar with those 

conditions because he was there when that contract was entered into, the conditions had changed and the 

terms of the contract were such that it was impossible for the plant to make money. As a result the 

parties concerned, that is the pulp company, Federated Co-operatives Limited and SEDCO last spring 

negotiated an arrangement whereby the pulp company would take over the chemical plant. Federated 

Co-operatives would have to swallow some of its loss, step out and SEDCO would lend more money to 

facilitate the refurbishing of the plant. New terms of the contract would be entered into. The pulp 

company would assume the responsibility for the management of the chemical plan and SEDCO would 

take as security not only the charge it had against the chemical plant but additional security by way of a 

charge against the pulp plant. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, just a supplementary question. I should like to correct a couple of 

things he said. The only customer for the chemical plant was not the pulp mill. The chemical plant sold 

chemicals to Regina., they sold them to the potash industry, they were their major customers. 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, I beg your pardon, With all due respect . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — I just want to put it on the record and I want to follow it up that he is aware . . . 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I was to answer the question. 

 

MR. STEUART: — After ten minutes you got around to answering after you spewed out a little 

information to the House. I just wanted to keep it clear to the Members opposite. . . 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, I did not spew out . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . That Government led by Mr. Landegger is taking something that belongs . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! Order! I think when questions are raised this way that take long, 

lengthy answers, should be raised in Crown corporations when that committee is meeting and not raised 

before this House. And I will have to rule that in the future that it be directed to the proper committee 

concerned. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I hope you’re not saying that we can’t ask a question that relates to a 

Crown corporation. The question 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

507 

was very simple — was he aware that SEDCO had lent money. He could have given the answer very 

shortly. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The question could have been very short and so could the answer but 

neither were. 

 

MOTION 
 

WITHDRAWAL OF BILL NO. 40 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, earlier this day you drew to my attention the fact 

that the Resolution on the Order Paper dealing with the Constituency Boundaries Commission and Bill 

No. 40 on the Order Paper caused a procedural problem. You explained that it might be necessary, under 

the rules of the House, to declare the Resolution out of order, but that the provisions of the Constituency 

Boundaries Commission Act, 1972, required that the Resolution be dealt with. Under these 

circumstances your suggestion was that Bill No. 40 be withdrawn for the time being and be introduced 

at a later date. I discussed this with the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and with leave I will 

move seconded by the Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture that: 

 

The Order for Second Reading of Bill No. 40 — An Act respecting Representation in the Legislative 

Assembly be discharged and the Bill withdrawn. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

JOINT TEACHER-TRUSTEE GOVERNMENT COMMITTEE 
 

HON. G. MacMURCHY: (Minister of Education) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 

should like to inform the House that the Department of Education has taken the initiative in forming a 

joint Teacher-Trustee Government Committee to review teacher tenure, grievance and dismissal 

procedures. It is a concern of both trustees and teachers and was identified by parents at our recent fall 

educational conferences. The Committee will consider appropriate changes in these areas and the 

various means of bringing them about, whether they come about by legislation or by negotiation or by 

both. It will be a top level group including my new deputy, Mr. Ian Wilson. We have an agreement in 

principle from Dr. McDowell of the STF, Mr. Thorson of SSTA and we are hopeful the group can begin 

its work next week and bring back the proposals very shortly. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Thorson that Bill 

No. 42 — An Act respecting the Conservation, Stabilization and Development of Oil and Gas in 

Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD: (Cannington) — Mr. Speaker, last evening 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

508 

I was making some preliminary remarks regarding Bill 42, the Government’s energy Bill, and I was 

indicating to the Government that much of their past record is an issue which I think must be of concern 

to many people in the Province of Saskatchewan today. Certainly it is an issue because of their 

performance of government ownership in the past two and one half years that they have been the 

Government of the Province of Saskatchewan. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it was encouraging today to pick up 

the newspaper and find that a spokesman of the calibre of Mr. Saltsman a Member of Provincial 

Parliament in Ontario for the NDP, indicated that he is most concerned from a national viewpoint as to 

what the NDP’s intentions are here in the Province of Saskatchewan. We, of course, support his position 

in this regard and it is encouraging to see that at least some of the NDP in Canada are thinking on a 

much more national scale than are the NDP in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Bill 42 dealing with energy is a Bill which, in effect, is a government takeover of the oil industry in 

Saskatchewan and it is a Bill which all the people in the Province of Saskatchewan must view with 

alarm. I should like, Mr. Speaker, to review our policy position, the position of the Opposition in this 

Legislature with regard to the current energy situation. 

 

1. It is obvious that most of the current energy problems in our country of Canada can and will be solved 

and the shortages that currently exist will be overcome in a short space of time. Mr. Speaker, in this 

regard the Federal Government is to be complimented for dealing with the energy situation in a quick 

and rapid manner. 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Mr. Speaker, in respect to our current energy problem, world energy 

problems have helped to focus public attention on our resources, our petroleum resources and other 

electrical resources which we must learn both to conserve and to use with care. We in the Opposition 

support strong and strict conservation measures so that energy resources will be available for future 

generations. 

 

2. Mr. Speaker, we the Liberal Opposition of Saskatchewan support the use of the export tax which was 

announced some time ago by the Federal Liberal Government. This export tax is effectively skimming 

off the extraordinary windfall revenues that could have come to the international oil companies due to 

the extraordinary world energy situation. 

 

3. Mr. Speaker, our policy as Members of this Legislature is that these windfall revenues collected by 

the Federal Government at Ottawa should be distributed in a manner as follows: Part of those revenues 

should be returned to the producing provinces, namely Saskatchewan and Alberta. The Federal 

Government has already in this regard announced that Saskatchewan will get 50 per cent of these export 

taxes rebated to them. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, part of this revenue should be returned to all the 

provinces of Canada so that petroleum prices can be held at reasonable levels for all Canadians. Thirdly, 

some of the additional revenue collected by the Government at Ottawa should be used to develop pipe 

lines, develop the Athabasca Tar Sands, develop coal and new oil reserves . . . 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

509 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: —. . . so that all Canada, so that all Canadians will be assured of an adequate 

energy supply for now and for the future. In essence, Mr. Speaker, we support a national energy policy 

for all Canada, with special financial recognition for the producing provinces such as Alberta and 

Saskatchewan as owners of the resource. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the announced legislation of the energy policy of the NDP Government is an extreme 

disappointment to all here in the Opposition. It is disappointing because it is a policy of an extremely 

narrow provincial view, that is characterized by the age-old saying, ‘I’m all right, Jack.’ This 

Government of Saskatchewan wants to charge all Canada the same price that the Arab countries have 

forced eastern Canadians to pay. 

 

Let’s take a look momentarily at this narrow, provincial political view. First, such a policy of charging 

the same price to all Canadians at the full world price will have a highly inflationary effect on all 

Canada. Secondly, these increased costs of oil will be quickly passed on to consumers particularly in the 

form of higher farm costs for manufactured farm machinery mostly produced in eastern Canada. 

Consumers of all manufactured goods will simply be forced to pay much, much higher prices because of 

the higher energy costs in manufacturing. 

 

Farmers in our province and consumers in general right here in Saskatchewan will end up paying higher 

prices due to the higher petroleum costs charged by eastern manufacturers. The cost of products from 

farm machinery to clothing will be bound to rise substantially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to emphasize that petroleum is more than heat for a house and gas for a car. It is 

also sweaters, records, carpets and streets and they will all cost more and be much more expensive as a 

result of the policy of the NDP here in our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — On a national level, Mr. Speaker, the competitiveness of much of our 

Canadian industry will be lessened in the export market resulting in less jobs for Canadians and higher 

unemployment. I want to emphasize this, Mr. Speaker. I want to emphasize that as of now there is no oil 

or energy crisis in our province. We can buy all the gasoline, all the diesel fuel and heating oil we want 

at a reasonable price. But as a result, Mr. Speaker, of Mr. Blakeney’s action there could well be a crisis 

in the very near future. 

 

Let’s look at, for example, if Alberta takes similar action to that taken by the Blakeney Government. 

Let’s look at the situation if Alberta were to take the parochial view of keeping all their oil for their own 

people, then Saskatchewan would be in very serious trouble. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, in a short period of time we would be out of gasoline and heating oil. Almost 

immediately, because 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

510 

as of now 96 per cent of the requirements for the Province of Saskatchewan are refined and come from 

Alberta. 

 

Much of the oil produced in Saskatchewan today requires special refining processes that are not 

available in our province. Much of our oil is not available in our province. Much of our oil is not 

suitable in the production of gasoline. The cost of producing and putting into effect some of these 

refining processes would be astronomical in a province such as ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plain hard facts are, that if the Province of Alberta chooses to take such a narrow, 

parochial view as the Blakeney Government has in our province, our cars, trucks and tractors could well 

be stopped and be out of petroleum within a short period of time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — It is obvious that this energy Bill put forward by Premier Blakeney cannot 

control either prices or supplies for Saskatchewan people in the future. These are matters that are of such 

importance that we must be tackling them at a national level for all Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what must be of greatest concern, however, is the NDP’s intention of a complete takeover 

of our oil industry. This is not a program of regulation of the oil industry and conservation of petroleum 

resources, which we in the Opposition would support. And I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that we in 

the Opposition definitely support the regulation and the conservation of the petroleum industry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — This, Mr. Speaker, is an NDP program of confiscation. It is a program of 

Government ownership. Given the Government’s past record of the past two and a half years, in 

investing $30 million in land, building a plywood factory and rejecting Simpson Timber’s offer to do so, 

investing $10.2 million in Intercontinental Packers, putting another $15.2 million in IPSCO and then 

breaking all the contracts with the forest industry, their current action must be of extreme concern to all 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — It is obvious that this Government has been determined for some time to 

take over the province’s petroleum industry. This concept, Mr. Speaker, of government ownership and 

control throughout history, ownership and control has always been the backbone of the socialist 

philosophy. 

 

I want now, to look momentarily at a story that appeared in last night’s Leader-Post, carried by 

Canadian Press. it says in part: 

 

Even more worrying has been Industry Minister Kim Thorson’s statement that the NDP Provincial 

Government is considering taking over ownership of all underground potash and 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

511 

setting up a government agency to sell it. In a later interview Mr. Thorson said, that does not mean the 

government will insist on partial ownership of new capacity, but such a course is a possibility. 

Discussing another possibility, Mr. Thorson said the province could take over ownership of the potash 

itself. 

 

It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the government’s intention for the future is to take over more and more 

government ownership of our provincial economy. 

 

While we support the regulation and control of private industry, we in the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, will 

continue to oppose massive government ownership as a solution to our province’s problems. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — It is for this reason that we in the Opposition will not be supporting this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. L. LARSON: (Pelly) — This Bill comes at a time when it is expedient to explode and dispel many 

of the mysteries and myths that have surrounded the oil industry for too many years. 

 

Most of these myths are of course sponsored by the oil industry itself. You have all heard how important 

it is for oil companies to have profits and incentives to keep the oil machine going. 

 

The giant international oil corporations all say that these incentives and enormous profits are necessary 

to keep them alive and to keep them healthy. These same corporations go to great lengths to try to 

convince the public that they are doing us a very great favor by taking oil out of the ground. 

 

They continually talk about the risks they are taking. Let’s look at some facts. Who really puts up the 

money? What do oil companies do with their fat profits? It is my contention that as consumers and 

taxpayers, it is we, the ordinary citizens who foot the bill. The owners of Imperial Oil for example, 

provide each year about 30 per cent of the total funds needed for their exploration, expansion and 

development. In the year 1972 out of a total sale of some $201 million only $7 million was spent on 

exploration and development. The consumer and the public put up the balance or more than half the 

money. 

 

A whopping $128 million in 1972, in the form of earnings, depreciation, amortization and deferred 

income taxes. The rest comes from a variety of sources. In 1972, there was $60 million that came from 

corporate debentures and $11 million from the sale of assets. When it comes to being ‘corporate bums’ 

the oil companies are among the most guilty. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LARSON: — The wealth from tax breaks which they enjoy have been denied to ordinary citizens. 

They enjoy exploration and 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

512 

development deductions. They enjoy accelerated depreciation, write-offs, depletion allowances and 

deferred taxes. 

 

In the last ten years while Imperial Oil has chalked up profits of over a billion dollars, Canadian people 

were donating $170 million in taxes that the company was allowed to put off paying. This is in effect an 

interest free loan. Imperial Oil is not the only offender. A check on the financial status of other large oil 

companies will reveal a similar situation. 

 

Probably the most disturbing aspect of all this is the fact that 70 per cent of the annual average of $72 

million paid in dividends that Imperial earns from Canadians, finds its way across the border into the 

United States. 

 

In spite of this, Exxon, Imperial parent company has provided only about 1 per cent of the funds 

required each year for exploration, expansion and development. 

 

These kinds of figures, Mr. Speaker, make it hard to believe that oil companies are the great gamblers or 

risk takers they would like to have us believe. 

 

Price increases at the well-head this year have brought some $10 million of profits to these same 

producers. These profits have accrued not because of reduced costs or efficiency on behalf of the 

companies or other related factors. These profits are a direct result of an international market that is 

willing and in fact is asking an additional $1 per barrel for their crude. With an estimated ten billion 

barrels in the ground of known reserve it is easy to see that this represents a $10 billion profit, and there 

is no assurance that they will stop there. 

 

Just in case anyone runs away with the idea that there is no threat of total corporate control of oil, gas, 

coal and other related energy sources, let’s look at who owns and controls oil and energy in the United 

States. 

 

According to a special Senate Sub-Committee investigating allegations of diminishing competition 

among the oil giants and their control over other energy sources, the following was found. 

 

The 20 largest oil companies in the United States control almost 95 per cent of the country’s known oil 

reserves and dominate in ownership of shares of all known alternate fuels. 

 

The Associated Press reports that the large oil companies also own: 

 

More than 70 per cent of the United States natural gas supply. 

More than 60 per cent of the uranium supply in nuclear power generation. 

Virtually all of the oil shale lands currently under private ownership. 

 

Information available through government documents and industry reports show that among the top 20 

oil companies as ranked by 1972 sales, all had oil, gas and energy holdings. Eighteen of the 20 had 

interests in oil shale lands. Fourteen had uranium holdings and at least 11 had coal holdings. Even by 

United States standards this consolidation of holdings is 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

513 

considered to be monopolistic. At least nine out of the 20 had fuel resource interests in all five fuel 

categories, gas, oil, uranium, coal and oil shale. 

 

These companies were Exxon, the largest oil company in the United States first; Texaco ranked third; 

Gulf, fourth; Shell Oil, fifth; Continental, eighth; Atlantic Richfield, ninth and Standard Oil of Ohio, 

seventeenth. Only one of the top 20 had interests in fewer than three fuel categories. 

 

The situation in Canada is comparative or worse. In the United States many of the largest corporations 

are owned by American shareholders and investors. In Canada this is not the case at all. Eighty-three per 

cent of Canadian oil and gas wells and 98 per cent of Canadian refineries are foreign owned and 

controlled. This means that we are not only exporting our oil products but we are exporting the large 

profits gained from them as well. In the fiscal year 1971, these profits stood at $105 million. With 

current crude oil prices this amount will be substantially higher. 

 

Dealing strictly with the whole of Canada, it becomes very plain that the need for a national energy 

policy and regulations is vital to our very survival. It is equally obvious that an energy policy that is to 

assure all Canadians that our energy supplies are available to us, must be one that is worked out to the 

satisfaction of all provinces, both those who consume oil as well as those who produce it. 

 

To this end I welcome the Federal Government’s announcement that we are now to have a national 

energy corporation with the necessary powers to control, develop and distribute our energy. 

 

With 83 per cent of our oil and gas wells controlled outside of Canada, it’s difficult to believe that 

decisions made in the boardrooms of foreign nations will be satisfactory and in the best interests of 

Canada. It is also very difficult to believe that these same boards of directors will be very concerned as 

to what happens to the energy of Canada. Their chief and obvious concern is to their shareholders and 

investors. The larger the profits, the better they like it. This is not good enough for Canada as a nation. 

 

Canada’s known conventional oil reserves at the present rate of consumption will be depleted in some 

15 odd years, and the supply of natural gas in some 25 odd years. After that we will have to rely on other 

sources which will undoubtedly be more expensive. This clearly outlines the insanity of selling our 

cheap supplies of oil and gas to the United States, when we know that in a few years we will be 

compelled to use more expensive fuels. 

 

To those in the oil industry who say that governments and politicians should keep ‘hands off’, I want to 

say that there is too much at stake to allow our future energy needs to be decided on the basis of profit 

and loss. I want to say to them that you have had it your own way long enough, and you have not been 

able to avoid crisis and disruption, and in many cases almost total chaos. I say to them it is not good 

enough for Canada to have our energy future decided in the corporate board rooms of foreign nations. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

514 

I turn now, Mr. Speaker, for a few moments to the reaction and the stand of the Leader of the Opposition 

and the Liberal Party. It will be very enlightening to this House if someone would write a new speech 

for them. I have listened to the Leader of the Opposition’s frantic efforts to scare and distort all relevant 

facts related to any legislation that this Government has brought forward. In trying to further the 

political fortunes of the Party, they are prepared to again sell out everything that rightfully belongs to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This was their program when in government. Sell out to the richest and most powerful corporations, all 

outside of Canada. Now, when the present government is forced to recover the most vital of these 

resources, they yell and scream and drag out the old time worn red herring of controls and take-over. 

 

As always, what the Liberal Party does best is to destructively criticize and condemn. Raise all kinds of 

false issues and speculation. If there ever was a shred of constructive evidence in their speeches the 

people in the province could think they had at least some credibility. 

 

The impossible position they find themselves in, is to try to condemn the action of the Provincial 

Government, when their counterpart in Ottawa has passed a Bill with equal or greater powers and they 

support this. But when the Government of Saskatchewan tries to protect the most vital resource we have 

it’s terrible, it’s horrible. Let me say to you fellows, you can’t have it both ways. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LARSON: — Let me again repeat what the Minister said yesterday when he introduced this Bill. It 

will give the province powers to conserve oil and gas already discovered and in the ground. It will 

permit phasing in of controlled production. It will allow the government to acquire freehold oil and gas 

rights from about 24 large companies and compensate for their oil as it comes out of the ground at the 

1973 well-head price in Saskatchewan or at a fixed price of about $3.38 a barrel. This can hardly be 

classed as confiscation. This Bill provides that all individual and privately held oil rights, up to 1,280 

acres, or .two full sections of land, is entirely exempt. This means farmers owning mineral rights will 

not be affected at all. A royalty or tax surcharge will be levied on all oil producers so that windfall or 

unreasonable profits above a set well-head price will go to the province instead of to the oil companies. 

 

The Government will have the power to control wholesale prices of petroleum products. Oil and gas 

exploration will be increased and the province will participate through a series of incentives and through 

taxes on undeveloped land held by large companies. 

 

Legislation already permits the establishment of a marketing board or commission. If necessary, such 

commission will be established to market crude oil and gas from Crown held mineral rights. All these 

aspects are necessary if the province is to assert its right to control the price and distribution of its own 

oil. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

515 

The strengthening of the provincial conservation regulations are designed to allow oil to be conserved 

for the use of Saskatchewan people into the 1980s and 1990s. But it is just possible that a conservation 

board may not be enough. We now face court action over potash contending that Saskatchewan potash 

pro-rationing and price support regulations are beyond the provincial constitutional powers. It is for this 

reason that the Saskatchewan Government must become owners of the oil reserves. 

 

The Government is therefore acquiring the legal titles to oil reserves held by some 24 large companies. 

At present, the province owns about 64 per cent of the known reserves of gas and oil. By acquiring the 

freehold rights to the large tracts of land owned by a number of companies the Provincial Government 

will become the legal owner of about 90 per cent of our gas and oil reserves. 

 

In conclusion, let me say that Saskatchewan in no way is adopting a selfish non-Canadian attitude by 

this Bill. The proposals that have been implemented by the Federal Government have been welcomed 

and will be respected. 

 

I remind you all that the NDP Members at Ottawa can take all the credit for the new National Energy 

Policy just announced. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LARSON: — Let me remind you that the power-hungry Conservatives were willing to force the 

country into a winter election, rather than work out a belated and satisfactory energy policy for Canada. 

Let me remind you further that the Conservative policy on energy is worse than that of the Liberals. As a 

matter of fact Alvin Hamilton said yesterday that they are now working out an energy policy. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, this Government recognizes that Saskatchewan cannot adopt an energy policy in isolation from 

the rest of Canada. We are prepared to co-operate to see to it that our resource is used for all Canadians. 

But in doing so, we are equally determined to see to it that no international corporation, over which we 

have no control, extracts windfall profits out of what rightfully belongs to all of us. 

 

The day is past when governments can sit idly by and allow ourselves and our way of life to be sold for 

profits and exploitation. To those who would like to suggest that this kind of thing can be allowed to 

continue they should be reminded that we are dealing with non-renewable resources. These resources 

were put here by a divine and almighty Power and for the use of all mankind. 

 

To support a system of waste, rape and destruction for the exclusive use of a few privileged corporations 

or individuals is a cardinal sin. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LARSON: — When the actions and the record of this Government are looked at by future 

generations they will recognize the value and the farsightedness of what we are doing. History will 

record this Bill as being another progressive Saskatchewan first. Obviously I will be supporting the Bill 

and want to commend 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

516 

the Minister for bringing it in as well as his able presentation of it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, anyone who has listened to the presentation of 

the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) and then listened to the presentation of the Member from 

Pelly (Mr. Larson) can certainly distinguish the difference between the Liberal Opposition and the NDP. 

The hate, the bitterness, disgust and the contempt for business, profit, initiative, and free enterprise was 

never more aptly expressed than from the Member for Pelly who just expressed it on behalf of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that we should call this Bill, the Big Swindle. The NDP Premier, Allan 

Blakeney has introduced a Bill, a Bill to confiscate, to seize without negotiation, without consultation, 

the private property of one of Saskatchewan’s major industries. He has used the current world prices in 

the oil industry and the energy crisis in the world to camouflage, to hide and to distort the real purpose 

of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he offers two reasons as to the necessity of taking over the oil industry. 1. To conserve the 

resources for future generations of Saskatchewan citizens. 2. To prevent huge windfall profits to the oil 

companies. 

 

We applaud these two objectives, but, Mr. Speaker, we oppose the despicable methods by which the 

NDP is trying to achieve those goals. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — The real intent of this legislation is to use the current situation to fulfil the 

major objective of the NDP, and that is to control and to own every aspect of the people’s lives in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the most interesting arguments, Mr. Speaker, is the one that the Member for Pelly and the 

Minister of Mineral Resources brought out about the fact that the Government of Canada was 

challenging the potash pro-rationing. I would like to say, let no one believe that nonsense. I was a 

Member of the Cabinet when the original pro-rationing regulations were put into effect in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. At that time potash was being sold at $12.50 and it was costing $18 to produce. We 

said we were not going to give a Saskatchewan resource away. We put in a pro-rationing board which 

did, we knew, threaten the constitutionality of the Federal Government in their control over exports and 

fixing prices on the international market. We negotiated with Ottawa and attempted to come up with the 

best possible compromise. 

 

At the present time it is not Ottawa, and the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson) knows, that it 

is Central Canada Potash Company which is challenging the constitutionality and applied for an order of 

the court to have their allocation of potash increased a year and a half ago. They lost that case. They 

took a second avenue and sued the Province of Saskatchewan and challenged the constitutionality of the 

Act. They also 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

517 

notified the Federal Government. This case was not initiated by the Province of Saskatchewan or the 

Government of Canada. 

 

And in every constitutional issue, the Minister of Mineral Resources as a lawyer knows, it is not only 

imperative but the constitutional duty of the Federal Government to become involved. This does not in 

any way have an impact upon the conservation of Saskatchewan oil, nor does it have an impact on 

stopping windfall revenues. The Premier knows it and the Minister of Mineral Resources knows it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No one in his right mind would suggest that this is the way to steal the private 

property of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me for one moment talk about the aspect of conservation. The Government of 

Saskatchewan now controls the number of barrels of oil that come from every oil well in the Province of 

Saskatchewan under The Oil and Conservation Act of this province. The conservation regulations or 

clauses in this new Act are taken directly from The Oil and Conservation Act of the Province of 

Saskatchewan and expanded to give the Minister a little more power and control. 

 

The Minister knows, the Premier knows, that all he has to do is to amend The Oil and Conservation Act 

of the Province of Saskatchewan, without confiscation, without seizure and he could conserve all the oil 

that he wants for the people of Saskatchewan in the future. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No one in his right mind would say that this swindle is being brought about in 

order to conserve the energy or the oil for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The second reason, Mr. Speaker, for this big swindle according to the Premier is to prevent windfall 

profits of the oil industry. No one in Saskatchewan objects to the Government stepping in to prevent oil 

companies from reaping benefits out of the Arab pressure and the Middle East situation. But why do you 

need to confiscate private property, let me ask? Never has a provincial government in Canada, to my 

knowledge, ever been challenged on its right to tax natural resources. In the Province of Saskatchewan 

we tax lumber or timber through stumpage fees. We have a mineral tax on minerals coming out of the 

ground. We have royalty rates, in fact the Premier of the Province and the Cabinet just increased the 

royalty rates a few months ago. 

 

Examples — we have all kinds of them. The Province of Saskatchewan has the right and the 

responsibility to charge and tax the natural resources of the province at whatever level they want. The 

Minister of Mineral Resources told us yesterday that the way that this new Act was going to operate is 

that they were going to take the international level at Chicago of the price of a barrel of oil as a base; 

they were going to provide a return to the oil company at a stipulated rate, and anything over and above 

that would be 100 per cent direct tax, and that is not unconstitutional. It is the right of the 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

518 

Provincial Government. It does not require the seizure of private property or the rights of any citizen or 

any company in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If they want to fix a price, they could use the Alberta method. The Alberta Bill would make Alberta the 

oil price fixer. 

 

They are great at setting up marketing commissions with the hog industry, or the poor little farmers of 

Saskatchewan to dictate to them how much they are going to receive for their hogs. If they want they 

can certainly do it in the Province of Saskatchewan with the oil industry. All I am saying, Mr. Speaker, 

they can prevent windfall profits, they can use direct taxation to stop and reap all the benefits of the 

expanded oil industry and the expanded oil prices for the Province of Saskatchewan without any need, 

or necessity of seizing and controlling and owning the oil rights and the private property in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, what is the real reason? The real reason is the reason the Minister 

of Mineral Resources indicated in his speech yesterday. He said that the most important thing, by far, is 

the political philosophy. They believe that oil should be the property of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. They believe that the NDP can run and own and manage every asset in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and only they. Mr. Speaker, I think that this action of the NDP is going to have three 

very serious results in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

1. It will destroy the trust and confidence and good faith of everyone who has business with the people 

and the Province of Saskatchewan, not only today, but for now and for years in the future. What really 

disturbed me most, Mr. Speaker, about this Bill is that the Premier stood up and said that he was proud 

to break every existing contract with the timber industry in the Province of Saskatchewan. He 

deliberately got up and made the speech here a few days ago in the House and to the native people who 

came down from the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who is next? That is the question. Is it the farmers of Saskatchewan? Is the NDP 

Government going to say to the Land Titles Office in this province, that you will transfer the title of a 

farmer’s land to the Province of Saskatchewan without even consultation or negotiation as they have 

done to the oil industry? Is the potash industry next? Who, Mr. Speaker, is next? 

 

If I were doing business in the Province of Saskatchewan I would have some real fears. One of the 

things that is interesting is the different attitude of the former NDP Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me quote what Tommy Douglas said about keeping oil agreements in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas will resign as CCF leader if a convention of his Party ever asks his Government to 

repudiate promises made to oil companies, he told the Legislature Wednesday night. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

519 

This statement was made to emphasize an assertion that the CCF Government was playing square with 

oil companies, now spending millions of dollars in research. Mr. Speaker, what a different attitude 

between El Allan, the Arab, the new Sheik of Saskatchewan and his former Premier Tommy Douglas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what bothers me even more is the tendency to balkanize the resources of Canada. There is 

developing a mood in Canada of BC gas for British Columbia, Alberta gas for Albertans, Saskatchewan 

oil for Saskatchewan. There is no logic, no rhyme or reason to this kind of a policy. Energy is not only a 

national problem it is an international problem. 

 

What a difference in attitude of Allan Blakeney and a man like Ted Kennedy, saying let’s go to the 

United Nations, let’s recognize our responsibilities to the world as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Blakeney, of course, has taken the exact opposite. He said that the people of Canada 

and eastern Canada are going to pay the same price for oil as the Arabs are trying to gouge out of the 

rest of the world. Mr. Speaker, if there is anything that has disgusted people around the world it has been 

the attitude of the Arab nations in using oil as a political weapon, taxing and charging whatever the 

traffic will bear for oil to all countries in the world. The hardship, the privation that is going on in 

Europe, in eastern Canada, in the United States and all over the world, and is the responsibility of the 

Arabs and their decision to charge that kind of price, and then to hear the Premier of Saskatchewan stand 

on his feet and say that he is going to charge exactly the same as the Arabs, then Mr. Speaker, he is El 

Allan, the Arab, the new Sheik of Saskatchewan. 

 

I wonder if he knows just exactly what he is talking about. Whom is he charging these prices to? Is he 

charging them to eastern Canada? Yes, it is a fact that 20 per cent of the oil used in the Province of 

Ontario comes from the Province of Saskatchewan, but does he also know that 40 per cent of the oil 

used in the Province of Manitoba comes from Saskatchewan? Does he know that almost 50 per cent of 

all the fuel oil, of all the heating oil, of all the gas for farmers in western Canada comes from the 

Province of Saskatchewan? I wonder, Mr. Speaker, is he going to do that to our neighbor, the Province 

of Manitoba, the way he has threatened to do it to my friends in Prince Edward Island, in Nova Scotia, 

New Brunswick, in Quebec and in Ontario. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, this policy is small, it is narrow it is regional, and most important of all, it is 

anti-Canadian and surely we, as Canadians today, can expect that the Premiers of the provinces in this 

nation will provide the leadership in inspiring Canadians to recognize the Canadian identity and the 

Canadian responsibility. I say that the people of Saskatchewan have a right to expect more leadership 

and more imagination and more inspiration for Canada out of our Premier than he has demonstrated in 

the last two days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third impact of this big swindle is to drive the oil industry out of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. It will leave the future oil exploration in the Province of Saskatchewan in the hands of 

Saskoil and that is what the NDP want, high risk at the taxpayers’ expense. What is this risk? 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

520 

 

I wonder how many of the people of Saskatchewan really recognize what the risk of Saskoil taking over 

the oil exploration in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I should like to repeat some figures I used the other day. Over one billion, one hundred million dollars in 

the Dominion of Canada was spent in oil exploration and development last year by the oil companies. At 

the end of that year at the expenditure of that $1 billion we were short 320 million barrels of oil reserves. 

What about the Province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The last ten years over $700 million was spent in oil exploration and development in the Province of 

Saskatchewan without a major discovery of any significance whatsoever. $700 million! Mr. Speaker, at 

the end of last year, in one year our reserves were down 36 million barrels. Not only that, four years ago 

in 1968, it cost $3.34 to replace a barrel of oil in the Dominion of Canada. In other words the $700 

million spent on oil exploration in the Province of Saskatchewan and development might well be $2 

billion today, at today’s costs and today’s prices to replace those barrels of oil. Unfortunately, the 

problems in Saskatchewan in discovering oil are rather critical. We have no guarantee that we could 

spend another $2 billion of the taxpayers’ money to find one more barrel of oil. Yes, we could dig 

around in some of the proven fields and come up with the odd new well. But there is no guarantee that 

the Province of Saskatchewan or Saskoil will ever find another major discovery. Are we to use the 

taxpayers’ money in that kind of a high risk development, when we can have the private industry come 

in. The job of the Government of Saskatchewan should be to control, to regulate and determine the 

profits of the oil industry by direct taxation for which they have the power and for which this Bill gives 

them the power without resort to seizure, control or confiscation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to add that Saskatchewan has some rather severe oil problems. It has been brought 

out in this debate, I brought it out the other night. Saskatchewan doesn’t use Saskatchewan oil, we use 

Alberta oil. The reason is that have mostly medium and heavy crude. But not only that we have some 

real production problems. For example, in Lloydminster when they take the oil out of the ground there is 

a sans problem. We know that we have many infill problems whereby we have to pump water down for 

good conservation and return, we know that most of the good land in the Province of Saskatchewan has 

already been explored. 

 

If the Government wants to participate in the oil industry, then, I would suggest to them that they do it 

by assisting and working in partnership with the oil companies to try and develop the shales of the North 

where we have some great potential, to experiment in the coal fields, because oil and gas can be arrived 

at from coal, if we could get it down to an economic level. I would suggest that they recognize that 20 

years from now we may have no oil in the Province of Saskatchewan and then we may go begging hat in 

hand to the Province of Alberta or the North West Territories or somewhere else and I call upon the 

Province of Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan to recognize their Canadian 

responsibilities and to recognize that the energy crisis is a national policy, a national issue, a national 

crisis and not a small narrow regional approach as the Premier of this Province has taken. 

 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

521 

Mr. Speaker, as you can see, I will have nothing to do with supporting this particular Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, may I first deal with some of the remarks for the 

Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). The remarks were interesting, interesting I think firstly 

because of the number of factual errors in a relatively short time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — And secondly, because of the concessions made to the portions of this Bill which 

other Members have attacked vehemently. 

 

Let me start one by one. First, he says that it is common knowledge and common practice that the 

Government of Canada intervenes in constitutional cases. I say to him that it is the highest degree, 

uncommon for the Government of Canada to be joined as a plaintiff on behalf of any company which is 

attacking the constitutionality of a provincial law or a provincial regulation. I say that if he or his lawyer 

friends over there can name one other case where this has happened, I’d like to know about it because 

our lawyers haven’t been able to find it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The second point I want to raise is with respect to the windfall profits. The 

Member for Milestone apparently agrees that the Government of Saskatchewan should be taxing the 

windfall profits. He apparently agrees that we should be increasing the royalties. Now I want that to be 

remembered. Because the Member for Prince Albert West, the Leader of the Opposition has been saying 

a great number of things which are contrary to that. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Name one! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I will come to that in a moment. But basically what he has been saying is that we 

have been breaking leases. I will come to that, but unless you say that the raising of royalties is a 

breaking of leases, then I challenge you, the Member for Milestone or you, the Member for Prince 

Albert West or any other Member to show one contract or one lease which is broken or varied in any 

way by this Bill, just one! Because it is false to say that this Bill breaks leases. It is false to say that this 

Bill breaks contracts. There is no substance whatever in any one of those allegations. There is one small 

basis for that allegation if you say that to raise the royalty is to break a lease. I gather that the Members 

Opposite are urging us to raise the royalties. I gather they are in agreement with that. So surely they are 

not complaining about that. And I say to you that other than that, there is no single basis for any 

allegation as the Member for Prince Albert West has consistently made, that any leases are broken, any 

contract is broken. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Tell us about the timber industry! 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

522 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I know the Member for Prince Albert West who says, “tell us about the timber 

industry,” would like to talk about anything but this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Right now, Mr. Speaker, what is before this House is this Bill and I certainly 

propose to talk about it. I propose to talk about what the Member for Milestone said about the way that 

the Government of Alberta proposes to control its oil. Because it proposes to control its oil only by 

controlling oil that comes from Crown lands. And it was because we wished to be able to use that 

method, if the Federal Government was successful in striking down our Conservation Board, because we 

wanted to use the Alberta method, that we have decided to take title to the large holdings of freehold oil 

and gas rights in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — It is because the Alberta method commends itself to the Member for Milestone, 

that it commends itself to us. And in order to be able to put ourselves in the same position as the 

Government of Alberta we have taken title or we propose to take title to the large blocks of oil and gas 

rights in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me before I turn to my formal remarks deal with some of the other 

allegations which have been made about this Bill, some of the pretty blatant distortions which have been 

circulated about this Bill and our policy. I have heard, as I said, the Leader of the Opposition say that 

leases are broken. And I say that unless you say that raising royalties is breaking leases, then I challenge 

him to name to this House one lease that is broken, one contract that is broken. I say he can’t do it. 

 

It is perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker, that nothing in this Bill gives anybody any power to break any lease or 

any contract. And if Members opposite can show where it is, I know they will contribute it to this 

debate. But they certainly haven’t done so up ‘til now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I have heard people say and I have heard the Member for Prince Albert West say 

yesterday, that the mineral rights, the oil and gas rights of private individuals will be taken over, he used 

the word individual. That is false! The Bill makes it very clear that it is false. No mineral rights owned 

by any individual will be acquired, only mineral rights owned by large companies, our estimate is 25 

large companies will be affected. I challenge the Leader of the Opposition or anybody else on the 

Opposition side of the House to give us the name of one individual whose mineral rights or whose oil 

and gas rights will be in any way affected by this Bill, one individual. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

523 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have heard Members opposite say that the oil and gas rights 

which will be acquired by the Crown under this Bill were given out by a previous CCF government and 

now will be taken back. That is false! 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard today and some of us who have long memories may be a little nauseated by 

hearing it, the Member for Milestone saying nice things about T.C. Douglas. I remember 10 years ago 

there was nothing bad enough that the Member for Milestone could say about T.C. Douglas in the 

Medicare fight. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — There was nothing bad enough that he could say. He said at that time that Mr. 

Douglas was a communist and he was taking it over and it was a big swindle. All of that, he said about 

Mr. Douglas. All of that he says today about this Government. And if it was true about this Government 

it was true about Mr. Douglas. It wasn’t true then and it isn’t true now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to say this, it is correct to say, I believe, that not one acre of the mineral 

rights which are being acquired by this Bill were ever owned by the Government of Saskatchewan. They 

are mostly large holdings given to the CPR, the CNR, the Hudson’s Bay Company before the Provincial 

Government ever had any control over our mineral rights. So much for the argument that somehow these 

rights were given out and are now being taken back. 

 

I have heard people say that we get our oil from Alberta. And if Alberta oil goes up then we will have to 

pay more for it and all our royalties will go to Alberta. But the facts are that we export nearly four times 

as much oil as we import. The Leader of the Opposition knows that, Members opposite know that. If we 

get an extra dollar in royalties on the oil we sell and if we use that money to pay an extra dollar in 

royalties on the oil we buy, we will have $3 out of every $4 we collect in royalties. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — So much for the story that all our royalty money would go to Alberta. 

 

If we don’t raise royalties I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition or anyone else can give us assurance 

that the price of Alberta oil will not go up. Their policy is to wait until the price of Alberta oil goes up 

and then decide what to do. Their policy would leave us with the worst of both worlds. We would have 

to pay more for our Alberta oil and we would have no extra royalty money from which to pay it. 

 

I heard Members opposite say that there is lots of time, there is no need to hurry with this legislation. 

That is false! The Federal Government says this, Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government says that it will 

give us 50 per cent of the export 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

524 

tax but we have no confirmation of that. So far as I am aware we haven’t got one line on paper saying 

they will give us 50 per cent or anything. We have the Prime Minister’s speech. That speech made one 

thing clear, that we were not going to get from the Federal Government 100 per cent of the export tax as 

we had demanded but at best only 50 per cent. Even if we do get that 50 per cent, we are still losing very 

large sums of money on Saskatchewan oil, even on the oil that goes to the United States. 

 

Let’s forget the Canadian oil for a moment. Suppose about 30 million barrels of Saskatchewan oil goes 

to the United States. (It was more last year and likely it will be more this year.) Suppose the average 

export tax is $2 a barrel, and I suggest it will be higher than that. That’s $60 million a year in export tax. 

If the Federal Government gives us half of it, that is $30 million. If we can get it all — under this Bill 

we think we can — that is an extra $30 million or $2.5 million a month. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — If we delay this Bill, the Federal Government will get the $2.5 million a month, 

and the people of Saskatchewan will not get the $2.5 million a month. If we raise our royalty from the 

present very low rates and I think they will be conceded by all to be very low rates on oil going 

elsewhere in Canada, we will have more money at stake. If we act now we will have substantial sums of 

money in the hands of Saskatchewan taxpayers. If we delay, as Members opposite are urging us to 

delay, that money will go to the Federal Government. 

 

Members opposite are suggesting we should have called the House into Session earlier. I say we had 

every right to believe that the Federal Government would give us the 100 per cent of the export tax until 

now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Only now, only last Thursday, when the Prime Minister made his definitive 

speech did we discover what the policy of the Federal Government is. The Leader of the Opposition is 

even more inconsistent than usual in this case. He says that he doesn’t believe that international oil 

companies should set the oil prices. He says that the Government of Saskatchewan should have acted 

sooner. That is what he is saying now. I ask him to tell the people of Saskatchewan how the Government 

of Saskatchewan should have acted sooner. Should we have called this House together and put on the 

royalties? If the answer to that is yes, then we should have broken all the leases which he was 

complaining about us breaking yesterday, . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . because the raising of the royalties is the only possible argument for saying 

this Bill breaks. any lease in Saskatchewan. And he is now urging, not only that we should break all 

these leases, in his terms, but that we should have done it months ago. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

525 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The Leader of the Opposition knows that there is no other way that the 

Government of Saskatchewan could affect or control the price at which Saskatchewan oil is sold outside 

this province except by the royalties or tax methods which are in this Bill. And he is now urging that we 

should have done this months ago. I gather from the comments opposite that the only part of this Bill 

that objection is taken to is the acquisition of oil and gas rights. If that is so, I wish they would stand up 

and say it because the Member for Milestone is saying, “yes, you should have put the royalties on; yes, 

you should have put the taxes on.” But all of a sudden it is now being said that we should not break the 

leases. I think that this sort of inconsistent comment from Members opposite tells the people of 

Saskatchewan that they have no policy on this, they are just stone-walling for the oil companies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — I have heard it said that Saskatchewan oil is moving to the Atlantic 

Provinces. I heard the Member for Milestone again tell us about how our people, how people in Nova 

Scotia and people in Prince Edward Island were somehow affected by this Bill. I tell you this; that is 

false. If Members opposite know of a single barrel of Saskatchewan oil going to the Atlantic Provinces, 

I wish they would tell us because we don’t know about it. 

 

MR. STEUART: — They shipped all kinds by the Great Lakes! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, sure! I think we know that some Saskatchewan oil is moving to Montreal 

but I am not aware of any moving to the Atlantic Provinces. If he’s aware of it, he’s aware of something 

that I am not. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — He says we shouldn’t put an extra burden on the people of the Atlantic 

Provinces. Well, the people of the Atlantic Provinces are facing a burden. They are facing a burden 

because we don’t have a national energy policy. They are facing an extra burden because the Federal 

Government policies are policies of cheap oil for Ontario and high cost oil for the Atlantic Provinces 

which comes from Venezuela. There indeed is a burden on the people of the Atlantic Provinces, but it is 

a burden not imposed by the Government of Saskatchewan, but by the Government of Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I’ve heard it said that we are trying to get royalties based upon what the Arabs 

are charging for their oil. And that is false. 

 

The proposals for royalties contained in the Bill are based on American prices. The United States 

produces vast amounts of oil. Now what do US oil companies charge to American consumers for 

American oil. That is the basis of our proposed royalties. That has nothing to do with the Arabs. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

526 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Our royalties deal only with what the international oil companies, the same ones 

we have here, feel is a fair price for the US oil sold to American customers. Now that is the basis for our 

royalties. And if, in fact, the US oil companies are charging people in the United States too much for US 

oil, it’s a little difficult to see what that has got to do with the Arabs. 

 

United States prices govern prices for lumber, and we pay them. For decades what the people in the 

United States were prepared to pay for lumber governed what we pay for lumber. And that’s true for 

beef, and it’s true for pork and it’s true for fruits and true for vegetables. Indeed we in Saskatchewan pay 

higher than US prices for our cars and our tires and our refrigerators and our televisions. We have to pay 

these higher prices. Eastern Canadians have for years bought coal from the United States because it was 

cheaper than Saskatchewan coal. The price they paid was what United States buyers would pay to US 

sellers, to US producers of coal. There was, and is no suggestion that we should have a national coal 

policy, and western mines have closed down in the past. We have lived with those price decisions made 

by eastern Canadians. 

 

What then is so inappropriate about a Canadian province basing royalties, not on the price of Arab oil, 

but on the going price of United States oil sold by American companies to American consumers, the 

price which those consumers are willing to pay to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are but a few of the misconceptions about the Bill with which I have been attempting 

to deal. There are good number of others, but before dealing with them, I should like to sketch in a little 

bit of the background of the Bill. 

 

The Minister gave a comprehensive statement outlining the issues under debate, issues which must be 

resolved by this Legislature. He has outlined with care the provisions of the Bill and the background of 

those provisions. Accordingly, I don’t think it is necessary for me to outline them in full. 

 

Let me, however, state once again our basic objectives. 

 

1. We believe that the control of our oil resource must be firmly vested in the people of Saskatchewan. 

We say this not only because control must be vested there in order to ensure that our consumers will 

have fair prices for oil in the years ahead, but also because we must make sure that our farmers have oil 

in the years ahead. Whether Members opposite oppose it or not, we on this side of the House believe it’s 

absolutely essential that we make sure that we have gas and oil in good supply in the decades ahead. 

 

2. We believe that the Government of Saskatchewan must be in a position to control, if necessary, sharp 

increases in the price of oil and gasoline in Saskatchewan. 

 

3. We believe that unearned increases in crude oil prices, arising from international oil policies, should 

and must go, not to the international oil companies but to the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

527 

4. We believe that there must be more, rather than less, exploration for oil and natural gas in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, those are our objectives. I believe they are sound objectives. I believe they are attainable 

objectives, and I believe that the people of Saskatchewan will support us in going after those objectives. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to elaborate on how we propose to go after those objectives, 

but before I do, I want to raise another issue which has come to the fore. 

 

The question has been asked as to whether the Government of Canada should collect its oil export tax 

and, more particularly, whether the Government of Saskatchewan should collect the full royalty on oil 

going to Ontario or a lesser royalty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a have-not province, always has been a have-not province. The provinces 

of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario have consistently had more wealth than we have had. We have 

striven under all governments to increase our wealth, to take our full place in the Canadian 

Confederation. We have consistently tried to get the full return from our resources, partly to finance our 

own programs, partly to reduce our need for equalization payments from the Federal Government. 

 

We feel and feel strongly that we still have that obligation. We hear now that if Saskatchewan collected 

full royalties on its oil going to eastern Canada, that Ontario would suffer a great hardship. Well, let’s 

look at a few figures. 

 

Suppose Saskatchewan increased its royalties on crude oil going to Ontario by, say, $1.40 a barrel. 

Under those circumstances the price would still be well below world prices. Now we supply perhaps 20 

per cent, perhaps 25 per cent of Ontario crude. If other suppliers did not increase their prices then retail 

prices in Ontario would go up about one cent a gallon. Now if Ontario consumers require protection 

against a price increase of one cent a gallon, I say that a fair question arises as to whether this protection 

should be provided at the expense of the Federal Government, the Government of Ontario or the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. It’s a question that can be argued, I admit, but it’s certainly not clear to me 

that the Saskatchewan taxpayer should bear the full cost. 

 

Those who consistently call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to do everything it can to increase 

its revenues — and I can name people across Canada who have done that — so that we won’t need 

equalization payments from the Federal Government, cannot reasonably complain when we increase our 

resource royalties to put ourselves into that position. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, the argument for a lesser royalty is that the people of Canada should be 

sheltered from the full impact of world prices for oil by a national policy. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan agrees with that argument. We agree that we should have a national 

energy policy and part 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

528 

of that policy should be lower than world prices for oil for all Canadians. We think that this should apply 

to all Canadians, whether they live in Vancouver or Regina or Toronto or Halifax. .Just as we think this 

should be a national policy, we think the cost of the policy should be borne by all Canadians. 

Saskatchewan is very willing to pay its fair and equitable share. That share might be paid by 

Saskatchewan accepting a lower royalty on oil going to Canada than oil going to the United States. 

 

But there may be other ways to accomplish the same result. Clearly this is something which should be 

discussed at the national energy conference, and we are willing and anxious to discuss the matter. 

 

If Saskatchewan is to accept a lower royalty rate on oil going to Canada than oil going to the United 

States, we would expect, and I think rightly expect, some reciprocal action in those areas where other 

national policies discriminate against Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Our national transportation policy is certainly one, but all that can be negotiated. 

It’s far too early to talk in melodramatic terms about blackmail and retaliation and the like. I think 

nothing is gained by engaging in this sort of language and I don’t propose to do so. I want this 

Legislature to pass this Bill and by passing it to instruct the Government of Saskatchewan to go to the 

national energy conference in January to argue and fight for a national energy policy: a national energy 

policy for all Canadians from coast to coast; a national energy policy for the benefit of all Canadians and 

paid for by all Canadians . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . national energy policy which calls upon the people of Saskatchewan, yes, to 

pay their full and fair share; a national energy policy which hopefully is a start on a new national 

development policy which once and for all obligates the Federal Government and all Canadians to 

develop this great land so that all Canadians enjoy a fair and equitable share of the wealth produced not 

only by our raw resources, like oil, but also by our fisheries, by our farms and by our factories wherever 

they may be. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, in that endeavor, our government and all the people of 

Saskatchewan will be more than willing to join. Now, Mr. Speaker, I outlined our objectives a moment 

ago. Let me deal first with some steps to give the people of Saskatchewan control over our own 

resources, the steps needed to make sure that we will have oil in Saskatchewan 20 years from now. 

 

What do we propose to do? First, we intend to strengthen and broaden the powers of the Oil and Gas 

Conservation Board. We want to give the Board the power to limit the production of our oil, and I 

believe we all know the reasons for this. We 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

529 

have total reserves of about 800 million barrels. We are producing at the rate of about 85 million barrels 

a year. Since 1960 we have been producing and selling each year more oil than we have been finding. 

Therefore, our reserves have been going down. Unless we act, Saskatchewan could be in real trouble in 

less than 15 years. 

 

You may ask, don’t we get the oil we use from Alberta? Why can’t we keep getting that oil? 

 

It is true of course, that the oil we now use in Saskatchewan largely comes from Alberta. But who can 

say whether that oil will be available in the future? And, if it’s available, who can say what the price will 

be? The oil in Alberta is controlled by the International Oil Corporations. Can we be sure that it will 

always be available at reasonable prices? We think not. 

 

If Canada had a national oil policy, well worked out and well understood, we might rely on Alberta 

supplies. But that we do not have. Rather, we have what someone has called, the come-by-chance oil 

policy of the Federal Liberal Government. Under these circumstances it would be a foolish man indeed 

who puts his total reliance on future supplies of Alberta crude. 

 

You may ask, can Saskatchewan refineries use our Saskatchewan crude? The answer is indeed they can 

for some of our crude, the crude that comes from Steelman and Alida. For some of the other types, our 

medium crudes, refineries would need new equipment, but certainly that could be installed if a serious 

need arose. 

 

So we say it’s wise for us in Saskatchewan to limit our production of crude to be sure that in the years 

ahead we do have gasoline and oil for our consumers, particularly our farmers. 

 

Liberals oppose this. I suspect they are going to oppose this Bill which will give this power. But let them 

answer for that opposition to the future generations of young people in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me deal now with a misconception which has apparently arisen. The 

Government of Saskatchewan does not propose to limit production of our oil now moving to Ontario or 

the United States at this critical time. I made clear again and again that we do not propose to add to the 

current problems of supply of crude oil being experienced by eastern Canada or the United States. I want 

to make that clear again today. 

 

It has been suggested that the Government of Saskatchewan would attempt to limit supplies of crude oil 

going to eastern Canada at this time unless certain conditions were met. There is not now and never has 

been any foundation for that suggestion. I hope there will be no misunderstanding on that point. I gained 

the impression from a quick look at a television shot of the Hon. Donald Macdonald that he 

misunderstood our position. He was saying that we were saying that oil would not go from 

Saskatchewan to Ontario, unless certain conditions were met. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

530 

I hope my statement today will remove all further misunderstanding. 

 

Now, over the years we do intend to limit production. And to do that we will, by this Bill, strengthen the 

Conservation Board. 

 

But unfortunately that may not be enough to give to the people of Saskatchewan control over our own 

resource. I said before and I say again that at this very moment the Federal Government is before the 

courts contending that we in Saskatchewan have no right to control our potash production through a 

potash conservation board, and that we must leave all decisions on how much potash is produced and 

exported to the private companies. We are fearful and we think we have every grounds to be fearful that 

the Federal Government in the same way will go to court to say that we in Saskatchewan have no right 

to control our own oil production through an oil conservation board. 

 

If this legal move by the Federal Government was successful it could mean that the oil companies alone 

would decide how much of our oil would be produced and exported and how much, if any, would be left 

for the future generations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, this Federal Government attack on the powers of a province to control its own resources is, I 

believe, unprecedented in the history of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — And if Members opposite can give us other instances of this I hope they 

contribute that to the debate. 

 

It is perhaps noteworthy that so far as I am aware not one Saskatchewan Liberal has raised his voice in 

opposition to this move by the Federal Government; not one Saskatchewan Liberal has had one word to 

say in defence of the regulations which their own government passed. So long as Otto Lang does it, it’s 

fine with the Saskatchewan Liberals, no matter how much it hurts Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — But, Mr. Speaker, we have spoken out and we will speak out. 

 

Our government would be doing less than its duty to the people of Saskatchewan if we did not resist this 

Federal attack with all the weapons open to us. Now, we believe that the position of the province in 

warding off this attack will be strengthened if the province gets legal title to large blocks of freehold oil 

and gas rights in the province. As I understand it, that is the position of the Government of Alberta. The 

Government of Alberta believes — you can read the statements of the Hon. Mr. Lougheed and the Hon. 

Mr. Dickie and other Cabinet Ministers in the Government of Alberta, and they say that they believe — 

that they can resist encroachment by the Federal Government on their powers because they have legal 

title to most of the oil in Alberta. Most of it come: from Crown lands and they are saying that they’re not 

even attempting 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

531 

to control the oil that comes from private lands because they doubt their power to do so. Now, it is 

because of this, and you can read their statements as well as I, that we believe that our position would be 

greatly strengthened if we acquired title to the oil and gas rights of about 25 large companies. The oil 

and gas rights of the vast majority of mineral owners in Saskatchewan are in no way, and I repeat in no 

way affected by this legislation. 

 

The great bulk of the oil and gas rights which are being acquired are being acquired from four or five 

companies, the CPR, CNR, Hudson’s Bay Company, to name three. Now, these three companies got 

their mineral rights long years ago and at no cost. They, and all the other companies, will be well 

compensated. Members opposite talk about confiscation. I should like them to look at those 

compensation provisions and tell us whether they think they are too skimpy. They’ll get the same 

royalty as they would if they still had legal title at today’s high and profitable prices. If Members 

opposite don’t think that today’s prices are high and profitable, let them say so. All that is being taken 

from these people is the right to get further windfall profits over and above the current high prices of oil 

at $3.38 a barrel. All that’s being taken is the right to get further prices over $3.38 a barrel. They are 

entitled to get the full cost of the oil on every barrel up to $3.38 and all this coming from rights which 

were largely obtained for nothing. Now anyone who says that’s ungenerous compensation has got a 

particularly soft feeling in his heart for the international oil companies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now with the oil and gas rights legally owned by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, we believe that we will be able, acting as owners, to prevent the oil companies from 

shipping all our remaining oil to eastern Canada and the United States in the next few years. We think 

we will be able to conserve some of our oil, even if the Federal Government is successful in its legal 

attack on provincial resource conservation boards, and even if our strengthened oil and gas conservation 

board is hobbled by the courts. We believe that these measures will give us effective control over the 

future development of our oil and gas resources. 

 

I turn now, Mr. Speaker, to price controls. Events in the world of international oil politics could very 

easily give rise to sharp increases in prices of oil and gas in Saskatchewan. We would be foolish indeed 

to take the view of the Opposition, the view that there is no crisis yet, the view which advises that we 

should do nothing. We say it can happen here. We say that there could be threats of sharp increases in 

prices in Saskatchewan, and if it is threatened that there would be sharp increases in price, then those 

increases should be controlled. 

 

I know some will call this the heavy hand of government, and I can perhaps quote what Members 

opposite will say, but we say that there are some situations which call for price control and that sharp 

increases in oil prices would be one of them. We say that the Government must have the power, if 

necessary, to control prices, and this Bill before us gives us that power. 

 

Now you will note from reading Section 43 that these provisions are not meant to come into effect 

unless they are 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

532 

needed. We don’t know whether there will be an increase in price. We don’t know whether there will be 

any need for controls, but who can say what the price of oil will be six months from now? 

 

The Government is not proposing to control prices at the retail level, but only at the wholesale level. We 

think that the sense of responsibility of retailers and the fact that there is relatively vigorous competition 

at the retail level, will act to control prices if wholesale prices are controlled. 

 

Now Members opposite may oppose this control of prices, but we say there are times when prices 

should be controlled and, should that time arise, we will be ready and these provisions will be used. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I come, Mr. Speaker, now to the question of unearned profits and who should 

get them. The cost of producing our oil in Saskatchewan is perhaps $1.75 a barrel. To be exceptionally 

generous, one could say $2.00 a barrel. The current selling price averages $3.38 a barrel. Everyone 

admits that the oil companies are making a handsome profit at that level, but this may be only a start. 

Prices of $5 a barrel, even $6 or $7 a barrel are possible. There may be huge unearned windfall profits. 

Further extra windfall profits from Saskatchewan could be $150 million more than they are now, $200 

million a year. The short question is: who should get those windfall profits? The Liberals say the oil 

companies should get the windfall profits; we say the people of Saskatchewan should get those windfall 

profits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Members opposite will have their full opportunity to tell us what they think 

about this and who should get the profits, and I tell you this, we won’t be persuaded by what they say; 

we’ll be persuaded by what they do. If they vote against this Bill, if they vote against the right of this 

Bill to get those windfall profits for the people of Saskatchewan, we’ll know on whose side they stand. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me give a little more background. 

 

The price of oil at Chicago is now $5.80 a barrel; indeed, it’s more. $5.80 a barrel would make 

Saskatchewan oil going to Chicago worth about $5.30 a barrel at the well-head. Right now the Federal 

Government is taking about $1.90. That leaves the oil company $3.40. We understand the Federal 

Government proposes to return to us the 50 per cent of the oil export tax. You know we claim the full 

amount of the export tax. We’ve repeatedly advised the Federal Government of that. Notwithstanding 

the fact that we have repeatedly advised the Federal Government that in our judgment all of that tax 

belongs to us, notwithstanding the fact that it is coming from a provincial resource and heretofore in 

Confederation it has always been acknowledged that the return from resources is a provincial 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

533 

revenue, notwithstanding that, they are saying they are going to keep half our tax and we are saying the 

tax belongs to us. They have finally declared that they are not going to give us 100 per cent of the tax, 

and accordingly we are now acting to make that excess profit come to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — On that issue we will want to know where the Opposition stands. Do they say 

that the money represented by the export tax belongs to the people of Saskatchewan, or do they not? 

We’ll know when they vote on this Bill, because if they vote for the Bill, we’ll know they say that 

money belongs to the people of Saskatchewan and if they vote against the Bill, we’ll know they say that 

money belongs to the Government of Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now turning to the matter of exploration, I couldn’t add much to what the 

Minister outlined in detail yesterday. But from what he said, he very clearly outlined our proposals and I 

think everyone who studies those proposals will know that the result will be more exploration in 

Saskatchewan rather than less. What this Bill will do will be to stop tens of millions of dollars flowing 

out of this province to finance exploration elsewhere in the world and to keep some of the billions home 

to explore here in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The oil companies circulate the myth that high profits mean high spending on 

exploration. The facts contradict that myth. The profits have been high. The exploration spending in 

Saskatchewan has been low, and it has been low for seven years. This Bill will keep some of our money 

for exploration right here at home in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there is another important aspect of the energy picture. We need more research on how to develop 

our tar sands, our heavy crude deposits. We see some of the profits going into this type of research; 

indeed, we think of an energy institute which may be set up in conjunction with the industry where this 

sort of research could be done. It could be done, not only for the benefit of the oil companies, not only 

for the people of Saskatchewan, but also for the benefit of all of Canada. We look forward to pursuing 

this idea with the industry and with the Federal Government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have outlined at some length our proposals for this Bill. I have attempted to deal 

with some of the more glaring misconceptions which people apparently hold with respect to this Bill. I 

have attempted to deal with some of the deliberate distortions of what is contained in this Bill, and I 

think that no one who believes that the people of Saskatchewan should have control over their own 

resources, who believes that windfall profits should belong to the people of Saskatchewan, and who 

believes that we should have more exploration in this province, can fairly vote against it. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

534 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill acts to give control of our oil resources to the people of Saskatchewan. It acts to 

defend against the Federal Government’s attack on our right to control our own resources. It acts to 

provide money for more exploration and more research. It acts to conserve for the people of 

Saskatchewan the large windfall profits which would otherwise go to the international oil companies or 

to the Federal Government. Most important of all, it acts to allow us to conserve, for future generations 

in Saskatchewan, our previous and depleting oil resource. 

 

The issues presented by this Bill are simple. Should the oil resources of this province be controlled by 

the people of Saskatchewan, or by the international oil companies? Should the destiny of our oil 

resources, and perhaps with it of our agricultural industry, be dictated by the people of Saskatchewan or 

by the international oil companies? Now that’s a simple issue and on that issue, Mr. Speaker, I am 

willing to stand and be counted. I ask all Members of this House to stand and be counted on this issue 

which is vital to the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. WIEBE: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, if anyone is going to make a comment or to try and put the 

Premier’s remarks into a nutshell, I think what they could do is probably put it into one sentence. What 

the Premier has told us this afternoon, is that he is going to guarantee everyone in this province a steak, 

but before the individual gets that steak he is going to make sure that he pulls their teeth out first before 

they can enjoy it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WIEBE: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there has been a strange aura effect around the Legislative 

Buildings since this morning. Members sitting on that side of the House are not walking around the halls 

as they used to, they’re hiding in their rooms, they are listening to the hot line programs, they are busy 

listening to the radios trying to find out what the people of this province are saying. When the Premier 

came in this afternoon, I must admit I have never seen the Premier as weak as he was this afternoon, 

with the exception of his debate on the Foreign Ownership of Land Bill. I expected the Premier to come 

out this afternoon fighting like a tiger. Not so much to defend this Bill but to raise the spirits of the 44 

Members whom he has got sitting behind him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Speaker, he failed to do this. The Members on ‘that side of the House sat just as 

glum and concerned and as worried as they were before he came into this House and they look exactly 

that same way now. 

 

The Premier mentioned that no Liberal on this side of the House has raised his voice against the Federal 

Liberal energy policy. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that I endorse that policy 100 per cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

535 

MR. WIEBE: — I might say as well to the Premier of this province, when has he raised his voice 

against the Federal national energy policy? When he spoke to the people of this province last Tuesday 

night, he said he agreed with every aspect of the national energy policy, with the exception of one 

clause; that was the part where they were only getting 50 per cent of the windfall profits, instead of a full 

100 per cent. But heaven knows, Mr. Speaker, he needs the money, he needs that full 100 per cent. The 

spending spree that this province has been on in the past three years has just been unbelievable. Even 

while spending all this money, Mr. Speaker, they have not brought one new industry into this province; 

they have not been able to stop the fantastic drain of our young people from this province; they have not 

been able to stop the decline of the rural people in the rural areas of this province, nor have they been 

able to stop the decline and the decay of many of our rural communities. 

 

A number of months ago, Mr. Speaker, it became evident that Saskatchewan would be having a fall 

Session. The news was well received by the people of Saskatchewan and I think especially by all the 

MLAs sitting in this Legislature. It appeared that we would have an opportunity to hear the Speech from 

Throne and have proposed legislation placed before us. After two or three weeks, the Session would 

adjourn until January or February. The main purpose of this exercise was to lay before the public the 

proposed legislation. The MLAs, Mr. Speaker, reacted favorably to this proposal. It would allow us an 

opportunity to study the proposed legislation; it would allow us an opportunity to contact and discuss the 

legislation with our constituents; it would have given each MLA an opportunity to assess fully the 

reactions of the people of Saskatchewan, which in turn he could then use as a guideline in debating the 

various issues in this Legislature. As well, it would have allowed each MLA the time to research fully 

and to study each and every piece of legislation. This hope and true demonstration of democracy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, was shattered by the Premier of this province last Tuesday night. He arrogantly 

declared that Bill 42 would be passed and become law in Saskatchewan even if the House had to sit until 

Christmas. Premier Blakeney’s determination, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ram this Bill through the House 

has made a mockery of the fall Session. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WIEBE: — He has demonstrated once again, as he has in the past, that ‘big brother’ knows what’s 

best for the people of Saskatchewan and they are going to get it whether they want it or not. He is 

determined to make the Bill law as quickly as possible, even though as he admitted on the Harasen 

hotline show that it would take more than two weeks for the people of Saskatchewan to fully understand 

and comprehend the far-reaching effects of Bill 42. Why is he so determined to rush this Bill through? 

Why does he not want the people of Saskatchewan to have the opportunity to understand this Bill? I 

wish I knew that answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There is no energy crisis in Saskatchewan. There is no oil 

crisis in Saskatchewan. There is no threat to the people of Saskatchewan that the cost of their heating 

fuel, car gasoline, or farm fuel will rise. There is no threat that the windfall on oil profits will go to the 

larger oil companies. Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the Premier 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

536 

and his Cabinet were sitting on their fannies interviewing more research assistants and playing politics 

with Saskatchewan medicare, the Federal Government moved quickly to protect those windfall profits 

and made sure that these profits would be used to the benefit of all Canadians, and especially those 

Canadians who lived in the province that produced that oil. The Federal Government quickly stepped in 

and froze the price of gasoline and heating fuel to ensure that Canadians would not have an increase in 

cost for these products. The Federal Government made sure that Canada would remain self-sufficient in 

oil and we would conserve our oil for future generations. The Federal Government acted and showed 

concern for the people of Canada, while Premier Blakeney and his cohorts tried to devise a scheme that 

could use this energy crisis to further their own political ambitions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WIEBE: — The Premier, Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did nothing while the prompt action 

of the Federal Liberal Government saved the taxpayers of this province millions of dollars. 

 

As I said a bit earlier, on his radio and television broadcast to the people of this province, Premier 

Blakeney stated he agreed with the national energy policy of the Federal Government. Again I say his 

only complaint was the division of the windfall profits — the division being that half of those profits 

would only come to Saskatchewan the other half could be used for further oil exploration to the future 

benefit of all people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Why is this money grab so vitally important to the Premier of this province? Is it to pay for the so-called 

free hospitalization and medicare or their Cabinet globe-trotting trips or to buy more meat packing 

plants? Does he need the money to buy more land for the Land Bank scheme or to buy into more 

Saskatchewan industries. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is not designed to benefit the people of Saskatchewan 

nor the people of Canada. This Bill is designed to further the political ambitions of Premier Blakeney 

and the NDP Government. It is a Bill designed to give the NDP Government almost total control over 

every aspect of the oil industry in Saskatchewan from the oil well to the service station. This Bill is 

designed to use the oil crisis in eastern Canada and other parts of the world as an excuse for the 

Blakeney Government to move in and nationalize this vital industry. 

 

This Bill as has been mentioned earlier is designed to blackmail other Canadians, to balkanize this 

country, to set back our fight for equity with the end result that it will pull this country apart and not 

unify it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is because of these reasons that I can now understand why Mr. Blakeney and his 

Government does not want the people of this province to understand this Bill before it becomes law. I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that this is wrong. Let us not throw away the high goals which we had set for this fall 

Session. I ask the Premier and his Government to allow this Bill to stay in Second Reading until the 

spring Session. I ask the Premier and his Government to allow the people of this province an opportunity 

to fully understand the far-reaching effects of this Bill. If Bill 42 is going to be rammed through 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

537 

this fall Session without giving the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to understand fully its 

far-reaching effects, I cannot nor will I support this Bill or the arrogant attitude of this Blakeney 

Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. GROSS: (Gravelbourg) — The basis for the Bill we are debating here today can be clearly 

stated that; (1) Do we want to see the future of oil supplies and the prices of those supplies left in the 

hands of selfish profit motivated oil companies or (2) Do we want to see these resources vested in the 

people of Saskatchewan so they can control their own destiny in the energy crisis? Let no one try to 

disguise it in any other form, that is simply what Bill 42 will accomplish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are concerned about the energy crisis. They look forward to this 

Bill and the real truth about what the energy crisis is all about. Mr. Speaker, I will explain a few facts on 

the oil situation in Saskatchewan and why it is so necessary the people of Saskatchewan control the 

resource which duly and rightfully belongs to them. 

 

The situation in Saskatchewan simply is: there are about 800 million barrels of known reserves, we 

presently produce approximately 85 million barrels annually. As John Richards (Saskatoon University) 

pointed out yesterday some simple Grade 4 arithmetic tells us we have a 10-year reserve supply. 

However, at present trends of exploration and production we possibly may have a 15-year supply. In 

order to ensure supplies in the 1980s and the 1990s we will soon have to start conserving our reserves by 

controlling our production. Bill 42 can and will look after this concern when and only when the control 

of our resources are vested in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the area of pricing I ask you: Have the oil companies been fair to the general public, 

have they been fair with the consumers in eastern Canada or in the United States? I think not, Mr. 

Speaker. Our Government has shown real concern in Bill 42 by incorporating a principle of controlling 

wholesale pricing to stop unnecessary gouging of our consumers. There is absolutely no reason why our 

consumers should be ripped off, because of an international crisis, when we in Saskatchewan are 

significant producers in terms of our Canadian boundaries. 

 

What effect has this international crisis on our Saskatchewan oil? Well in the last nine months we have 

seen the price of Saskatchewan crude rise some 95 cents per barrel, while the cost to produce the same 

barrel of oil, nine months ago has not risen in any proportionate level. Oil companies in Saskatchewan 

have already been able to enjoy windfall profits. Mr. Speaker, this is only the beginning of those types 

of windfalls. We say and Bill 42 says those types of windfalls belong to the people of Saskatchewan. It 

is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that a gallon of gasoline in other parts of Canada and in the United 

States is as high as 75 cents per gallon. Some people say it will be shortly up to $1.00 a gallon. That is 

the type of profit-gouging the oil companies are looking forward to. Thank God the people of 

Saskatchewan have got a government with only 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

538 

one master, that being the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GROSS: — This Bill will protect and ensure that our farmers and our public are not treated in the 

same way as people in eastern Canada and the United States. Not only will Bill 42 ensure conservation, 

stabilization, production and exploration, and provide wholesale pricing it will return some of the 

windfall profits to the public purse. 

 

How much money will that be? Our Minister yesterday used several examples. Returns should vary 

anywhere from $100 million to $150 million plus. For the first time the people in Saskatchewan will be 

able to see some real returns for a resource which rightfully belongs to them. 

 

It is difficult to understand the position of Liberals opposite and what position they will have to take. 

The 15 weaklings are quite aware of the position the Federal Government has taken in regard to the 

national corporation. Yet on the other hand they are torn by the possibilities of being wined and dined by 

the oil corporations at home. Mr. Speaker, the boys opposite I suggest will take the wining and the 

dining. 

 

There is every possibility the Liberals opposite may want to make this a battle, if so, our party and the 

people of Saskatchewan will have two opponents. I suggest the first will be the oil companies who will 

pour millions of dollars into a campaign to protest a bill which returns windfall profits they expected to 

get. That battle might be compared to the weight put into the medicare crisis when the doctors laid 

threats of doom and gloom. Our second opponent, Mr. Speaker, hardly a formidable one will be the 

provincial Liberal Party. Let me warn the Leader of the opposition it will be with pleasure the people of 

this province will grind you and your arguments into the dirt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another fact the people of the province should know is, what really has the oil industry put 

into this province in return ;what have they extracted from us? Up to 1973, including a period of some 

two and a half decades the oil companies have poured in some $2.3 billion and have extracted some $3.1 

billion to give them a break even plus a cumulative total profit of some $800 million. The oil industry 

cannot argue they have not received a fair return on their investment. The people of this province have 

more than adequately subsidized the oil industry with our resources. 

 

Where the action of our government is welcomed, Mr. Speaker, it would not have broken my heart if we 

had cut ourselves into a much larger share of the action and returned even more revenue to the province 

where it rightfully belongs. However, I am convinced that this Bill will accomplish a great deal and it is 

logical and sensible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in years ahead I look forward to the days when our party joined with the people of this 

province will be able to launch successfully a program to develop and return any benefits in terms of 

hard and soft mineral resources. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is richly endowed with natural mineral 

wealth and it is high time we got at it. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

539 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 will ensure: (1) Control of oil resources as with other basic resources 

must be firmly vested in the people of Saskatchewan; (2) Future supplies of petroleum for Saskatchewan 

farmers and other Saskatchewan users must be assured; (3) Increases in Saskatchewan wholesale prices 

for petroleum products which do not reflect increases in the cost of operation must be limited; (4) Future 

unearned increments in crude oil prices over and above the level of prices which have prevailed during 

the immediate past period must be retained for the people of Saskatchewan and (5) The returns from 

producing lands owned by farmers and other small holders of freehold acreages should not be disturbed. 

Oil exploration in Saskatchewan should be stepped up over the low exploration levels of the past several 

years. Those principles of Bill 42 will be of total benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, let me warn the people of Saskatchewan and in particular Members 

opposite; a nay vote on this Bill will mean Liberal support for (1) windfall profits of the corporation, (2) 

they don’t want to conserve oil for future years for our people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS: (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to participate in the 

debate on Bill 42 related to energy. 

 

Saskatchewan has known reserves of fossil fuels approximating 800 million barrels. Annual production 

is in the range of 85 million barrels and therefore we have approximately 10 years supply at the present 

rate of production related to proven reserves. Saskatchewan’s annual crude oil production is exported 

almost in total, in turn we import approximately one quarter of our annual production or some 22 million 

barrels from the neighboring Province of Alberta. Part of the reason for this situation is the pipeline 

structure in the province. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) would have us believe that 

Saskatchewan crude, heavy, medium and light is either not light enough in gravity or too sour to be 

handled in present Saskatchewan refining facilities. That is only partially true. Part of the reason for the 

situation is as I previously mentioned the pipeline structure across the province which automatically 

takes eastward the flow to Canadian and south-eastward to mid-west American markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are constantly reminded that the oil industry is a high risk industry. Oil exploration 

companies obviously involve themselves in some risk. Usually, Mr. Speaker, the risk has been insured 

to a considerable degree by public authority, through deferred tax concessions and other special 

concessions such as accelerated depreciation. Risk, I think, Mr. Speaker, is entitled to some reward but 

this contention can be carried much too far. I believe it was George Bernard Shaw who once said, “If we 

are to use the risk factor as the criterion for reward then the highwayman should logically be assured of 

the highest risk rate of all.” 

 

The largest expenditures on oil and gas exploration in Saskatchewan occurred in the years 1957 and 

1967. In the first instance, Mr. Speaker, we had a CCF Government in this province which Liberals 

claimed could not attract exploration capital 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

540 

and in the latter year we had a Liberal Government in power. The expenditures in those two years are 

approximately similar in amount, although it should be noted, Mr. Speaker that the dollars expended in 

1967 probably bought less drilling footage because of inflationary tendencies than that purchased in 

1957 by the expenditures made in that year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in September 1973 the average, well-head price per barrel was $3.38. In September the 

preceding year 1972 the average well-head price per barrel was $2.43, the differential of 95 cents per 

barrel was a windfall in effect to the oil producers. The increase of 95 cents per barrel is not due to 

increased production costs, it is due to a sudden inflationary rise in the price of crude oil on the 

international market. Revenues to crude oil producers in Saskatchewan from 1945 to 1973 — and other 

speakers have made reference to this — were estimated to cost three billion one hundred million dollars. 

Their expenditures during that period were in round figures, two billion three hundred million dollars, 

leaving net returns of $800 million. 

 

If we look at more recent statistics we find in 1972 revenues totalled $224 million and expenditures 

$126 million with a net return of $98 million. It is estimated 1973 revenues will total $278 million and 

expenditures will be $144 million with a return of some $134 million. The Member for Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) referred to this Bill as a swindle, Mr. Speaker. Well when you have your profits increased 

from $98 million to $134 million a year, that can hardly be classified in the category of a swindle. If 

crude price per barrel on the international market rises higher in 1974, and that prospect is clearly 

probable, windfall profits above those already accrued would grow in almost geometric progression. If 

public authorities both at provincial and federal levels did not take action a consumer would have no 

protection against international price levels which did not merit such prices in the Canadian market in 

relation to production costs and inflationary trends. 

 

If we are realistic we will accept the fact that when production costs rise some revision in price level is 

warranted and required. The Bill takes this into account. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition asserts that 

Bill 42 represents confiscation. It does not. It may well represent expropriation which all governments at 

all times in history have had the power to enact and enforce. It represents expropriation at a price which 

leaves the oil industry with a substantial profit over their exploration and production costs per barrel on 

all proven reserves. The Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) says the profit permitted is 

too high. He may be right. That is a matter of judgment. However, I for one believe there is merit in the 

provisions of the Bill in using the difference between the basic well-head price and the premium 

well-head price to ensure some $24 to $25 million for exploration in this province in 1974. Incidentally, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a good deal more than has been expended in recent years for exploration in this 

province. In 1971 the total was $19.3 million, in 1972 $20.7 million, the estimate for 1973 is $18 

million. Surely Opposition Members are not going to argue that the drilling rigs will not derive benefit 

and earnings from an assurance of availability of such a sum in an attempt to secure more proven 

reserves. 

 

The second provision permitting rebate of up to 50 per cent for further drilling, exploration, research and 

other 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

541 

facilities, expenditures should provide initial exploration activity. Opposition Members, Mr. Speaker, 

will likely ridicule this suggestion. They are the same people who swore up and down that there 

wouldn’t be a single oil well drilled in Saskatchewan as long as there was a CCF Government in 

Saskatchewan. They were wrong then, Mr. Speaker, and they are wrong now. The Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) says exploration activity will cease and private investment will be withdrawn. 

Mr. A.L. LaBerge, General Manager of Imperial Oil Saskatchewan Operations, and President of the 

Provincial Division of the Canadian Petroleum Association, said if accurately quoted in the Leader-Post, 

“It will run the oil industry clear out of Saskatchewan”. That is a rather queer comment from an 

individual whose corporate employer had long ago announced eventual closing down of the Regina 

refinery. In addition, Gulf and Husky plants in Moose Jaw and Saskatoon have already terminated 

operations. It is pretty difficult, Mr. Speaker, to run someone out who has already left or who has 

announced his intention to start towards the main exit long before any such legislation was 

contemplated. 

 

The Leader-Post in a recent editorial remarked that overreaction is one of the chronic ailments of our 

times. There is a discernible trend around the world today for governments to take proprietary interest in 

the production and distribution of all kinds of energy. 

 

Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, call Bill 42 a plot. A plot — a legislative takeover. Another dark and 

sinister socialist plot. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing it all over the world; in Ottawa, where we have a 

minority, would you believe it, a Liberal Government; in Edmonton where the Government is 

Progressive Conservative — I don’t know whether it is progressively more conservative or 

conservatively more progressive — but in any event it’s not a socialist government; in Paris where they 

have a right wing administration; in Tokyo where they have a Liberal Government (so-called which is 

just as conservative as the so-called Liberals to your left, Mr. Speaker); in Washington where the 

Government could hardly be termed socialist; and even in Kuwait, where the Kuwaitis are ruled by the 

Sheik who rules his kingdom with an iron hand over an appointed council, appointed, Mr. Speaker, I 

presume in much the same way as the Hon. Leader of the Opposition appoints Liberal candidates for the 

next election a number of days in advance of the actual nominating convention, example Saltcoats. 

 

Bill 42 expropriates and pays a substantial sum of money for proven oil reserves, an amount which 

represents substantial returns to the oil industry. 

 

It provides some protection to the Saskatchewan consumer in relation to wholesale prices. It ensures that 

windfall profits on crude oil production will accrue to the people of the province. 

 

It provides incentives to increase exploration in order to procure future reserves. 

 

It provides for conservation measures which are necessary in a world energy crisis to ensure supplies for 

Saskatchewan consumers now and in the future. 

 

It is a practical pragmatic approach to the problem which cannot await any longer swiftly moving events 

of the world 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

542 

energy picture. On that basis, Mr. Speaker, and not on any dogmatic or doctrinaire philosophy, I will 

support Bill 42. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.F. LOKEN: (Rosetown) — Mr. Speaker, there are several aspects of this Bill which concern 

me very much and I should like to take a few moments to outline what I think are some of the more 

serious mistakes which are in this legislation. It does nothing to ensure an adequate energy supply for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Premier has admitted that 96 per cent of all oil products consumed in Saskatchewan come from 

Alberta and yet this Bill refers only to the conservation of Saskatchewan oil resources. The oil which we 

have in Saskatchewan could be conserved for 100 years and it still would not help anyone in the 

province. 

 

If the NDP is serious about making sure that we have enough oil to keep our economy going this 

legislation should be withdrawn and positive government action should be taken, either to modify the 

refining capacity of Saskatchewan so that we can refine our own oil or a firm written contract should be 

entered into with Alberta to make sure that we are not cut off from their oil. 

 

Secondly, this Bill will drive out from Saskatchewan hundreds of millions of dollars of private 

investment. Not only those people who are involved in oil, but those involved in all mineral resource 

industries will be more than a little reluctant to invest their dollars here. 

 

The potash industry is a good example. Once again, the market for our potash is expanding, the demand 

has risen sharply, now would be a natural time for one or two new mines to be initiated. But ask the 

Government opposite who they think will invest money in the potash industry when any contract or 

lease that may be made with the Crown is likely to be torn up or discarded in a few years’ time. 

 

A third reason why I oppose this legislation is because of the way this Government is seeking to have it 

passed. When we came into this Assembly two weeks ago, we were told that bills would be introduced, 

possibly discussed, but not passed, not until we sit again next year. 

 

The Government has broken its agreement. It has now tried to bulldoze through this very serious 

legislation. 

 

I should like to repeat the Leader of the Opposition’s call for public hearings and an opportunity for both 

Members of this Legislative Assembly and private individuals to study the Bill and in this manner be 

more capable of commenting on it in a conservative way, a constructive way. 

 

Fourth and finally, Mr. Speaker, I oppose this Bill because it is a violation of the rights of individuals 

who own property. The NDP has decided to expropriate oil rights from individual land owners and 

companies, even though present agreements with them have not yet expired. Not only that, they 

themselves set an arbitrary price on which they will compensate those who have had their oil rights 

expropriated. There will be no 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

543 

appeal from the Minister’s decision. This is not only unfair, I think it comes close to robbery. 

 

There is no way, Mr. Speaker, that I will support Bill 42. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H. ROLFES: (Saskatoon Nutana South) — Mr. Speaker, before I go into the text of my 

address I want to deal, just a few minutes with comments made by the previous speaker. 

 

This Opposition must be getting rather desperate because this is the second time that the Member from 

Rosetown has spoken this year or else they feel it is a really important issue and they have to get their 

big guns in on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous speaker said that we should withdraw the Bill and do some modifying of our 

refinery capacities in Saskatchewan. I can agree with the Member that possibly Saskatchewan should 

have a look at modifying our refining capacities and do something that will make certain and assure the 

people of Saskatchewan that if we cannot import oil from Alberta that we will be able to refine 

Saskatchewan crude in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Member also said that this Bill will drive hundreds of millions of dollars of private investment out 

of Saskatchewan. Then he went on from that analysis to say that no one would expand further in the 

potash industry. Mr. Speaker, the last thing we need right now in Saskatchewan is another potash mine. 

First of all, let us see to it that the present potash companies are able to work at 100 per cent. And 

secondly, Mr. Speaker, let us make absolutely certain that the Saskatchewan Government will have the 

right to control the amounts of products of our natural resources and defend that right against the 

intrusion of Otto Lang. 

 

The Hon. Member made two more points, or at least tried to make the points. One was that he objects to 

the way we are going to be passing this Bill. Mr. Speaker, this seems rather odd, because in 1971 we had 

a democratic election in this province; the people spoke. The people said we want 45 MLAs on this side 

of the House and we want 15 on that side of the House. 

 

Many of us told these people in 1971 that we would do everything possible to bring back to the people 

of Saskatchewan the control of our natural resources. 

 

People at that time said yes, and the people today say yes. Mr. Speaker, to say because we have 45 

Members on this side or 44 on this side now, and they only have 14 on their side and therefore we are 

acting undemocratically, doesn’t make any sense. All the Leader of the Opposition is trying to do is 

obtain a little bit of sympathy. But you know that psychology doesn’t work. You’ve got to give the 

people credit first of all. They are not that stupid you know. The people know that if 25 people sit on this 

side of the House and only 24 on that side of the House, it is just as effective democratically as if you 

have 44 on this side of the House and only 14 on that side. One vote for each individual, that is the way 

it works, and it doesn’t make any difference. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

544 

Next, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on the Member saying that this is a violation of individual land 

owners’ rights. The violation of rights of individual land owners. This Bill as the Premier has pointed 

out, does absolutely nothing to violate the rights of the individual land owners in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Absolutely nothing: 

 

Last night, Mr. Speaker, I watched the 11:00 o’clock news and I was rather amused to observe that on 

the same program they had the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and Dick Colver from Saskatoon. Mr. 

Colver was saying, look people don’t panic in Saskatchewan we still have a democracy in Saskatchewan 

and that we should work by the Golden Rule. I would just like to ask Mr. Colver if he thinks that the 

Golden Rule permits him to purchase the Bessborough Hotel for less than the renovations cost the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — At least he kept it in Saskatchewan! 

 

MR. ROLFES: — The Member for Lumsden says at least he kept it in Saskatchewan. I should like to 

point out to the Member from Lumsden, Bill 42 brings back our natural resources, right back to the 

people of Saskatchewan. That’s what Bill 42 does. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROLFES: — I would expect that the Member for Lumsden will therefore support the Bill. 

 

In an article on December 11th issue of the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Phil Wade who is not known to be an 

NDP supporter, characterizes very well the private enterprise parties, both the Liberals and the 

Conservatives when he says: 

 

Does this indicate that if perchance his Party (referring; to the Tories) attained power in Saskatchewan 

that that Party would sell the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the Saskatchewan 

Communications (that is, SaskTel) at fire sale prices to private business. 

 

Mr. Wade goes on to say: 

 

Does he (referring again to Mr. Colver ) does he believe anything goes in this business and 

commercial world, does’ he believe that anything which will permit an income tax write-off is 

justifiable and desirable? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this is the kind of philosophy that has taken hold of, not only the Members 

opposite, but certainly the Members of the Conservative Party both provincially and federally. That 

anything will go and you can certainly sell it at fire sale prices as long as it goes to their corporate 

friends in the United States or in eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want on this particular occasion to express my appreciation to the Hon. Minister, the 

Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson) for the way he clearly presented yesterday, to this House, 

in a non-partisan manner, the principles of Bill 42. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

545 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Certainly people on the other side of the House, if they had opened their ears and 

closed their mouths, like the Member from Lumsden should do sometimes, they now would know the 

principles of Bill 42. I should like also at this time, Mr. Speaker, to give credit to the Member from 

Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards). I listened very carefully yesterday to the Member from Saskatoon 

University. At least the Member from Saskatoon University clearly attacked certain things in the Act 

that he felt he could not support and for that, I want to give the Member credit. 

 

Today again, I think many of us when we listened to the Premier certainly felt that the Premier outlined 

very clearly the position of the people on this side of the House, as to where we stand when it comes to 

our natural resources. 

 

It is easy, Mr. Speaker, to criticize the Government for not having done something earlier. But there is 

no one in this Assembly on that side of the House, with the exception of the Member from Saskatoon 

University who has made any solid, concrete suggestions as to how the Government should deal with 

the energy crisis. 

 

The suggested actions that should be taken by the Government, as proposed by the Member from 

Saskatoon University, that is, to nationalize the oil industry, is in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, not a 

realistic objective for a provincial government. Although I have some sympathy for such a suggestion, I 

don’t think that it is feasible unless we first of all have a national energy policy and some nationalization 

of our multinational corporations at Ottawa. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, may not be too far in the future when one notes how quickly the Federal Government 

has moved recently in adopting many of Mr. Lewis’ suggestions in dealing with the energy crisis. And 

let there be no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the policies of the Federal Government today were responsive to 

the suggestions made by the national party of the NDP and Mr. Lewis. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to refer briefly to Saskatchewan’s history with the oil companies. Saskatchewan’s 

experience with oil companies should convince all of us that we cannot rely on the oil industry for the 

production, the conservation and the refining of our oil and gas resources. Even when incentives, Mr. 

Speaker, to the oil companies were very lucrative under the Thatcher Government, expenditures by oil 

companies for exploration went from a high of $44.7 million in 1967 to a low of $19.3 million in 1971. 

The oil companies even at that time had a very sympathetic government and a very sympathetic Premier 

who believed in the free enterprise system. Even then, Mr. Speaker, the oil companies preferred to move 

their equipment and their financial resources to look for oil in the Arctic and other places where they 

thought they would be able to get higher profits than they were receiving here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want briefly to refer to the closures of refineries in Saskatchewan. Those of us who lived 

in Saskatoon felt the effects and I know the people in Moose Jaw felt the effects of the closures of the 

refineries. The closure of the 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

546 

three oil refineries and the announcement of a fourth closure indicates that the oil companies have total 

lack of concern for the economic development of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROLFES: — The closures, Mr. Speaker, of the Gulf Refinery in Saskatoon threw many people out 

of jobs. The Gulf and Husky Refineries in Moose Jaw was debated in this House and we know the 

effects these closures had on the economy of that city. The announced closure of the Imperial Oil 

Refinery in Regina in 1974 in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, very clearly reflects the industry’s attitude 

towards Saskatchewan, which is that of an extractive source only. These closures, Mr. Speaker, will cost 

Saskatchewan people over 400 jobs. If we consider the multiplier to range from 2 to 4, then we can 

assume that the total job loss because of the refinery shutdowns will be from 800 to 1,600. 

 

Speaking, Mr. Speaker, on the closure of refineries, as I mentioned earlier in this House, I believe that 

governments should have the right to take over these refineries if a private company has suggested or 

has given indications that they will close down. The Government should have the right to expropriate 

these refineries and convert them for the use and benefit of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me ask this Assembly; were the oil companies concerned about what effect these 

closures had on the Saskatchewan community? Were they concerned about the disruption caused to 

many of the families who had to relocate or go on unemployment? Or were they more concerned with 

consolidating their refining plants for higher profits elsewhere? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no doubt in anyone’s mind that it is economical for Imperial Oil to 

continue with their refinery here in Saskatchewan. I said that it is economical, but that does not mean, 

Mr. Speaker, that it is not more profitable for them to consolidate and move to Edmonton. And that is 

exactly the yardstick they use. If it is more profitable, they will move somewhere else. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite are not asking the people of this province to rely on the oil 

industries for the development, the production and the refining of our resources. The track record of oil 

companies in Saskatchewan is not very good. Private oil companies are motivated more by profits than 

by the welfare of people or the development of our communities. 

 

One would have thought that the oil companies would have been satisfied with profits of over $500 

million since 1964. One would have thought that they would have felt some moral ;responsibility to the 

people of this province. But no, Mr. Speaker, this was not the case. They continued to increase the price 

of oil until it reached an unprecedented level of $3.38 per barrel and Mr. LaBerge asks for more. 

 

Bill 42 will put an end to this and will guarantee that any windfall profits in the future will accrue to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the legislation ensures us, despite what the Leader 

of the Opposition says, that exploration will take place in this province at least to the tune of 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

547 

$25 million. For I, Mr. Speaker, do not believe that the oil companies are prepared to give up the 

incentives provided in the Bill, nor are they prepared to give up the lucrative profits still to be made at a 

well-head price of $3.38 a barrel. 

 

It is also hoped, Mr. Speaker, that Saskoil will make an attempt to get into the exploration, the 

production, the distribution and refining of oil and gas in this province. We now have the funds and it is 

time that we acted. 

 

Since Imperial has given notice that the refinery will be shut down, I believe the Government should 

begin planning a new refinery for this province which would be capable of refining the crude oil found 

in this province. 

 

I said before, Mr. Speaker, and I say it again, we cannot depend on the oil industry and we must be 

prepared for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the principles enunciated in Bill 42 should be welcomed and supported by every 

reasonable Member of this House. Who would argue with the principle that control of the oil resource 

should be firmly vested in the people of Saskatchewan? Who would not support the principle that future 

supplies of petroleum for Saskatchewan farmers and other Saskatchewan users should be assured? Or 

who would argue that increases in Saskatchewan wholesale prices for petroleum products, which do not 

reflect increases in the cost of operations, must be limited? And I know we all agree that oil exploration 

in Saskatchewan should be stepped up over the low exploration levels of the past several years. 

 

Most Members in this Assembly, with the possible exception of the Member from Saskatoon University 

(Mr. Richards), accept the principle that returns from producing lands owned by farmers and other small 

holders of freehold acreage should not be disturbed. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, leaves one principle upon which there seems to be a diversity of opinion, that 

principle being that future unearned increments in crude oil prices, over and above the level of prices 

which have prevailed during the immediate past period, must be retained for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is obvious from the speeches that have been made from the opposite side and 

speeches that have been made on this side, that the Members opposite want these profits to go to their 

big corporate friends and we want the profits to go to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROLFES: — The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) would have the people of Saskatchewan 

believe that the Government is being miserly in its dealings with the oil industry. He says we are driving 

out the oil companies. That there is not sufficient incentive for them to stay in Saskatchewan because we 

allow them net profits of only $134 million for 1973, plus the $25 million incentive available to the 

industry by reason of the differential between the basic well-head price and the premium well-head 

price, plus an additional 50 per cent of exploration costs incurred by the industry if approved by the 

Minister. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

548 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite say that this is not enough. In my opinion, this is a pretty lucrative 

offer. What more do such benevolent, such community-spirited and non-profit men like Mr. Steuart, the 

Camerons and the LaBerges want from the people of Saskatchewan? The people of Saskatchewan have 

been gouged enough. It is about time that some reason and justice are brought back to the bargaining 

table. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it is about time that we established a bargaining table. Bill 42, in my opinion, 

is that bargaining table. It is time that the people enjoy some of the benefits and that the oil industry 

recognizes its moral obligations to the owners of these resources, the people of this province. 

 

As I said previously, the profits to the oil companies as outlined in Bill 42 are fairly generous. In fact, 

they are too generous. In my opinion the oil industry was not justified in raising the well-head price of a 

barrel of oil by 95 cents in less than one year. Profits of $98 million in 1972 should have been sufficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this particular aspect, I agree with those people who criticize Bill 42 in being too 

lucrative. In my opinion $3.38 is too much. My criticism of Bill 42 is that the well-head price should 

have been rolled back to $2.43 and the additional revenues should have been used for further 

exploration, as outlined in the present Bill. I find it very difficult to justify the extra $36 million that will 

accrue to the oil industry rather than to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 does take some significant steps towards returning to the people of Saskatchewan 

the control of our oil and gas resources. It will, in my opinion, increase future explorations and it does 

guarantee that substantial profits from the sale of gas and oil will accrue to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is a significant first step and therefore, I will support Bill 42. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT: (Melfort-Kinistino) — Mr. Speaker, as it is getting late and towards supper I 

thought I would get up and say a few words. I sat here and listened very quietly and patiently. We have 

heard the opposing views and we heard the people who were for it. Over the years I have found, by 

assessing what has taken place in the House, I have to concur with the 45 Members on this side with 

what they are trying to do. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Forty-four and a half! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Well, forty-four and a half. One is like Jacob Bench and he is wandering back 

and forth, sometimes he is here and sometimes he is there and where he will be next is up to him. 

 

I would say, in all the observations, when we saw the Opposition fight something real hard it turned out 

to be something very good. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

549 

MR. THIBAULT: — That has been my barometer. I can recall the hard fight we had on the Hog 

Marketing Commission. You go throughout the country now and the people are accepting it. People say, 

by golly, you know this is not so bad, it is better than we thought it would be. We had the Land Bank 

and again we had a hard fight. Well it takes some longer to see things than others. You know it is like 

three immigrants who came from the Old Country and they came in this cold 40 below zero weather, 

they each took a homestead. The three of them planted a patch of potatoes and they each built a little 

shack and they dug a cellar to put the potatoes in, in the fall. One fellow banked up his shack and the 

potatoes did not freeze during the winter. The two other fellows had their potatoes frozen and had to eat 

frozen potatoes. The next winter there were two of them that banked up their shack and the potatoes did 

not freeze. The third one believed in freedom and he never banked his shack and he never learned and he 

always ate frozen potatoes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — So we had the Land Bank, we had FarmStart, we had Medicare. Now I want to 

compliment this Government for being foresighted and acting before it is too late. I want to compliment 

the Premier and his Government to do just what they are doing today. It is looking ahead. 

 

As I said I would not take too much time, but to leave no uncertainty in the minds of people of where I 

stand, I will support Bill 42 and the best guarantee that we have that it is a good thing, is that the Leader 

of the opposition is fighting like the dickens against it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.R. GUY: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, after listening to my friend from Kinistino (Mr. 

Thibault) I feel moved to make a few comments. l always thought that he really didn’t know much about 

anything but potatoes and he proved it today because I will tell you that the people of Saskatchewan do 

not suggest that this legislation, which is being rammed through is like a sack of potatoes, even if they 

are frozen. 

 

I have been rather amused by some of the comments opposite today and I am going to deal later on with 

the comments of the Premier and the Minister of Mineral Resources, because they are really the only 

speeches that have had anything to do with the Bill under discussion. 

 

The Minister has thrown up some backbenchers to try and take some of the heat off. You know that 

when you get too close to the oven you try to turn down the heat. So they brought in a few of the 

backbench quarterbacks today. They had the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson). You know I always said 

when the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) came over to this side that he shouldn’t have 

been alone, that he should have had some supporters come with him. I never heard more of a Waffle 

speech today than we heard from the Member for Pelly. 

 

Surely to goodness, Mr. Speaker, if he’s got the courage of his convictions as he spoke today, what is he 

doing over there? 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

550 

Why don’t you get over here and sit with Mr. Richards? I had to laugh. There is the Member from Pelly, 

the Member for Saskatoon-Nutana (Mr. Rolfes) they all got up here today and said, “This Bill is an 

attack on the multinational oil corporations.” 

 

Of course, this legislation has nothing to do with the multinational oil corporations at all. They can 

defend themselves. This isn’t an attack on them, this isn’t even an attack on the Federal Government. 

This is an attack on every farmer in this country, it is an attack on every businessman, it is an attack on 

the rights of every individual who believes in the free rights to hold property and to own property. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — I had to laugh when the Member from Saskatoon said, “There are 45 of us over here and 

that gives us the right to do anything we see fit. We told them in 1971 we were going to nationalize the 

oil industry.” That is nonsense. If you had had the courage in 1971, as I mentioned the other day, to say 

the things that you intended to do you would never be sitting on that side of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — You didn’t tell them that you were going to nationalize the oil industry. The Minister 

from Estevan (Mr. Thorson) didn’t say that he was going to attack the potash industry as soon as he 

became Minister. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) he never told the farmers of Saskatchewan 

that he was going to set up a Hog Marketing Commission and ram it down their throats without any 

consultation. He said it was a marketing board that was going to be producer controlled. Do you, Mr. 

Messer, one of the biggest land owners in this province, just because you are the Minister, call it a 

producer controlled commission? You never told the people of Saskatchewan that you were going to 

take the forest industry away from the people who wanted to make a living in the forest. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Yes we did. 

 

MR. GUY: — Oh, no you didn’t! At that time the Minister, the Member from Shellbrook didn’t even 

know he was going to be a minister. It came as a surprise to him. And after the speech from the Member 

for Watrous (Mr. Cody) I am not sure that he will be the Minister that much longer. 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — What happened to your Minister? 

 

MR. GUY: — Well, it was cut short. And I make no apologies. I can’t make any apologies because 

your turn will come. 

 

The Member for Saskatoon Nutana says, “You know we have a federal policy today because of the NDP 

Government.” What nonsense Herman, I thought even you wouldn’t be taken in by that. I will say this 

for the Conservatives. The Conservatives were prepared to risk an election in the winter time even 

though 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

551 

they knew it would be distasteful not only to their own members but to everybody in Canada. But they 

had certain convictions. They were prepared to stand or fall on them. But what did the NDP do, where 

did their convictions go? They went out the window. They were afraid to face the public in a winter 

election. You know that they would have been wiped out from one end of Canada to the other because 

they have completely lost their identity. All they are now is, ‘me too’, anything that the Liberal 

Government in Ottawa says in order to avoid an election, they say, ‘me too’. There has never, I don’t 

think in the history of this country, been an opposition party with 31 Members that has been as 

irresponsible, that has wavered on their convictions. that has put their politics ahead of the interests of 

Canada like the NDP in Ottawa. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — And as a result the NDP in Ottawa will be wiped out completely across the country in the 

next federal election. 

 

I just want to say a word or two about what the Premier spoke about this afternoon. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Oh, you’re going to talk about the Bill 

 

MR. GUY: — I will eventually! You know the Premier likes to play on words and he stood there and 

shook his little stubby finger and he said, “I defy you to tell me of one lease that was broken.” I will tell 

you, just speak to the oil companies that have had their rights taken away from them. The same as you 

talked to the farmers who have had their rights taken away from them by the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Messer). Or you speak to the forest operators who have had their rights taken away by the pen of 

the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). These people don’t care whether a lease was 

broken or what happened. All the people know is that a power-hungry and thirsty government and the 

Premier took the rights away without consultation, without by your leave. By a stroke of a pen they 

destroyed their livelihood. And that is what this Bill is doing to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier can play on words all he likes, he will not convince the oil companies, or the small land 

owners who have rights, that they won’t be next. Sure, you say today, any individuals or anybody who 

has 1,280 acres, we’re not going to touch them. What you really mean is that you are not going to touch 

them now, today. But I should hate to be in their shoes if you ever occupy those benches after the next 

election. You won’t be able to keep your sticky little fingers off that 10 per cent. You had 65 per cent, 

enough to get Saskoil into operation but now you want 30 per cent more. You are not going to be 

satisfied until you have 100 per cent because that is your philosophy. You don’t want an individual in 

Saskatchewan, whether he owns land, whether he owns forest products, whether he owns mineral 

products, whether he is in business, whether he is a professional man, no matter what he is, you don’t 

want him to have any rights, you don’t want him to have any say on how his life is going to be run, 

because you are the Government. You’re the ones who have been given all the God-given brains in this 

province according to your philosophy. You know better 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

552 

than anybody, you know everything. You know that people should never have been born to have any 

individual rights. Not when the state can control them. Not when the state can be made up of NDP 

Socialists. That’s your philosophy. And that is why you will never rest until you have taken the rights 

away from every individual in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, I have considerable more that I wish to say about the Bill, so I should like 

to call it 5:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 o’clock p.m. until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, before we adjourned for supper I hadn’t read the Bill so I got a little lost in 

my comments. However, at supper time I had the opportunity to read the Bill. I will tell you it didn’t 

take very much reading to find out just how terrible and disastrous a Bill this is for the principle of 

liberty and freedom of rights and individuality and things like that. I realized I was on the right wicket 

before we adjourned for the supper recess. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, getting serious for the moment, that there are two main questions that have to be 

asked when you consider Bill 42. First of all, is there an oil crisis in Saskatchewan that demands 

immediate action by the Blakeney Government to the point of forcing this Bill through the Legislature 

without consultation with the companies involved or with the oil industry; without public hearings and 

without any negotiations with Ottawa? 

 

Secondly, is the proposed legislation in the best interest of Saskatchewan and Canadian people? And 

will it solve the oil and gas problems that do exist? Above all will it help Saskatchewan fulfil its role in 

Confederation? 

 

To find these answers I am going to turn to the best point to start and that is with the television program 

of the Premier the other evening, for which I have a copy of his remarks. The reason I am turning to the 

comments of the Premier, of course, is that it is very obvious that this is his legislation. I have never 

before seen a Premier push the Minister in charge of the Bill and the Department which he represents 

aside, the way that Premier Blakeney did to Kim Thorson. In fact, if I was Mr. Thorson, in charge of 

putting this Bill through the Legislature, I would walk out and say, if you want the Bill, take it, and put it 

through and take the criticism, take the static that you are going to get over the next few months and 

over the next few years. Why should a Minister of Mineral Resources take static that the Minister of 

Mineral Resources is going to take when the Premier moves into the limelight and takes over and 

presents the Bill, before we in the Legislature have even had the opportunity to have the full explanation 

of what the Bill is concerned with. 

 

I think that this is another example of contempt shown by the Minister for this Legislature, by the 

Premier, taking it to the public in the hope that he can forestall the criticism that he knows is going to 

come as a result of this Legislation. I 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

553 

would suggest that the Premier taking the position and the stand that he has by pushing his Minister of 

Mineral Resources aside by pushing his back benchers into the oblivion of getting up and making a few 

nonsensical statements like we heard from the Member for Pelly today (Mr. Larson) and the Member for 

Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) and the Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) that he is prepared to 

stand and fall on this legislation. I can’t think of a better issue to have the people of Saskatchewan judge 

the present Government than on this legislation which we are debating here tonight. 

 

You know the fact that Saskatchewan has a so-called new oil policy is no credit to the NDP Government 

or the Premier. You know in the last six months all oil producing countries, all oil producing states and 

provinces have been developing, revising and coming out with new policies in light of the world 

situation. It is not related to any political philosophy, in spite of what our Members say opposite. 

 

The Liberal Government in Canada has revised and come up with a new energy policy. Conservative 

Alberta have seen fit to revise and develop a new policy. Republican United States have seen it 

necessary to change their policy and the dictatorial Arabs have also come up with a new policy, for the 

most part which is creating difficulties for the other members in the world. 

 

In fact, if Saskatchewan had not come up with an oil policy, it would be condemned for its failure to 

face the facts as they exist in Canada today. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the policy that the 

Saskatchewan Government has come up with is too much related to the policies of the Arab 

Governments, too narrow to really gain the support of the people of this province. 

 

So the first question is: is the crisis in Saskatchewan immediate? It could only be immediate if three 

conditions developed; that there were severe shortages, that there were sharp price increases and if 

Saskatchewan does not have the opportunity to receive or negotiate a fair share of the windfall profits. 

 

The severe shortages are not in the hands of Saskatchewan. They are in the hands of Alberta. We are not 

using Saskatchewan oil in this province, we are depending 95 per cent on imports. So, nothing that the 

Saskatchewan Government does today in regard to our own oil resources has anything to do with 

whether we are going to have a shortage for our tractors next spring, for our homes to be heated in the 

late months of this winter. So there is no fuel shortage as far as anything Saskatchewan can do to either 

prevent it or to create it. 

 

The price increases, of course, they have been frozen by Ottawa policy, Liberal Ottawa policy. So that is 

out of the hands of the Provincial Government. 

 

The federal export tax controls, the profits and returns and shares to the provinces, this is open to 

negotiation. I listened to the Minister of Mines and Resources in Ottawa over the supper hour. He said 

that he is prepared to sit down with the provinces and negotiate. But he made one point clear, he is not 

prepared to be blackmailed by any province in Canada, 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

554 

any province that is part of the so-called Confederation of Canada. 

 

I suggest that the Premier has the opportunity to negotiate the disposition of windfall profits. I think that 

we can certainly support the Premier in his desire to get more for Saskatchewan. I think we are all out 

for the most that we can get for our province. But unfortunately, we have difficulty in supporting the 

manner in which he is going about it. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that he supports the federal moves in the directions that we have 

talked about, on price controls, windfall profits and shortages. So there is no crisis in Saskatchewan, 

thanks to Ottawa. But I will tell you that if we had waited for Saskatchewan policy the crisis would have 

come and the crisis would have gone before the Premier acted. 

 

Prices according to the Minister of Mineral Resources, started to rise in October 1972. That’s more than 

12 months ago. And what did the Saskatchewan NDP do at that time? They did nothing. The reserves 

continued to be depleted for the past year and no action was taken. 

 

You know I was surprised the other day when I asked the question, “Who was the executive director of 

Saskoil?” We remember how we came into the Legislature last spring, Saskoil similar to this Bill, was 

pushed through the Legislature in the dying days of the Session because they wanted to create additional 

supplies of oil and gas in this province. And what have they done? They have done absolutely nothing. 

They have got no executive director, they have got a manager of a board that knows no more about the 

actual process of getting oil out of the ground and refining it than any of the Members sitting opposite. 

You could have put any one of them in that position and they would have done as poor a job as he is 

doing. 

 

So, if the problems that the Minister referred to the other day as being so vital, or as vital as he suggests, 

why didn’t the Provincial Government take action a year or two years ago? So, it just goes to show that 

there is no immediate crisis in this province. There is no immediate crisis. 

 

The Premier’s final argument was that this legislation is needed to take to the Premiers’ Conference on 

Energy at the end of January with the Federal Government. He says he is prepared to co-operate but he 

is only prepared to co-operate while he is preparing his blackmail letters for the rest of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this argument and this approach tells me one thing that Premier Blakeney is not capable of 

meeting the Prime Minister or the other premiers of this country on an equal basis. He has to carry a 

blackjack in his back pocket in order to protect himself against his failure to negotiate with Ottawa in a 

spirit of true co-operation. 

 

Unfortunately, we have seen this happen not once, but many times. He went to the Calgary conference 

and he has been to other first ministers conferences. And beyond a shadow of a doubt his performance at 

these conferences has proven that Premier Blakeney is not as capable of negotiating for Saskatchewan as 

other premiers in Canada are for negotiating for their interests. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

555 

Instead, to win his claims he must blackmail the rest of Canada, he must create disunity within 

Confederation and he has to act like a dictator from some Arab sheikdom instead of sitting down and 

negotiating in a strong position as a Canadian, interested in a united Canada. 

 

So the first question that I have raised has to be answered in this manner. There is no crisis. There is no 

need for such far-reaching legislation. There is no need for the urgency that the NDP Government 

suggests. And there is no need for confiscation and complete control of the oil industry in this province. 

 

So why then are we faced with this legislation? That has to be a supplementary question. And to find the 

answer I think we have to look, as the Minister of Minerals said the other day, at the philosophy of the 

NDP. You go back to the Regina Manifesto, the Winnipeg Declaration, and every policy statement since 

has called for nationalization of the oil industry. In 1971, 1972 and 1973 the NDP Conventions called 

for it. The Wafflers left the Party because of the failure of the NDP Government to do it. No NDP 

leader, although supporting it dared to do it, because it would have been political suicide. T.C. Douglas 

from 1944 to 1960, as my colleague today pointed out, didn’t dare nationalize the oil industry, even 

though it was part of the program, part of the Manifesto on which he was elected. But he not only didn’t 

dare do it, he was very careful to point out that he didn’t really want to do it. He wanted the oil 

companies in this province. The late Woodrow Lloyd, Premier from 1961 to 1964 would have liked to 

nationalize the oil industry but he too didn’t dare to do it in view of an upcoming election campaign. 

Blakeney in 1971, Leader of the Opposition, New Deal for People hinted very softly that he was 

interested in nationalizing the oil industry, but he refused to admit it publicly that he was interested in 

nationalizing the oil industry. He refused to admit it publicly when he was asked on several public 

platforms whether that would be the intention of the new NDP Government. 

 

I think it is significant that now that T.C. Douglas and David Lewis who have no hope for power on the 

federal scene and who are out of the provincial scene, now all of a sudden favor the nationalization of 

our oil industry. After the Socialists Conference last week it is obvious to everyone, I suggest, that Mr. 

Douglas and Mr. Lewis have found a sucker to be the first Premier to nationalize an industry or to start 

the nationalization of an oil industry in a province. He couldn’t go to Premier Barrett in British 

Columbia because they haven’t got enough oil to make it worthwhile. He couldn’t go to Premier 

Schreyer in Manitoba because Premier Schreyer was publicly chastised at the Socialist Conference 

because he said there isn’t room for the private oil industry in the development of our resources. So 

whom did he turn to? Premier Blakeney was the natural. We have the Saskatchewan oil resources that 

are well developed, so we don’t need the additional investment to the extent that perhaps other parts of 

Canada do. 

 

Saskatchewan people don’t depend on Saskatchewan oil so if the oil supply dries up completely as it is 

likely to do, it won’t really affect the economy of Canada that much that it would affect Tommy 

Douglas and David Lewis. Saskatchewan doesn’t produce enough to have any significance on the world 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

556 

markets. So Premier Blakeney was taken in, sucked in by the federal NDP to show that the 

nationalization of the oil industry would work. It didn’t take much effort because ever since he was a 

little boy he wanted to be a socialist hero. He may never win another election . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Who? 

 

MR. GUY: — Premier Blakeney: But he will go down in history as the Premier who started the 

nationalization of the oil industry in Saskatchewan. Why else would he move to the front . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Oh, we see the donkeys in the back row clapping! They don’t want to be back after 1975 

either. I don’t think they have to worry, their chances are very limited. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — . . . Changing seats anyway! 

 

MR. GUY: — Well I notice that you changed your seat only a year or so ago. You started out in the 

Legislature over there then you moved into the back rows, as Finance Minister. It showed the concern 

that the Premier had for your role in the Government when he moved you from the front to the back. 

 

Why would the Premier of the Province move to the front in this particular issue, if he didn’t want to be 

a socialist hero? He let the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) bear the brunt of the Land Bank, the 

Hog Commission. He let the Minister for Natural Resources and Northern Saskatchewan bring in The 

Forest Act and the DNS. In fact it was very noticeable during the debates on those two bills last year that 

the Premier wasn’t in his seat very often. He let the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) bring in the 

teacher bargaining bill, which took the rights of parents and the school boards away from the people of 

Saskatchewan. He let the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) bring in the Bill that would close 

businesses down for five days without recourse to the courts or to anyone else but the Minister. But not 

the oil Bill, he pushed the Minister aside and he said, “You can introduce it tomorrow but I am going to 

make your speech tonight on province-wide television.” Mind you I can’t blame him that much when 

you consider the performance of the Minister of Industry over the last few years, he is the most travelled 

Minister in Saskatchewan but he is also the least effective when it comes to bringing any industry to this 

province. 

 

So we have to say and the people of Saskatchewan have to recognize that this is an ego trip for Premier 

Blakeney, it satisfies his own ego of being the man to socialize the industry, it will save him with his 

own backbenchers and the people at the convention who have voted for three consecutive years to have 

the nationalization of the oil industry. It will also make him a little hero with Tommy Douglas and 

David Lewis in the federal scene, who now that they have no responsibility in this country are prepared 

to nationalize everything, with no effect on their political future. But I think that we in Saskatchewan 

don’t mind his little ego trip that he is on, we don’t. mind him carrying out the commitment that the 

NDP have made. I think we do show concern for the fact that he is using an international oil 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

557 

crisis to create fear in Saskatchewan people in order to accept this oil nationalization. I say that that is a 

coward’s approach. If the NDP wanted to nationalize the oil industry why didn’t they do it last year, or 

the year before. Why didn’t they come out in their Throne Speech last year and the year before and 

again this year and say, ‘we intend to nationalize the oil industry’. Why wait for a crisis, why spread fear 

throughout the Province of Saskatchewan about shortages of fuel and price increases when there is no 

crisis. He did it for one reason and that was to bring about this great plan that the socialists have always 

had in the back of their minds but never the courage to fulfil and that is to nationalize the oil, the potash 

and every other means of production that there are in this province. 

 

Now let’s look at the second question. Is the legislation in the best interests of Saskatchewan and 

Canadian people? Well of course you have to start off by saying that any crisis and fear that is being 

created by the Government opposite can’t be responsible for legislation that is in the best interests of our 

people. The Premier outlined the main objective of the oil policy. He said, “Future supplies for 

Saskatchewan must be assured.” That is a worthy objective that we on this side of the House support, 

but this Bill hasn’t done it. Ninety-six per cent of the imports in this province are from Alberta. There is 

nothing in this Bill that controls the supply from Alberta, there is nothing in this Bill that controls the 

prices that Alberta will charge Saskatchewan for the oil and gas that they import. 

 

I have noticed that the Minister of Finance has been strangely silent throughout the last three weeks in 

regard to anything that has developed in the House, in regard to oil . . . 

 

MR. LANE: — He’s just praying for money! 

 

MR. GUY: — Yes, he’s just praying for money. If fact that is why I think he is a little vocal tonight. He 

heard the Minister in Ottawa say that he is not prepared to hand over the money to an irresponsible 

government like they have in Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. LANE: — He’s happy tonight because Allan assured him! 

 

MR. GUY: — Oh yes, he did! He’s been wrong before, so his chances again are pretty good. This Bill 

does not in any way provide for the future supply of oil and gas for Saskatchewan people. There has 

been nothing in this to assure that Saskatchewan can refine their own oil resources. 

 

If Alberta wanted to take the same attitude that our friends opposite have taken, the tractors could be idle 

in the fields this spring. Before the end of the winter homeowners could be shivering in their houses. 

The Government opposite has taken no steps to make sure that this doesn’t happen. It has done nothing 

to assure Saskatchewan people that there will be supplies of oil and that there will be no cost increases 

in the legislation that they are forcing through the House at this time. Therefore it is not in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

558 

His second point was that the increased value of oil should flow to the people of Saskatchewan. Again 

this is a worthy objective, but he hasn’t guaranteed it. He may get increased value on our exports abroad 

or to other parts of Canada, but it would be soon lost if Alberta takes the same dog-in-the-manger 

attitude that Saskatchewan has taken and makes us pay for our imports. If Saskatchewan is prepared to 

make Ontario and Manitoba pay through the nose there is nothing to say that Alberta won’t treat 

Saskatchewan the same way. Again we would be the loser, so we can’t say that this Bill on that basis is 

in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The third objective that he mentioned was, that this Bill will make the greatest possible effort to discover 

new reserves in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this Bill does just the opposite. Any oil company that is in 

the province today will leave as a result of this legislation. There will be no new risk capital exploration 

as a result of this. The Premier in his point of repatriation of private oil and gas rights spoke nonsense. It 

is not necessary at this time. You have 60 percent, which is plenty to get Saskoil started if you could find 

anybody stupid enough to take on the job of trying to manage that new corporation. The other 30 per 

cent is not that important now. 

 

I want to remind you that it was the NDP Government or the CCF Government at that time under Mr. 

Douglas and Mr. Fines who gave the rights away to begin with for most of the oil in this province. I will 

suggest to you that they gave them at a fraction of their value to their friends, who subsequently made 

windfall profits from the oil companies who eventually came in and took those rights over. 

 

Now Mr. Blakeney and his travelling boys are confiscating them back. As my colleague from Milestone 

said, in direct defiance of a promise that was made by a former Premier. The Premier complains about 

the profit of the oil companies. Again there is nothing in this legislation that will affect that. I should like 

to remind you, Mr. Speaker, and the Members opposite that the profits that have been taken by the oil 

companies out of Saskatchewan for 23 of the 30 years of the oil industry in this province was under an 

NDP Government. Why didn’t Blakeney and his boys do something about these profits at that time if 

they are so concerned. Again it is another red herring to force the nationalization of the oil industry and 

forcing control over the public and people who have invested money in this province in the hope of 

making it a better place to live. 

 

Even in the last. two and one half years when there have been substantial profits taken by the oil 

industry did our friends opposite move, did they do anything? They did absolutely nothing! It was 

admitted by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson) the other day that the year 1973 will see 

the largest profits taken; out of this province that has ever occurred since the oil industry came here. 

What were they doing to allow the profits in 1973 when they have been the Government since 1971? It 

doesn’t make sense. They had two and a half years to take some action if they were concerned about the 

profits of the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will increase the costs of exploration to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Instead of having the companies which have been spending millions of dollars 

— and I agree with the Minister of 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

559 

Mineral Resources and I seldom do, but I agree on this point — that they should have been putting more 

money back into this province. I think we all agree with that. We accept that premise that oil companies 

should put some of the profits back into the areas from which they get them. They have put some, in fact 

they have put a considerable amount. Perhaps it was not enough. But I will tell you today, Mr. Speaker, 

when this Bill is passed there will not be one cent of private money going into the oil industry. Instead 

of the Province of Saskatchewan maybe accepting 50 per cent, or the people of Saskatchewan accepting 

50 per cent of the risk, as was pointed out the other day, they will now be accepting 100 per cent of the 

risk of any new oil find in this province. We heard last night on the program that when you average it 

out a new producing well in this province if you consider the dry holes that are drilled, costs you $2 

million. Two million dollars every time a new producing well is found in this province will be a burden 

on the taxpayers of this province because the Government has chased any private risk, any private 

capital out of this province. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, this is a heavy burden for the people of Saskatchewan to bear just to have an 

NDP Government who is anti-business, anti-development, anti-public interest. 

 

The main reason why this is going to happen of course is that the Government has no technical 

knowledge. They have no expertise, they have no trained personnel in Saskoil. I don’t think that the 

people of Saskatchewan recognize yet that there was an Order-in-Council passed just a few days ago — 

in fact on November 27th — asking for $500,000 for Saskoil. Where did that half million dollars go to? 

It didn’t go to drilling oil wells, it didn’t go to the development or the research or anything. It went 

straight for administration. A half million dollars in six months for administration of a Crown 

corporation that has not even got off the ground. They haven’t even got an executive director and yet it 

is costing the people of Saskatchewan half a million. That is only the beginning. This half million loan is 

interest free over the next 10 or 15 years or whatever the terms of this loan will be. There will be no 

interest paid. Just think what would happen if the Finance Minister, who is very mouthy this evening, 

had taken the half million, invested it at 9 per cent for 15 years, how much money would have 

accumulated to the Province of Saskatchewan. Instead they take the half million and put it into 

administration of a Crown corporation that hasn’t even got off the ground. No interest is going to be 

paid on that money and the Saskatchewan people are the losers even before the Crown corporation gets 

started. In fact, I will tell you I have had a lot of people tell me across the province, “Let’s, hope to God 

that this organization never gets going, because every day it doesn’t get off the ground we’re-saving 

money!” That’s going to be the story of Saskoil. They’ll be the greatest money losers of any Crown 

corporation. You know we saw the box factory, the fish marketing board, we saw the millions that were 

lost by them. That’s going to be a drop in the bucket compared to what Saskoil will put into the ground 

with no return. Oh, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Saskatchewan, they’re not being fooled by our friends opposite. They know what these Crown 

corporations will cost them before there is any return to the public, and this is a typical example, half a 

million dollars of public funds to organize a Crown corporation which hasn’t even got an executive 

director yet, which has nothing to contribute to providing some revenue to the province. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

560 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — I hope the Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) will speak. The only reason I’m stopping 

now, I think the Minister of Finance feels a speech coming on and we shall be glad to listen to it. 

 

But anyway, the two questions that I posed at the beginning of my remarks, if you answer them 

honestly, will show that Bill 42 is not necessary and is not in the best interest of Saskatchewan or 

Canada. This is a barefaced grab for power and control of another industry by Blakeney and his 

travelling boys, under the guise of a Saskatchewan and international crisis. And when you think about it, 

it follows hard on the heels of the Land Bank, The Forest Act, the Hog Marketing Commission, the 

Ward System, the University Bill, the Foreign Ownership Bill, the threat to the potash industry that was 

made just a few weeks ago by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson), the Business Closure 

legislation, the interference with the autonomy of the school boards, the hospital boards, the library 

boards, the Timber Board even. And it is all by force, all without consultation. All without recourse to 

the courts and all at the whim of the Minister involved in each particular case. 

 

But I am going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite can sit there and they can laugh and they 

can talk, but they are not in touch with the pulse of Saskatchewan today. The people of Saskatchewan 

are saying, “We have had enough, we have had enough of the power and control of this power hungry 

Government.” They only have one question that they can ask. The Member from Saskatoon won’t even 

be around to hear the answer, not likely. He was defeated once because of his stupidity in this House and 

I suggest that he will be defeated again on the same basis. 

 

You know, the people of Saskatchewan have only one thing to ask today and that is, “Who is going to be 

next?” Who is going to be next to feel this thrust for power by the Premier and his Ministers? There is 

nothing sacred in the province today as far as our friends opposite are concerned when it comes to 

individual freedoms and individual rights. That is the problem that is facing Saskatchewan today and it 

is being exemplified once more by Bill 42, which is taking away the rights of the oil industry in this 

province. 

 

And worst of all is its effect on Canadian unity. Saskatchewan is a dictatorship in the middle of a 

democracy. Saskatchewan the blackmailer at a time when co-operation is needed. The Premier says he is 

prepared to co-operate with the rest of Canada, but this isn’t what he said when he spoke to the province 

the other night. He tried to mislead us by saying, “We don’t want to charge world prices to the rest of 

Canada.” But this is what he said, “Further, if federal policies propose that Saskatchewan crude be sold 

in Canada at less than its international value, we will co-operate fully, so long as this is not done at the 

expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayers.” In other words, he wants to set a little island in the middle of 

Canada, if the world prices are going to be charged, then let Alberta pay, let the welfare recipients across 

the country pay, let the small businessman pay, let the farmers pay, but don’t ask Saskatchewan to pay. 

Now, we have seen ridiculous 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

561 

statements made in this House by the Premier before, but never has there been one made that is as 

inconsistent as the one he made today in relation to what he said the other night on his television show. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GUY: — Premier Blakeney is prepared to destroy the prestige, the honor and the dedication to 

Confederation that successive Saskatchewan governments have built up over 68 years in Confederation 

for one reason, for short-term political gain. He is prepared to gamble the future of Saskatchewan in the 

conferences in the halls of Confederation for himself, for his Government, on a short-term political basis 

hoping to use a world crisis in energy to gain enough support to elect him in 1975. 

 

I tell you today, Mr. Speaker, this is a gamble that he is going to lose. If he is sincere in helping solve 

the present Canadian fuel prices, or in strengthening Canadian unity, or in the future of Saskatchewan 

citizens, he will do three things: (1) He will hold this Bill until public hearings can be held so those 

affected by it can be heard. (2) He can sit down with Ottawa and the other Premiers in the spirit of 

co-operation, rather than confrontation with a gun at their head, which isn’t a gun but a little pop pistol 

because he knows that he’s not going to get very far with that. (3) He can put the interests of 

Saskatchewan people ahead of his own political objectives. Mr. Speaker, until he is prepared to take 

these three steps and make an honest effort to be a Premier who is concerned with Confederation, 

Canadian unity and the dignity and honor that Saskatchewan has always held across the country, until 

that time, I am not prepared to support this motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY: (Minister of Education) — Mr. Speaker, as a Member of the New 

Democratic Party I am pleased and proud to speak in support of Bill 42. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Before I begin my remarks I want to comment on the words of the Member 

for Athabasca (Mr. Guy), who just sat down. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that as a fairly new Member of 

the Legislature, I always look forward to the speeches of the Member for Rosthern-Athabasca because 

he has some points that new Members should look at. He always attempts to deliver, and I say ‘attempts’ 

a political speech . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, not here! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, he’s always, as he said, very, very serious. He always yells when 

his arguments are weak, and he always speaks on the Bill. Only one problem, Mr. Speaker, he has the 

same speech that I have listened to in the last two years, the same arguments in opposition to progressive 

legislation that we’ve brought forward in this House. The only one new thing he said today, one new 

thing, was that the Member for 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

562 

Pelly (Mr. Larson) was a Waffler. The next thing he’ll say is that the Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris) 

and the Member for Last Mountain (Mr. MacMurchy) are Wafflers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend my fellow Cabinet Minister on the strength and the decisiveness of this 

legislation. It is well timed because there is, despite what the Member from Athabasca said, a current 

energy crisis. It is well timed literally, because what better time to introduce a bill and debate a bill when 

a Saskatchewan blizzard is raging outside. It is a courageous bill, it’s a progressive bill, it’s a demanding 

bill. And I say it is demanding because it’s a challenge to the international oil companies, it’s a 

challenge to the Federal Government, it’s a challenge to the Liberal Party and a good number of their 

allies in the corporate world. It is a challenge to all those groups at once. 

 

It is the kind of legislation which makes me proud to be a New Democrat. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — It’s based on the principles of both the CCF and the NDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are at least five key points in Bill 42. And I don’t believe we can discuss these 

principles without reference to the current energy crisis and to the situation we face at the federal level. 

For, Mr. Speaker, in many ways Bill 42 is a response to the incompetence of the Federal Government. 

 

Many of the principles of this Act are there because they have been ignored at Ottawa and they have 

been ignored for years. Both the Liberals and Conservatives have maintained policies that exploit the 

West, in fact, exploit all Canadians to the profit of the international oil companies. Bill 42, Mr. Speaker, 

will give us the tools to end this exploitation, to do what Ottawa should have done a long time ago. 

 

Let’s, Mr. Speaker, consider just one example. For many years the western governments, our 

Government, our CCF Government, Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, the Social Credit Government 

in Alberta, fought the old line parties, fought for a pipeline to carry our oil into the eastern market. But 

these were times of surplus oil. They were times of cheap energy and our requests — the Saskatchewan 

and Alberta requests — fell on deaf ears. We asked the Liberals, and they said, No. We asked the 

Conservatives and they said, No. In fact, it was the Tories who drew a line and locked us out of 

everything east of the Ottawa Valley. All for the sake of the international oil companies and 10 or 15 

cents a barrel. Both the old line parties at Ottawa pursued this cheap and short-sighted policy. They left 

Canada at the mercy of the offshore oil barons, and they left the West to fend for itself in the export 

market with respect to oil. So the Liberal and Conservative Governments kept us out of the Montreal oil 

market. While they had no objection to forcing western farmers and consumers to buy their tractors and 

their combines, their lumber, their commodities, their manufactured goods at the full world price, plus 

tariffs, they had no objection to letting the railways rob us on freight rates, no objection to severe 

discrimination against our processing industries. It has cost the West plenty to belong to Canada and 

Ottawa has ignored our pleas for change. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

563 

Ah, but things are different today. Oil is scarce and the world price is high and it is rising even higher. 

Today our oil is cheaper than the offshore inputs and if we listen we can hear those eastern corporations 

scream all the way from here. Screaming for our oil to run their plants. Suddenly we have become part 

of their country, the Montreal pipeline is the latest thing in the boardrooms on Bay Street. Make no 

mistake about it, we recognize our obligation to eastern Canada as the Government of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to supply oil. We are prepared to supply oil at a lower price than we can 

get overseas. The East can have our oil, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we can have equality, and Bill 42 gives 

us the power to guarantee equality. With Bill 42 we can send Premier Blakeney to negotiate, as the 

Member for Athabasca said. We can send Premier Blakeney to the first ministers’ conference with real 

power to bargain, for what? For fair freight rates, to reduce the cost of our exports and to encourage 

secondary industry to locate in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are several other areas where Bill 42 makes 

up for federal negligence. The Liberals at Ottawa were forced to set up a National Petroleum 

Corporation and who forced them to? The NDP forced them to and isn’t that interesting. What’s even 

more interesting is that they say the corporation will only have $40 million for exploration. For 

exploration, $40 million — that’s peanuts! We spend half of that in Saskatchewan in one year alone. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — What do you expect from monkeys! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — The Liberals are weak, they’re not strong, they have no courage, they adopt 

NDP policy to stay in power and they starve the NDP programs to appease the corporations. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if Ottawa will not explore for oil, Saskatchewan will. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Bill 42 will encourage exploration by the companies themselves. We think 

they will take advantage of the incentive. But suppose they don’t? We are not going to sit on our hands. 

The revenue generated by Bill 42’s taxes and royalties will be used by the province to do our own 

exploration. 

 

So on one hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 42 does for Saskatchewan what Ottawa has refused to do. On 

the other hand, much of Bill 42 is a response, not to what they did not do, but to the steps Ottawa has 

taken to deprive this province of its resources. Ottawa, and the Federal Liberal Party, is making an 

all-out attack on the constitutional right of Saskatchewan people to control and to conserve the resources 

of this province. I refer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the intervention by Otto Lang in the court case over 

potash conservation. Mr. Lang has taken an unprecedented step and he has taken that step on behalf of 

the Liberal Government in the political interests of the Liberal Party to challenge the constitutional right 

of the province to control its resources. Now let’s ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

564 

Otto Lang has intervened. Is it because of a new found interest in potash? No. The Conservation Board 

was set up by the Liberals, by the Members opposite when they sat in these benches and they did it in 

consultation with their Liberal colleague, John Turner, who was Minister of Justice and Ottawa had no 

objections then. 

 

In 1971 when the NDP took office there were no objections and we brought in some changes and still no 

objections. Mr. Speaker, 1972 went by and still no objections, but 1973 and what do we have? We have 

an oil crisis. All of a sudden Otto Lang develops an interest in potash. Now why did the Liberals get this 

sudden concern for resource conservation and why are they challenging the province’s rights? Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I suggest to the Members of this House, the reasons are political. Otto Lang has 

adopted many policies that openly discriminate against the West. The feed grains policy discriminates, 

the stabilization plan was a disaster, his rapeseed vote is loaded. Our Government is opposed to these 

Liberal programs, we have opposed them openly and strongly. So what does Otto Lang do, he is looking 

for tactics to take the heat off himself and put it on the province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Liberal court 

case is pure politics. I say that the Members on this side of the House don’t mind at all. If Otto Lang 

wants a fight he can have it. The unfortunate aspect is that the Liberal political tactics could have a very 

serious consequence on our relations across this country. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Leader of the opposition spoke on this Bill he implied that he 

didn’t object to Bill 42 except for its expropriated oil rights. Now I am not quite sure if I believe him 

when he says that but that’s what he says. Let me tell the Leader of the Opposition and the Member 

from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) that if it wasn’t for Otto 

Lang expropriation might not be necessary. Ottawa has attacked a basic provincial constitutional right. 

Otto Lang has gone to court to challenge our power to control potash, and if he wins on potash he could 

win on oil. Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Government had no choice. There was only one way for 

Saskatchewan to guarantee that we can control our oil resources and that is to own it outright. We have 

always had a great debate in Saskatchewan about public ownership, many times there have been debates 

in the New Democratic Party about public ownership. I have always said it is desirable and I say in this 

instance it is desirable and I say in this House it is Otto Lang, the old buddy, the old Federal Liberal 

buddy of the Members opposite at Ottawa who really turned a very desirable step into a necessary one. 

 

Why, let’s ask, is the Federal Liberal Party trying to grab control of oil? Now that’s a tough one. But I 

say again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that their motive is political, it is part of a larger political strategy of the 

Prime Minister and Otto Lang. Well, let’s think about what happened in the 1972 election. In the 1972 

election the Liberals took only seven seats in the West. They lost many seats in Ontario, especially in the 

rural constituencies. But in Quebec they held steady. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the Liberals 

have decided to write off the West. They have given up hope of ever electing a majority with western 

seats. So what is their plan? Their plan is to tighten their hold on Quebec, to secure rural Quebec against 

the Creditistes, and in Ontario, to regain constituencies there. In short, and it makes sense when you 

think politically, they are going to build on their strength and give their weaknesses 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

565 

second priority or forget about them altogether and that is pretty good strategy, if you’re a Liberal. But it 

is a plan that is having disastrous results for western Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the evidence is all around us. Otto Lang’s feed grains policy reflects their political 

designs. Mr. Lang takes from the West and gives to the East, he undermines the Canadian Wheat Board, 

undermines it to sell western grain to eastern feeders at less than world price. He forces western 

producers to subsidize eastern consumers. This is not new Liberal policy but this is the first time it is 

being pursued so vigorously. Now this kind of strategy it seems to me is carried over into oil. 

 

Why is Otto Lang attacking provincial rights? What is his plan? I think, (1) he wants to undermine our 

control of potash, (2) he wants to undermine our control of oil, (3) to take control of these resources 

federally to exploit our oil at cheap prices and (4) force Saskatchewan producers to subsidize Liberal 

votes in the East. The Prime Minister and Otto Lang would force our product to be sold in the East at 

less than the going world price. We would have to subsidize eastern consumers. 

 

Is that federalism? Is that Canadianism? Is that I ask the Members who sit opposite, good Canadian 

policy? Is this the Liberal idea of national unity? Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer over 

the years has been, Yes. With Bill 42 we have a real opportunity to pull ourselves up by the bootstraps. 

We don’t have to be the straight man in Liberal politics. Yes, we are prepared to help the East. Yes, we 

are. But all we ask is equality, equality in freight rates, reasonable support for our farm industry and an 

honest chance to develop our secondary industry. Is that too much to ask of the Federal Liberal 

Government and the Liberal Party? 

 

Bill 42 is more than a Saskatchewan response to federal inadequacy. It is a decisive move to guarantee 

oil and gas to our citizens. Saskatchewan is an agricultural province; we need and use more oil per 

capita because farming demands it. Our population is scattered, we have many, many small towns and 

they would become isolated if oil and gas were cut off. Bill 42 is designed to ensure supplies to our 

farmers to our rural communities at reasonable prices. This can be done by conservation, by price 

control. 

 

It is true, as the Opposition says, we get 95 per cent of our oil from Alberta, but I don’t expect as I 

examine the Alberta policy that we are going to be cut off. Alberta in their policy is willing to sell all it 

can to anyone who will buy. The Alberta Conservative Government wants the price to go sky high and 

not just to foreign buyers but also to Canadians and that is Saskatchewan people as well. They need oil 

at $6 a barrel so that their friends and their relations, the free enterprise oil corporations, will develop the 

Athabasca Tar Sands and if that means gouging Canadian consumers for corporate profit — not for 

public profit — the Tories in Alberta will do it. Maybe this is why our own Tory businessman, Mr. 

Colver — and he had a tough time last night — has come out on the same program as the Leader of the 

Opposition. When he is on the same program I think he is on the same side as the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and that’s the side of the corporations. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

566 

Saskatchewan agrees with Alberta to the extent that we both believe western oil should not subsidize 

easterners but we part company — yes we part company when it comes to where the profits should flow. 

Bill 42 will return excess profits to the people of Saskatchewan, it will channel the revenue from our 

taxes and royalties into a fund to hold down the cost of Alberta crude used by our Saskatchewan 

consumers. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Otto Lang has made it dangerous to rely on our constitutional rights to 

control oil. In order to protect Saskatchewan consumers our only alternative is to actually own the oil 

and that’s why Bill 42 buys out the freehold rights of the 25 oil companies. We already own 64 per cent 

of mineral rights and Bill 42 buys out another 25 per cent. Anything above two sections. I want to point 

out that this won’t affect our farmers with small mineral holdings and they are the other 10 per cent. 

They keep their holdings, they continue to draw their royalties on whatever price is paid. Bill 42 only 

affects the oil corporations. 

 

The Liberals opposite cry about expropriation and who are they crying for? Well they are crying for the 

CPR, the Hudson’s Bay Company and Canada Trust and Husky Oil. I don’t think all of the Members 

opposite will go along with that. I think the Opposition is putting up this squabble to lay claim to the oil 

companies’ campaign. contributions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — If they can’t win on the issue perhaps they think they can win on the money. 

Maybe if their voices are loud, they can be heard in the board rooms on Bay Street, the greatest windfall 

will go to the Liberals for their defence of the international oil corporations. 

 

What about exploration, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Will the oil companies pull out? Maybe a better question 

to ask is: what difference does it make if they do leave? Let us remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Bill 

42 provides an incentive for exploration. The corporations can take advantage of a 30-cent per barrel 

rebate if they do explore. But if they don’t explore, if they don’t explore the companies will leave behind 

$24 million and I can’t see them walking away from that. That’s their choice to make. But if they leave 

what are the implications? The opposition says that oil companies need large profits to pay the cost of 

finding new reserves. If the profits are high explorations should also be high. They are wrong. The fact 

is that our oil companies in Saskatchewan reached pay-out in 1964, all of their investment had been paid 

back at that time. After 1964 all they had to pay for was the cost of pumping crude out of the ground and 

the rest was gravy. Their profits were enormous. The Minister yesterday talked about their profits. So 

we should expect that their exploration should be enormous too. But let’s look at the record. In 1965, 

$44 million was spent on exploration. Did it increase? Not at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It went down, 

despite the increasing profits exploration dropped by 50 per cent, from $44 million in 1968 to $20 

million in 1972. So oil profits don’t mean more discoveries in Saskatchewan; what they do mean is more 

dividends on Bay Street or Wall Street, and we have the facts to document it. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

567 

So how much weight does this withdrawal threat really carry? If big oil cuts off its investment, the 

province should have little trouble picking it up from the revenues generated by the taxes and royalties. 

And I say in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan has had to rely on itself before, it did in 

the thirties, it did with Sask Power and we can do it again. Our only difficulty will be mounting the 

program and that’s a technical problem and once it’s solved — and we’ll solve it — we stand to benefit 

significantly from direct control over our explorations. Withdrawal is a threat, only a paper tiger threat. 

It is a political spook that will really scare no one who stops to size up the facts. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me review some of the arguments of the Opposition. I think we have to take 

the Members opposite with a grain of salt. Let’s look at the argument. They say that Bill 42 is 

un-Canadian. They say it will split the country. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is hypocrisy. Do they think 

freight rates are good? Do they think DREE grants are fair. Do they think that the feed grains policy, 

subsidizing Ontario and Quebec, is that fair? For years the Liberal Party has served the East, exploited 

the West, and they call us un-Canadian when we protest. I challenge the Members opposite to sell that to 

the people of Saskatchewan. The Opposition Leader says Bill 42 does to oil what The Forest Act did to 

timber. He says that’s bad. What hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last week he was here in this building 

competing with the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) for the attention of the sit-in, and 

he was calling for leases to be broken and timber rights to be cancelled. “Turn it over to the natives,” he 

said. He was all in favor of The Forest Act then when it suited his purposes. I don’t think anyone will 

believe them, no one believed them then nor will they believe then now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have heard it said that this Bill should have 

been drafted in consultation with the oil companies. I have heard it said that the corporations were left 

out and they weren’t consulted. What nonsense! Maybe we should have let the oil companies write their 

own legislation. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Like they did . . . 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Right, like they did. Parsons and Whittemore and Simpson Timber wrote 

theirs. I say in closing, Mr. Speaker, we have no apologies to make. We write laws for the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — And that is why there are 44 Members on this side of the House and that there 

are only 15 on the other side. Sorry, 16. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 is one of the best laws our Government has brought into this Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

568 

MR. MacMURCHY: — As I said when I started, as a Member of the Government, as a Member of the 

New Democratic Party, I’m proud and I’m pleased to support it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER: (Weyburn) — Mr. Speaker, I certainly welcome the opportunity to take part in 

this debate and I am confident that I share the concerns of all Members of the Assembly as we deliberate 

over this very important public issue. There are obvious differences of opinion over this matter. 

However, I believe that all Members sincerely have a concern over what I call this energy question. 

 

The development of a responsible energy policy for the people of Saskatchewan is the single, most 

important issue, which this Legislature will deal with during this Session. 

 

The implications of the policies which are set out have a profound effect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on our 

province in the years ahead. And for that reason, I urge all Members to cast political considerations to 

the wayside and work together to develop a policy which is acceptable to the majority of the people we 

represent. 

 

Our God-given energy resources are the life blood, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of our economy and represents 

an absolutely vital element in determining the present and future standards of quality of life for our 

people. 

 

To date there has been a predictable degree of opposition to this legislation. The alignment between 

giant oil companies and the Liberal Party is not really surprising, but what is surprising is the fact that at 

this time of public anxiety, Mr. Speaker, and confusion, that certain elements continue to cling to a 

viewpoint for political reasons, at the expense of social and even economic considerations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would have been easy for this Government to point the finger at Ottawa and excuse itself 

by accusation and accusing Ottawa of not having a national energy policy. We could have adopted the 

attitude that because of the fact that Alberta supplies us with over 90 per cent of our petroleum energy, 

there is little we can do. However, this Government views the situation differently. 

 

Simply stated, our Government, Mr. Speaker, recognized the problem, it studied the implications of that 

problem, considered the alternatives and took action which reflects the attitude of this Government when 

it comes to the well-being of the people of our province. 

 

It is very unfortunate, however, it is a reality that we are now faced with the fact that it is time to pay our 

dues for not having a sound energy policy in Saskatchewan in the past. For too many years our energy 

resources were taken for granted. This carefree public attitude overshadowed the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

privately owned, multinational corporations were having a financial field day, so to speak, in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because government in the past left the responsibility for management and development in 

the hands of private oil industry, today we find ourselves with our backs to the wall. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

569 

I can see the point that western Canada is not undergoing the same degree of hardships because of this 

situation, however, that certainly does not in any way detract from the necessity of articulating an energy 

policy here in Saskatchewan, which will ensure that our people receive priority, consideration and 

maximum benefits from an energy policy. 

 

We have heard the term used, balkanization, during this debate. I do not share this narrow view, Mr. 

Speaker. I am a Canadian first and a Saskatchewanite second. And that, Mr. Speaker, does not contradict 

the implications of this legislation. Because surely no one in this Assembly would argue that the first 

responsibility of any provincial government is to look after the interests of the very people it represents. 

It is also agreed that our second responsibility is to attend to the interest and needs of our fellow 

Canadians. 

 

As a Canadian, I firmly believe everything possible must be done to expedite a sound national energy 

policy and I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan will do whatever possible to assist the 

formation of such a policy. At the same time, however, it must be conceded that it is the province which 

has the responsibility of administering, developing and managing its own natural resources. And any 

doubts about this fact must not be considered seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the argument has been raised that this Government is again taking further steps to control 

the life of our people. This argument baffles me greatly. Is it not the responsibility of an elected 

government to responsibly attend to the needs of its people? The development and utilization of energy 

resources is too important a matter, at least to me, to be left to the private sector in the hopes that public 

objectives will be served. 

 

The situation today in Canada and around the world is proof that the free market approach towards 

energy is neither desirable nor is it dependable. 

 

Some, Mr. Speaker, would interpret this attitude as a reflection that this New Democratic Government is 

somehow committed to a war on big business. Mr. Speaker, that is simply not true. 

 

In the late ’40’s and early ’50’s private industry moved into this province and exploration was booming. 

There was over the next few years a virtual oil boom, in many parts of the province. The spin off of such 

economic activity was a welcome boost in the economic arm of our province. These companies through 

taxation, employment and other activity did contribute to the economic and social life of Saskatchewan. 

However, Mr. Speaker, in ensuing years the situation changed somewhat dramatically, to the point 

where today some dynamic decisions must be made by the Government. The oil companies involved 

within our boundaries were here for one reason and that reason was to explore, to develop and to market 

the resource potentials buried under our soil. They have been very successful in their ventures and I 

would say that the secondary benefits of their endeavors were somewhat coincidental rather than 

deliberate. 

 

Today we find ourselves in the position where we must look back at the hundreds of millions of dollars 

in profits that have left this province and at the same time we must assess the growing scarcity of energy 

resources in Canada. I am pleased, 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

570 

Mr. Speaker, that this province has the foresight to take action before the problem intensifies. 

 

Some will ask the question, where does this leave the oil industry? The oil industries involved have the 

chance to provide leadership as this province does its part in helping to develop a national oil policy. 

Which according to the Prime Minister, very recently, will result in energy self-sufficiency, within a 

decade. 

 

Individuals and companies in the private sector possess skills and possess resources which can be very 

usefully employed in the production and distribution of various forms of energy. However, they should 

be contributors, I think, Mr. Speaker, not final decision makers. 

 

I should like at this time, to reiterate the view of the Hon. Kim Thorson who stated publicly, “The final 

right to determine what is satisfactory, should rest with the public as represented by democratically 

elected government.” Because we deceive ourselves if we think there is a reliable automatic, market 

mechanism available to regulate the production, distribution and price of energy in a way that is 

satisfactory to members of the consuming public. However, Mr. Speaker, some quarters are arguing that 

his Government has broken another contract, that this Government has not shown good faith with the oil 

industry in Saskatchewan. If anything I feel, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Governments; past and 

present, have, to date, been more than fair with these companies. 

 

And on that note, I should just like to take a moment or two to examine some of the facts. 

 

In 1965 the Saskatchewan oil industry spent about $44 million in Saskatchewan, drilling somewhere 

around 443 exploration holes. But six years later, spending on exploration dropped off to about $19 

million and the number of exploration holes declined to about 260. And today, Mr. Speaker, two years 

later that is the same level of exploration. Since 1964 profits per year have gone from about $60 million 

to about $134 million but exploration dropped by 50 per cent. 

 

Past history does not support the argument that this legislation will drive the oil industry from the 

province. They have been pulling out as far as exploration is concerned since 1967. There are some, Mr. 

Speaker, who claim that this Government should expropriate without compensation. There are others 

who think we are over-reacting and should do nothing other than to control the pricing. But, I’m afraid I 

cannot share either opinion. At both national and provincial levels intensified public involvement, must 

be initiated effectively to meet the energy needs of all our Canadians. 

 

Precise and systematic planning of energy, development and its utilization must be the order of the day 

in the future. We must develop the necessary public agencies and the institutions which are responsible 

in both a democratic political sense and an efficient, economic sense. 

 

Saskatchewan, and I would say indeed Canada, Mr. Speaker, should strive to treat all energy resources 

as a public utility. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

571 

MR. PEPPER: — As electric energy is under complete public control, all other energy resources 

should be treated in this same manner. 

 

A most desirable feature of the public utility approach would be to perhaps enable Canada and 

Saskatchewan to shift energy pricing to one based on the cost of development of production and 

distribution rather than on the basis of the highest price they will bring in world markets. We have not 

reached the crossroads yet, in Saskatchewan as far as energy supply and demand is concerned. 

 

But to me, Mr. Speaker, that does not in any way, mean that governments have any less responsibility to 

legislate in the public interest. There must be a commitment made by all governments and all oil 

companies to work together for the common benefit of all Canadians. 

 

The economic base which has been established in Saskatchewan as a result, Mr. Speaker, of oil 

company activity will continue to have a role to play and so will the people of Saskatchewan employed 

in the industry. And the secondary industry which in the past has been partially dependent on this 

activity will undoubtedly have questions I am sure and reservations concerning the legislation. And I 

admit that this legislation is going to pose some problems for these people. I do not regard this situation 

lightly. I am concerned about it. However, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that all citizens of this province 

seriously and deliberately study the implications which we face, should we continue down the same path 

we have followed in the past. 

 

As you know I represent a constituency which is endowed with this oil resource. Over the years the oil 

industry through wages and other related spending has contributed significantly to the economy of the 

Weyburn area. I for one would not like to see in any way these benefits reduced and I am confident that 

this Government has immense concern as well. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I feel that the action of 

this Government will undoubtedly create some initial problems — problems which must and will 

receive attention. But, Mr. Speaker, the crunch has come in Canada, perhaps sooner than we expected 

and as a result of an international situation few anticipated it. However, if there is a redeeming factor it 

must be found in the fact that it is not too late to act and act responsibly. 

 

As I said earlier, these God given resources are non-renewable. As a government we have a 

responsibility to ensure that these energy resources are handled in a responsible manner. 

 

In short, we must explore, develop, market and conserve in a manner which will be to the betterment of 

our people. The commitment of the Federal Government to establish a national oil corporation is very 

encouraging although we know very little of what is involved. It, for the first time, reflects the concern 

of our National Government over our energy supplies. 

 

In Saskatchewan we face a similar concern. Saskoil was a reflection of that concern and this legislation 

reinforces our position with respect to energy. Perhaps there are trying days ahead for the Legislature, as 

we continue our deliberations on this Bill. No doubt there are going to be intensified protests from the 

oil industry. However, Mr. Speaker, I hope and I am confident that this Government will continue to 

pursue this course of action, which I believe is, indeed, in the public interest. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

572 

We have a responsibility to protect and enhance the interests of our people and our responsibility 

becomes even greater as we look to the future generations, faced with the realization that it is going to 

be our children and our grandchildren, which will either reap the benefits or face the consequences of 

decisions made here, Mr. Speaker, by each and every member of this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of this responsibility and this concern, for not only the present but for the future, I 

offer to you my support for this legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D. BOLDT: (Rosthern) — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Member who just sat down (Mr. 

Pepper) is held in more respect on this side of the House than any other Member opposite. The fact that 

he said that one of the most important issues at this Session, that is, the session whether it is today or 

tomorrow or after Christmas will be the issue that is facing us today. He stated that he would hope that 

the people in Saskatchewan seriously study the situation and this is what the Opposition is asking and 

this is what the Premier promised when he called the Session before Christmas. 

 

I read parts of the Premier’s announcement why this Session was called and I will paraphrase his 

remarks. He did say that the Opposition Members at times have criticized the Government that, they 

didn’t have enough time to study Bills, so he was going to call the Session early. He would place on the 

Order Paper and introduce Bills, controversial Bills which we could study over a period of six weeks to 

two months and then call a session later after the New Year and we would be well-informed. Also the 

public would be given an opportunity to study these Bills. This word to the public and to the opposition 

has not been kept by the Premier. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Now the last two speakers mentioned exploration costs. For personal reasons I was 

not in the House this afternoon and I have missed some of the speeches that were given on this Bill. 

However, the last two speakers pointed out that the oil companies had not spent enough money on 

exploration costs in comparison to the profits that had resulted from oil sold inside the province. 

 

Now oil companies are not provincial. Oil companies are not national, oil companies are international. I 

think we can apply this criterion to our educational system. We spent money at the University and only 

yesterday I listened to the news and one of the university students at Saskatoon will be attending Oxford 

University. He was voted the top student at the University Campus at Saskatoon. Now part of this 

education is paid for by people in Saskatchewan. Oxford. University will benefit and we, in turn, at 

some future date might experience some benefits from this student who will be trained in England. 

 

Now if Imperial Oil or Husky takes some of the profits that accrue out of the production of oil in 

Saskatchewan- and there is no argument as all companies will say that cheap oil in 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

573 

Saskatchewan is gone — if they will find other oil fields in the world that will keep the price of oil 

down, from profits arrived from Saskatchewan it will still be a benefit to us here in this province. So 

there is a wide area that is a concern to me. We are only talking about how much money the oil 

companies have taken out of Saskatchewan, but yet we do not talk about how much of that money has 

gone into exploration and it need not necessarily be in Saskatchewan, it could be in Manitoba, it could 

be in Ontario and it could be in the Middle East. It doesn’t matter that much. 

 

Yesterday, when I heard the Minister open the debate on second reading, he challenged all Members of 

the House as to where our interests lie. For the benefit of the Minister I can tell him that our interests are 

with the people that are threatened by this Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — If you want to confiscate the titles of the small merchants, we are on the merchants’ 

side. If you want to take over the titles of our farmers, which I am sure that you will some day do, then 

we are on the farmers’ side. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — And if you want to take the mineral rights away from oil companies, confiscate them, 

then we are on the oil companies’ side. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) outlined our stand very ably yesterday. There is no basic 

reason that this Government should take away the mineral rights from holders greater than 1,280 acres. 

To systematically control conservation we already have legislation for it. To control profits or windfall 

profits, this can be done through taxation and has already been done. The main principle of this Bill is in 

Section 29, which spells out what will happen to the mineral rights owned by certain companies and 

individuals. 

 

This Act is really more than confiscation. This is considerably worse than the Communist Party or the 

Government of Russia did to its citizens. A lot of people have something to say about that. My wife was 

born in Russia and I have been associated with people who have come from that country. At least when 

the Government, at that time, confiscated land from my in-laws, they kicked him off the land or they 

told him he could go away if he wanted to. But what does this Government do? They take the titles away 

and force these people to still produce for a government that has taken the mineral rights away. They 

took the title away from the peasants in Russia and they were herded off the farms. But you people do it 

differently. You are worse than the communists at their worst. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — This Bill takes the title away from the oil producers and then forces them to continue 

the operation. If not, heavy penalties are provided for in the Act. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

574 

Apparently the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) . . . Yes, he is in the House but he is 

sitting where he should sit, better known as a Waffler, has had considerable influence on the present 

Government. Why he left the Party with this Bill before us is difficult to understand. I suppose Mr. 

Blakeney realized the effect of the Wafflers moving out of the NDP in the Lakeview by-election. So 

now he is trying to win them back with this Bill. I suggest to this House that it won’t be too long that 

Mr. Richards will be back with the NDP. However, I want to make him an offer. I want to make a 

sincere offer to the Member for Saskatoon University. I want to tell him . . . 

 

MR. ENGEL: — He can run in Rosthern: 

 

MR. BOLDT: — No, we have other fellows to run there. I want to tell him that there are many 

countries that have governments who are sympathetic to his ideals. A country such as Russia should be 

his ideal. I want to offer to him that I will buy him a one-way ticket, first class, to Russia on one 

condition only, that he will not return within 20 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — I am sure that there are many, many Canadian Saskatchewan citizens that would do 

likewise, that would buy a one-way ticket to Russia for all the Wafflers we have in Saskatchewan and 

we would hope that they would enjoy the good, benevolent government in Russia. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — I’ll buy you one to Chile! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Fine, I will buy the return. We, in Saskatchewan, have no need or use for his theories 

and he could apply his talents in a country where he might be appreciated. Here in Canada, they are not 

wanted. 

 

I listened to the Harasen Line the other day when the Premier was on the hot line. I am sure that the 

Premier had not expected the barrage of criticism and calls that opposed this legislation. Several callers 

. . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — I heard it too. 

 

MR. BOLDT: — If you heard it — and I am sure you did — but no one has mentioned the Harasen 

Line, they dare not, because there were no favorable comments except from our good old friend Mr. 

MacLeod, who phones in on every occasion. 

 

Several callers told him, you are leading us in the direction of Communist Russia. As I said I was away 

from the House this morning in the city of Saskatoon and there were many people whom I met who 

were really concerned about this legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Everyone on the street, in the shopping mall asked, “What does this Government want 

to do? What are they doing? 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

575 

You go and fight this thing.” Not even a socialist phoned the Premier the other day to congratulate him. 

 

This Government and the Cabinet are too busy globe trotting to know what the pulse of the grass root 

citizens of Saskatchewan is today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — We, in the Opposition, have repeatedly said, that the Land Bank, Hog Commission 

and the Ward System are warning signals of things to come. Bill 42 is the beginning. Farmers should 

take note of this action. Farmers today, particularly of flax and rape and wheat growers are reaping 

windfall profits because of food shortages. Socialists, the NDP have repeatedly said that agriculture is 

the greatest resource that Saskatchewan has. And the Regina Manifesto has repeatedly said that we will 

not rest until capitalism is eradicated from the face of this country. 

 

Socialists in this debate have repeatedly said that the resources of this province belong to the people, not 

the individuals. The agricultural resources don’t belong to the farmers, they belong to the people. Will 

the farmers be next? I don’t think that the farmers will be next because there is an election coming up 

and there are too many individuals involved. But the warnings are already on the horizon, through the 

Land Bank and many other pieces of legislation that have passed in the last year or two. 

 

But as surely as I speak here tonight the potash companies are on the line, they are next on the line, and 

they will be confiscated in the same manner and for the same reasons as the oil producer. I am sure all 

citizens in Canada are deeply concerned about this Bill. Eyes are focused on Saskatchewan, not only 

from Ottawa or Parliament Hill, but ordinary Canadian citizens are concerned. Are you going to be an 

island in a country surrounded by land on all sides and nationalizing industries, if you don’t agree with 

the Federal Government’s policy on national matters. 

 

Last night the Federal Minister of Justice was interviewed on television regarding this Bill. He was 

deeply concerned, and rightfully so, and one of his comments in closing was, “I wonder when the 

socialists in Saskatchewan will nationalize the vote.” 

 

I think that is a very appropriate question to ask. Well I want to tell the Minister of Justice that this 

Government is progressing very successfully in nationalizing the vote. If you want land from the Land 

Bank you have to be a card carrying NDP. If you want a job with the Civil Service you have to be a card 

carrying NDP. If you want to do business with the Government it has to be done through the co-ops or 

the credit unions. If you want to win an election you have to join the NDP . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — . . . for no other party will be allowed to hire civil servants during the campaign, at 

government expense. Other parties will be forced to show the true — and I say the true — 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

576 

election expenses, but not the NDP. You will hide them all in government operations. 

 

This Government will railroad this Bill through this Session before Christmas despite the opposition 

from us, as MLAs and the ordinary citizens. What this Bill will do, and has already done — and the only 

good thing about this Bill it has stirred the Opposition in a united way, determined that this Government 

will be defeated at the first opportunity. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT: — This Bill is the knockout blow for little Allan and his socialists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden) — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on the matter of this very important Bill. I 

must at the outset express the same criticism that other Members have, the Members of the Opposition, 

that we were promised by the Premier, we were given the word of the Premier of Saskatchewan, that this 

Session was to see the introduction of controversial legislation. The people of Saskatchewan were then 

to have the opportunity to study and comment on the Bills on controversial legislation, and the final 

decision would be given next spring. So far, Mr. Speaker, we have had one controversial piece of 

legislation and that is this particular bill. We are given no time, nor are the people given time to study 

and assess as the promise was made. But I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill is interesting, not so much 

what it says but what it doesn’t say. I think we can look at each part of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and upon 

assessment then start to find the real reasons for this legislation, not the reasons given by the Premier or 

the Members opposite. 

 

We’ve got part — the so-called windfall part. How we are going to get from the Federal Government for 

the people all those windfall profits that the big bad oil companies have been making. We are going to 

get them for the province, says the Premier and yet the whole concept of windfall profits has already 

been taken by the Federal Liberals, by means of the export tax with which the Provincial Government 

agrees. So the windfall aspect, the use of the oil companies as the scapegoat, is unfair and not true. The 

windfall aspect is already taken care of. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — The Premier argues that these added revenues should not go to the people of Canada, 

but should go to the producing provinces. Yet the very Government opposite, which has lived, survived 

and promised, on equalization grants, threatens to upset the very structure of equalization grants by its 

attitude and by its proposals. Because if the producing provinces take these added revenues themselves, 

and we’ll use Alberta as an example, because the figure is much greater, Alberta will probably receive 

increased revenues of approximately $300 million from its share of the export tax and that will 

immediately upset the whole Federal-Provincial fiscal arrangements on which our equalization formulae 

are based. It will mean that 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

577 

in order to maintain the level of services and the income level of the Province of Saskatchewan and to 

get equality across the country, that there will have to be hundreds of millions of dollars paid out by the 

Government in Ottawa to the so-called ‘have not’ provinces and I say that this selfish attitude of the 

Government of Saskatchewan is wrong and threatens to destroy the very program that has kept them 

viable for the last two and a half years. And I say that’s something that the Government opposite either 

has not considered or if it has considered, is wrong, is morally wrong to throw it out the window as they 

propose to do. There is no doubt the argument that the Government intends to keep the oil for the people 

of Saskatchewan is a fallacious argument to say the least, because our oil cannot be utilized for the 

transportation of our vehicles in Saskatchewan and for the burning of household fuels. 

 

I say, that this approach is narrow. This narrow approach that the Government has taken is both unfair 

and is wrong. 

 

The windfall part, obviously, is unnecessary because the windfall does not go to the oil companies but is 

already going to the people of Canada. 

 

Let’s look at the mineral taxation part, supposedly designed to encourage production so that the 

so-called speculators cannot sit on the land and watch the mineral rights increase in value. Yet, if they 

do go into production they are no longer able to get profits because of their going into production and 

because of other parts of the Bill. There has got to be another reason for this particular section. The 

amendments made to The Mineral Taxation Act could, of course, aside from the other arguments be 

done simply in that Act and the Bill is not necessary. 

 

We then look at the wage and price aspects of this particular Bill. We note the Government’s arguments 

about wage and price controls and the Premier, I believe, is on record as stating that there will be 

selective wage and price controls and make no mistake, we, in the Opposition, disagree with the 

selectivity being beer and oil. We think that there are other prices that should be controlled. But it is 

interesting that the Government opposite brings in price maintenance when it has made in the past a big 

production about talking about prices and the control of prices. So why, we must ask ourselves, does the 

Government opposite bring in this particular provision? The question of price control of oil and price 

maintenance of oil costs in Saskatchewan is again a fallacious argument and a wrong argument because 

price maintenance has been done by the Federal Government. If the Government opposite is prepared to 

say, and as they have said, that it is the NDP that have kept the Federal Liberals in, then surely the 

Federal Liberals would not do away with the price controls and the price freeze that they have already 

implemented. If you are going to take credit for it on that level, as you have done, then surely it is not 

necessary at this particular level. 

 

We then look at the confiscation section — Part 4 of the Bill. Confiscation, the word, of course, opposed 

by the Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) obviously having his problems with the 

English language as he has for some period of time. But why do we need a confiscation section? If we 

are already taxing the rights and taking the added profits under the first part, we have to again ask 

ourselves why the necessity of this particular part? We are already doing, if we accept Part 1 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

578 

exactly what the Government intends to do and that’s to make sure that these big bad oil companies 

don’t get all this money. Why do we have to take the rights? No reason has been given by the 

Government opposite. I say, that this section is unnecessary and unwarranted. 

 

We can look at each one of these major sections and there is a concise argument against the need for 

each one of the parts. So, as I have said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, we have to look beyond this Bill for 

the reasons for the Bill. I think the reasons are obvious. The Government started its Throne Speech with 

a vicious attack on the Western Economic Opportunity Conference. An unfair attack, because a lot was 

accomplished and a lot of good was done at that conference. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — The Government opposite made an unwarranted, unfair and damaging attack on the 

Stabilization Fund and destroyed the first chance that the farmers of Saskatchewan have had to have a 

fair income in bad times. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — The Government opposite attacked and took over and will control and will destroy the 

Small Farms Development Act. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that coupled with the NDP Premier of British 

Columbia traipsing down to Quebec to make a deal with the Separatists indicates only one thing, and 

that is that the NDP provincial governments across Canada are making war on Ottawa and that is one of 

the reasons for this Bill. 

 

We’ve also got another situation and that is the matter of Saskoil. Saskoil has been a failure — an 

outright and abject failure. It hasn’t got off the ground. The Government is forced to give it $5 million in 

interest free loans, with terms of repayment which are decided by the Minister himself. They can’t find a 

chairman or a president for Saskoil. It has been a failure, it has been a failure from the word go and as 

has been argued in this House, Saskoil can’t work because it will be a static organization in a field where 

new technology, new knowledge, new ideas and new projects or programs are necessary. We are trying 

to impose a static organization and it won’t work. We’ve given you examples of other countries that 

have argued for the takeover or argued against the takeover of multinational corporations and you can 

talk all you want about the control of the means of production. When we are dealing with an industry 

like oil, or gas, the control of the means of production is not the basic control and is not really the issue. 

What has to be controlled and what the Government opposite argues, or fails to see is that if you are 

going to control, and we disagree with it, you have to control the knowledge behind that organization 

and that no government can do, socialist or otherwise. Saskoil will fail for that very reason. 

 

But what happens under this Bill? Saskoil has been a failure. It hasn’t got off the ground, or into the 

ground or whatever it is supposed to do. Under Part 2 of this Act we have the 50 per cent Mineral 

Taxation Act tax. What will happen? Those people who own those rights will not be able to afford to 

pay this tax year after year after year. Nor can they afford to 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

579 

go into production because they can’t get their money back and make a return under the Act. Under The 

Mineral Taxation Act, if you fail to pay this tax, your land then, or your rights, then revert to the Crown, 

the Government of Saskatchewan, and I think it is fairly obvious what this Government will do with 

those rights. It will turn them over to Saskoil. I say that one of the real reasons for this Bill is a desperate 

attempt to save the failing Saskoil and that’s one of the real reasons for this particular Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — The Government makes it clear under Part 1 that the so-called windfall moneys are to 

go to Saskoil. Finally Saskoil will get the moneys, something it desperately needs obviously, and so, as I 

have said Saskoi1 is one of the real reasons for this Bill. 

 

We’ve got another reason for this Bill. Two and a half months ago the Premier of Saskatchewan had a 

fall television special. He talked about the great crying issue of inflation and how it was hurting and 

hitting the poor, the sick and the aged of the people of Saskatchewan and what he was going to do to 

help the fight that desperately needed fighting — inflation. He promised free medicare and he promised 

welfare increases. He didn’t give the amount — they are now up 29 per cent and he raised the minimum 

wage to fight this issue of inflation. 

 

I ask this House and I ask the people of Saskatchewan — has inflation gone? What has happened to the 

Premier’s fight? Was he successful? Obviously he wasn’t successful. Prices are still going up. They will 

go up. Those people on fixed income that the Premier cried about are still being harmed by inflation. But 

what have we heard about inflation in the last month and a half — not a thing since the television special 

last fall. Because the Government failed, the Government is trying to hide its failure to fight inflation by 

jumping on the energy crisis bandwagon. The Government opposite failed to fight inflation because it 

itself is one of the causes of inflation and the Economic Council of Canada has stated one of the major 

causes of inflation is extravagant spending by governments, irresponsible spending by governments and 

we’ve got Intercontinental and $6 million to Karl Landegger. That’s irresponsible spending by the 

Government opposite and that’s the very type of spending that the Economic Council of Canada objects 

to and says it is wrong and I say that this particular Bill is jumping on the energy bandwagon and is 

merely an attempt by the Government opposite to hide its failure to fight inflation and to hide its failure 

to the people of Saskatchewan in being one of the causes of inflation in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — We’ve got, as I have said, a war on Ottawa, a desperate attempt to save Saskoil and an 

attempt by the Government opposite to hide its failure to fight inflation. The Government opposite and 

the backbenchers opposite have jumped up like little puppets doing what they are told, what John Burton 

has put on the paper in front of each of them and they have criticized the opposition for its concern about 

the breaking of government commitments, government contracts, government leases and they have 

criticized 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

580 

our raising this concern before the people of Saskatchewan. The Government opposite has proudly stood 

up and the Premier has proudly stood up saying “Yes, we’ve cancelled forestry leases, and we’re proud 

of it, we are glad we did it, we will do it again.” He’s proud of that attitude. Now we have the same 

thing in the oil industry. They are proud to break the rights of individuals. We know, from the statement 

of the party opposite, that potash will be next and the Government will proudly stand up and say, “We 

took over the potash industry, we control the rights, we gave it to the people of Saskatchewan,” and 

already they are starting to applaud those statements. And I say that we have got cause for concern and 

the people of Saskatchewan have grounds for concern. They proved their concern in the Lakeview 

by-election but you obviously haven’t got the message yet. They are concerned. And the farmers of this 

province are concerned for one very simple fact that they know what you’ve done to the forest industry, 

to the oil and what you will do to the potash and it can happen to them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — And I say that the Government opposite is already set, has laid the groundwork for its 

policy of breaking leases and will do it to the farmers and I refer to clause (d) of paragraph 1 of the 

Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission Long Term Agricultural Lease. It says: 

 

(a) For the period commencing at the end of the first three years of this lease, the rent shall be the 

product of the percentage rental charged and the market value of the land; 

 

Clause (d) of that very paragraph says: 

 

The market value of the land may be adjusted in accordance with Land Bank regulations following the 

third year of this lease. 

 

And I say that the Government has set the cornerstone for breaking every Land Bank lease that they 

have signed and that’s why we are concerned. That’s why the people are concerned and that’s why the 

farmers are concerned about your actions. 

 

Your Bill has brought out and brought before the public forum a lack of integrity in the Government, a 

lack of integrity which is subjecting our people to criticism. You’ve called into question your integrity, 

the people’s integrity and the integrity of the people of Canada. We in the Opposition say that that 

approach is wrong, that approach to government is wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more to say in this debate and beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

581 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth) moved second reading of Bill No. 46 — 

An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, my comments on the Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act are going to 

be brief. 

 

The Bill will enable any provincial insurer, with the consent of the Minister, to apply under the 

Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act, for letters patent in continuing the company as if it had 

been incorporated under an Act of the Parliament of Canada. This provision in the Canadian and British 

Insurance Companies Act was enacted in recent years and before the enactment many companies 

seeking to become federally incorporated had to apply for letters patent forming a new company. The 

new federal company would then enter into an agreement with the provincial company whereby the 

federal company would take over all of the assets and assume all the liabilities of the provincial 

company. Any provincial insurer authorized under the laws of the province in which it was incorporated 

may now apply for letters patent under the Federal Act and be continued as if it had been incorporated 

initially as a Dominion company. 

 

The purpose of this Bill, therefore, is to provide the means whereby provincial authorization may be 

granted. It is complementary to the federal legislation. 

 

The first company to make use of this Bill is expected to be Pioneer Life Assurance Company Limited. 

This company was incorporated as a provincial company on January 20, 1971. It has operated in 

Saskatchewan since that time and now proposes to obtain federal registry and to expand its operation 

into other provinces. 

 

The passage of this Bill will facilitate the companies obtaining federal registry by permitting them to 

proceed under the Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act provision which I have mentioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment to The Saskatchewan Insurance Act is of a non-controversial nature, it is 

found now in most of the legislation in most of the provinces of Canada. I believe that my critic on the 

opposite side of the House has agreed to let it proceed with speed. I would commend all the Members of 

this House to support it. 

 

With those few words I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden) — Mr. Speaker, just a comment on the Bill. The Opposition will 

certainly co-operate whenever the Government does anything right. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

582 

MR. LANE: — It is interesting to note that for the first time this Session the Government has actually 

gone out of its way to help some Saskatchewan people who are trying to get ahead on their own. And for 

that we thank the Government. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to concur with the remarks of the Hon. Member 

for Lumsden and add the following suggestion. With the growing complexity of our society and more 

than that with the greater inter-relationship between the various provinces we have now discovered that 

many companies which were incorporated by provincial laws are in some ways handicapped by the 

limitations imposed upon them in that fashion. I would ask the Minister to give consideration to 

amendments to The Companies Act to do the same kind of thing for other companies which appears to 

have been done in this particular Bill. I recognize that this type of thing is not something that will be 

brought forth quickly. I know that it needs consultation. Law Societies have been discussing this in the 

past and I just invite the Minister, however, to give attention to The Companies Act to give broader and 

more flexible power to companies to amalgamate, for example, a Saskatchewan company with an 

Alberta company which cannot be done today; to amalgamate Saskatchewan companies with federal 

companies, again which cannot be done today. This of course would require complementary legislation 

in both jurisdictions. As a result, Mr. Speaker, I urge upon him further activity in this direction and we 

will support the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. G. SNYDER: (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 11 — An Act to repeal The 

Construction of Chimneys Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it seems only appropriate during this season when Santa Claus is looming large in 

the minds of our young people and indeed in the minds of some not so young, that we should pause to 

examine an Act which should be very close to Santa’s heart — the construction of chimneys. 

 

When we first started looking at this Act, we assumed it would require chimneys to be built with hand 

and foot holds suitable for the old man with a suspected hernia carrying his big bag of goodies, but, Mr. 

Speaker, I am afraid the Bill is silent on this particular point. 

 

We thought that perhaps the cleaning of chimneys every December 23rd would be mandatory but again 

we were disappointed. I must confess, Mr. Speaker, that I was shaken, I began to wonder if there really 

was a Santa Claus after all. But then I remembered the big bag of goodies, Mr. Trudeau promised before 

the last election, I realized that we had been mistaken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act which is before us is one which repeals The Chimneys Act and there is really no 

need to retain this particular document on our statute books. The standards which it sets out are not 

relevant to today’s construction processes. We have much better regulations dealing with schools, with 

hospitals, nursing homes and the like in our Fire Prevention Act. The National Building Code which is a 

normal construction standard in the province contains more adequate provisions than 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

583 

are presently found in the present Construction of Chimney’s Act. And I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that I 

was not aware until several months ago that this Act was one of the responsibilities of the Department of 

Labour. 

 

I might just add that it was the fire commissioner’s office which first suggested that this particular Bill 

had outlived its usefulness and should be repealed. I think we are doing our part perhaps to cut down on 

the wasteful use of manufactured products because the next time the statutes are revised it won’t be 

necessary to print this particular document. 

 

So I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. D. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of our chimney critic, 

who happens to be away . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It is very interesting they both come from Moose Jaw, we will certainly agree with 

this whatever it is. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. SNYDER (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 10 — An Act to repeal The 

Factories Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the Department of Labour over the last number of years has established a pattern 

of introducing into these Chambers legislative matters of major significance, so in keeping with this 

tradition, the Bill which is before you will no longer make it mandatory for employers to provide a 

sufficient number of spittoons strategically placed about his factory. I may say, Mr. Speaker, we 

undertook this only after serious consultation with the chewing tobacco industry in Canada as well as 

International Spitton Cleaners’ Union and at that point in time we felt sufficiently confident to bite into 

this major undertaking. 

 

I can well imagine, Mr. Speaker, if the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) were here that 

he might suggest that we have ‘bitten off more than we can chew`. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — However, I should like to refer him and other Members opposite to a recent study 

conducted by a major research firm which established clearly that only 15 per cent of the population 

chew tobacco and that fewer than 1 per cent are able to hit a spittoon at more than one in ten tries. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — So we concluded in the Department of Labour, Mr. Speaker, that it was a case of 

either ‘spit or give up the pot’. 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

584 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — We don’t really believe, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will be too hard to 

swallow. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Another provision in The Factories Act which will disappear with the passage of 

this outmoded legislation, Mr. Speaker, is an obligation for employers to keep privies in the factory in a 

clean and sanitary condition. Now there is a widespread belief, Mr. Speaker, that with the hustle and 

bustle of 20th century living, that a minimum of time will be spent in these accommodations available 

for employees in the place, of employment. 

 

Furthermore, I understand existing standards that are to be found elsewhere have surpassed the 

requirements of this outdated piece of legislation. 

 

I think a further indication that time has passed this legislation by, Mr. Speaker, will be seen by turning 

to Section 22 of the Act, which prohibits the existence of a stable under the same roof as a factory unless 

a partition of brick or other suitable material is provided, and I suppose this was to prevent employees 

from horsing around or something of this nature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — In a more serious vein, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform you that The Factories Act has 

become antiquated like the Bill that I referred to earlier, the Construction of Chimneys Act, especially 

since the passage of The Occupational Health Act, it has served, no useful purpose. 

 

There are some provisions in The Factories Act which are still relevant and we have been very careful to 

ensure that the provisions that are still relevant are retained elsewhere in either regulations or legislation. 

 

For example, The Factories Act contains a prohibition against the employment of children under 16 

years of age in a factory, and because we believe that that provision provides worthwhile protection, we 

are transferring. that particular part of The Factories Act to The Labour Standards Act. I don’t think that 

anyone will argue that we should allow children to be exposed to the hazards of machinery in a factory 

situation. 

 

We have carefully checked the other provisions of The Factories Act and we find that all of the pertinent 

sections dealing with health and safety have already been adopted, often in a much more useful form as 

regulations under The Occupational Health Act. Except for certain sections dealing with the provision of 

sanitary facilities and I have asked my departmental officials to ensure that appropriate regulations are 

prepared before the repeal of this Act is proclaimed. 

 

There are certain statutory requirements in The Factories Act which we have no intention of retaining in 

their present 



 

December 13, 1973 

 

 

585 

form, Mr. Speaker, and those are: setting up a separate — and I suggest an outdated status for female 

employees — section limiting the number of hours a female employee may work; sections specifying 

that female employees must be provided with an hour lunch break and so on. Maybe we should be 

looking at providing these things for all employees, Mr. Speaker, but if we so decide we will provide 

these rights for all employees and not set up a situation in which the end result will be one of limiting 

available employment to women because of the special considerations that the employer must provide 

for them. 

 

My Department is firmly committed to the goal of providing real equality of opportunity for women, 

Mr. Speaker,, witnessed by the strengthening of equal pay legislation. I am just as firmly opposed to the 

retention of extremely questionable benefits that single out women and provide employers with a ready 

made excuse for hiring men first, or worse yet, men only. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Factories Act does practically nothing that is useful. The old Factories Act did some 

things which I believe were harmful and some things that can only be considered to be ludicrous. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the repeal of this Act, I suggest to you makes good sense, keeping in mind the 

consolidation of the statutes sometime in the not too distant future. Accordingly, I move second reading, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC: (Wilkie) — Mr. Speaker, it is with great interest to hear from the Hon. Minister 

of Labour, the Privy Counsellor from Moose Jaw outlining a piece of legislation that obviously does 

belong in the archives, and at the same time revealing a side of the Minister that we very seldom see in 

this House. I have never known the Minister of Labour to embark on a little spirit of levity as my friend 

says from Lumsden, as he did this evening. 

 

I thought after he got started, I looked at the title of the Bill that perhaps it should have been the Minister 

of Industry who was bringing in the Bill because he is not going to need any factories, with the record he 

has had in industry. But I didn’t think he was giving up the ghost so soon — by abolishing The Factories 

Act only because after two years of effort he was unable to attract any industry. 

 

Regrettably we will support the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:22 o’clock p.m. 


