



















































Hansard: December 03, 1973


28 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, December 3, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. G.B. GRANT: (Regina Whitmore Park) — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the Members of this 

Assembly I should like to introduce 44 Grade Eight students from Athabasca School and they are under 

the direction of Doug Zaitz. I believe this school class is one of the first ones we have had in the 

Chamber this Session and I know all Members join with me in wishing them a sincere welcome and an 

interesting visit to the House. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.C. WHELAN: (Regina North West) — Mr. Speaker, through you I should like to introduce to 

the Legislature, 20 students from the adult up-grading class at the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and 

Sciences, Vocational Education Division at the Saskatchewan House in Regina North West. They are 

located in the west gallery with their teacher, Mr. Hanson. 

 

I am sure that all Members join me in welcoming them to the House and expressing the wish that their 

stay with us will be pleasant, informative and educational. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Regina North East) — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I should like to also join with 

the Hon. Member from Whitmore Park in extending a welcome from the Government side of the House 

to the students from Athabasca School. It is normally the custom for the Member in the constituency 

where the school is located to extend a welcome to visitors, but regrettably at this time the Lakeview 

constituency is not represented in this House due to the death of the late Member, Mr. McPherson. So on 

behalf of the Government Members I should like to extend a warm welcome to the students from the 

Athabasca School and hope that their stay with us this afternoon will be enjoyable and educational. This 

is the first day of the Throne Speech Debate that is going to take place. The mover will be Mr. Kaeding 

and Mr. Cody as seconder. 

 

I hope that your experience this afternoon will help you and will be useful to you in your social studies 

in school. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone) — Ted Malone will appreciate that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

29 

QUESTIONS 
 

LARGE INDUSTRIAL GAS ACCOUNTS 
 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I 

should like to direct a question to the Premier. I have a copy of a letter here from the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation and it is to a company in Saskatchewan and the topic is large industrial gas accounts. 

The letter goes on to say, and it is dated May 30, 1973: 

 

The supply of natural gas for all large industrial accounts, including yours, is covered by specific 

contract between us. One of its provisions enables us to increase the rate during the term without 

disturbing the force and the effect of the contract in any other way. Unfortunately we now find it is 

necessary to exercise the option. This will increase your annual bill by approximately 10 per cent. The 

new rate will be used to calculate bills rendered this August for gas taken in July. We still don’t know 

the full implications of the gas pricing policy which the Alberta Government has adopted so it is likely 

this increase will be an interim measure. 

 

It is signed, I think it is J. Catchuk, it looks like, District Superintendent. 

 

I wonder if the Premier is aware that this has happened? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) — Yes. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I have a quotation from the Globe and Mail of November 14th, 1973. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I must remind Members at the start of this Session again that quoting 

from papers is definitely not permitted in Questions and I hope the Hon. Member will phrase his 

question without quoting from the paper. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is rather a strange ruling but anyway I can say that the 

Premier was quoted in the Globe and Mail and I listened to him on the television the other night and I 

have heard him on the radio and what he said in effect was this. He didn’t say it in effect, he said it: 

 

We in Saskatchewan, through the Saskatchewan Power Corporation have avoided, we have not, in 

spite of increased cost, we have not raised gas rates. 

 

And in his speech he went on to say: 

 

Natural gas which is used by most of our manufacturing industries and to heat a great many of our 

homes . . . 

 

And so on. The quote is right here and I have heard him on television: 

 

We have resisted and we have not passed those rates on. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

30 

Now, in view of the letter which I have just read which he is aware of, why has he gone out to 

misinform the public when in fact gas rates have been raised to a tremendous number of users by over 

10 per cent? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, am I allowed to make an equally facetious reply on the Orders of 

the Day? I say to him, as I have said any number of times, that the context of the question that I was 

referring to was household gas rates. I don’t care what the Globe and Mail says. Order, Mr. Speaker! 

Am I to be allowed to answer the speech given by the Leader of the Opposition or is he to continue to 

interrupt me? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think that the questions as I tried to point out previously and again today, 

should not be read from statements in the paper. The paper may or may not be correct. Members should 

ask their questions and if the question is lengthy the Minister concerned is going to take a lengthy 

answer. Therefore, it is better if questions are short and then answers are going to be short. But I believe 

in this case the Minister should have a right to answer because the question was lengthy. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated the context in which I answered the question was 

with respect to retail gas rates and I say, again, that the people of Saskatchewan are going to enjoy the 

fruits of having a public natural gas corporation, they are going to enjoy the fact that they will not suffer 

increases in natural gas and fuel rates such as are happening in every province that has a Liberal 

Government. They are going to enjoy the fact that we have public ownership of this facility, whereas 

Liberal Governments all across Canada have resisted public ownership. If I had to defend in a 

forthcoming Federal election, the record of the Liberal Party federally and provincially with respect to 

fuel rates, I would be inclined to raise red herrings as is the Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. 

Steuart). 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I wonder if you would ask the Premier if he would answer the question, why he 

deliberately misinformed the public when he said in this article, and said on the television and the radio 

and he lied to the public and said that he did not intend to raise rates, when in fact the rates have been 

raised No amount of red herrings about Liberal Governments anywhere else will change the fact that 

you said this, you said it on the radio, you said it on the television . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . and now you get up here and you say you have not misinformed them. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I have a ruling on his outburst which included the word ‘lie’. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

31 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think Members should try to keep themselves in order by asking questions and 

not making statements on Orders of the Day this way because it leads to disruptions of the House and it 

doesn’t lead to good procedures. Statements and words are used which shouldn’t be used and I hope we 

don’t start out the Session by getting out of order all the time. I should like to ask that the questions be 

distinct and to the point so that the answers may be the same. I hope that future questions will be brief 

and not quoted from newspaper articles. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the word “lie”. I meant, misinform and mislead the public 

by the Premier. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Is this little smudge pot going to be allowed to break the rules? He called the 

Premier a liar and I want a withdrawal. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Hon. Member just rose and said if he used the word “lie” he wished to 

withdraw it. I think if Members would just be a little more patient with each other and not be so ready to 

take on verbal battle, we would get along a little better. 

 

SCHOOL AT LA LOCHE 
 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone) — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask Mr. 

Smudge Pot’s seatmate, a question. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I must ask that that remark be recalled, because I have been ruling him out of order 

and to rule one out of order and have another one repeat it, it doesn’t help me in my capacity. I’ll ask 

you to withdraw that. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I would be most happy to withdraw if you ask him to withdraw. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I ruled him out of order be-cause the Member had risen. When we get a debate 

going like this where both sides are not trying to stay within parliamentary rules, it makes it difficult for 

all of us. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Northern 

Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). Could he inform the House if those 450 children at La Loche and 22 

teachers are now back in the classroom? I notice on his brilliant defence of the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan he did not indicate whether or not the school in La Loche was open at this time. 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN: (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is 

yes. They are back in school and I suggest that an additional answer to this is that the Northern School 

Board is now in charge of affairs with respect to schools in Northern Saskatchewan and that question 

should be more properly asked of the Northern School Board. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

32 

MR. MacDONALD: — As a supplementary question would the Minister from Northern Saskatchewan 

give my colleagues credit, Mr. Weatherald, Mr. Gardner and Mr. Coupland, for getting those 450 

children back to school? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — The answer to that question is no, I would not give them credit. Mr. Speaker, 

anybody who was born and raised on the Regina plains and goes into Northern Saskatchewan for 48 

hours and comes out with an expert answer is a long way off course. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It wouldn’t take them 10 minutes to know more than the Member from 

Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman). 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

GLOBAL BUDGETING 
 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD: (Moose Jaw North) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a short question 

to the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek). It seems that global budgeting last year forced doctors 

out of the Prince Albert Community Clinic and now the global budgeting has forced all of the doctors 

out of the Regent Park Community Clinic. My question is that in view of the complete collapse of the 

Regent Park Community Clinic, including the resignation of some of the Board Members and all of the 

staff and the fact that the doctors who were formerly employed by the Clinic, are now under a 

fee-for-service basis, will the Clinic still be collecting funds from the Government for operating the 

Clinic under a global budgeting basis? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Public Health) — Mr. Speaker, obviously the Member knows 

something that nobody else does seem to know. I am not aware that there is a total collapse of the 

Regent Park Clinic, nor am I aware of any resignations of the staff or any medical group. Certainly that 

has not come to my attention. I know that there are differences between the Board and the medical 

group. I am aware that they have been meeting and negotiating their differences, the matter of whether 

or not they will be on a fee-for-service basis or on a global budget will be determined sometime in the 

future. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, as a supplementary I will ask the same question again, will the 

Clinic still be collecting funds on a global budgeting basis at the present time or for the next month? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, there is an agreement between the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission, the Minister and the Community Clinic on a global budget. That agreement has not been 

terminated by either party so far. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

33 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

MR. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats) moved, seconded by Mr. D.W. Cody, (Watrous): 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE STEPHEN WOROBETZ Lieutenant-Governor of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of 

Saskatchewan in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am honored indeed this afternoon to have been chosen to move the 

Address-in-Reply. Both myself and the constituents of Saltcoats, which I have the pleasure to represent, 

are honored by this opportunity. It is probably ironic that just three years ago in the first session of this 

Legislature, in my maiden speech, I was somewhat critical of the procedures and methods of this 

institution. Many of the criticisms made then may still be valid, but I have learned in the intervening 

years that democratic decisions must of necessity be made slowly and accurately. It is not unusual that 

any group, political or otherwise, might become so bound up in their philosophy that they do not always 

see the other side of the street. On such occasions, sharp criticism from opposition and an informed 

public are a sobering counterbalance which can often lead to more responsive government. 

 

Three years ago, Mr. Speaker, we entered this House full of enthusiasm at having gone to the people of 

this province with a platform and a working program which we called the New Deal for People, and at 

having received an overwhelming endorsation of that program. I can recall at that first session, the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) waving a copy of the New Deal in his chubby little hands and 

telling us that he would keep it to make sure we would fulfil all of our commitments. I can assure you 

that neither his threats or his taunts have had anything to do with our performance up-to-date. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — I should like to take a minute or two to give a progress report on that program and 

I invite Members opposite to do their own analysis of it. In the New Deal, there was a total of 139 items 

listed. Since some of these items were covered in more than one department, the total number of 

commitments were probably somewhat less. 

 

In the three years since this Government has been in office, 72 of these commitments could be said to 

have been completed in full. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

34 

MR. KAEDING: — Another 60 or so are either already partially underway or in the final planning 

stage. Only six remain to be started and a number of these have become obsolete. In addition to these 

many commitments we have fulfilled, there are a host of other programs which have been developed and 

implemented in response to public demand. 

 

The New Deal called for a removal of deterrent fees. They were immediately removed. It called for a 

hearing aid program. This year that became a reality. We promised to include chiropractic care under 

Medical Care Insurance and that is now an insured service. 

 

The New Deal called for a reduction of mill rates on property taxes for school purposes and that has 

been done to the level of 25 mills. A new Trade Union Act was passed guaranteeing free collective 

bargaining, the repeal of Bill 2 and other benefits. The work week was reduced to 40 hours and 

minimum wages go to $2 on December 1st. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — In response to the New Deal commitment to assist small business, SEDCO 

regulations were drastically changed to make possible loans for a wide range of business financing. 

Regional business representatives have been appointed to help with technical advice and to assist 

businessmen in their dealings with Government departments and legal problems. New “Aid to Trade” 

programs will assist small manufacturers to promote and display their products on world markets. One 

could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, down the list of fulfilled commitments, and more are being introduced 

at this Session. 

 

This record of performance, Mr. Speaker, will be well received by the people of this province. It is a 

record of promises made and promises kept. It is a record which will instil confidence in the people so 

that when we present the next edition of the New Deal that this Government will again have the courage 

and determination to do the will of the majority of the people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — We invite all people of this province to join with us through policy seminars and 

forums in the next few months to help formulate that second edition of the New Deal with the full 

knowledge and confidence that this Government will again be responsive to their needs. 

 

In the New Deal we committed ourselves to establish a Land Bank Commission. In response to the 

urgent need for a better and easier method of transferring farm land from one generation to get 

established in agriculture without committing all of their funds to the purchase of land., the Government 

introduced the Land Bank program in 1972. In spite of the bitter cries of the Members opposite that it 

wouldn’t work; first the rent was too high, then it was too low, we paid too much, and then we paid too 

little, and all of the other predictions of doom and failure, in spite of this, Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank 

program has been a resounding success. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

35 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Before this purchasing season is over the Land Bank will have purchased over $21 

million worth of land, and has leased it back to over 460 farmers, most of them young men, and many of 

them who would not otherwise have been able to obtain a start in agriculture. 

 

In the New Deal we promised to provide low-cost credit with loan forgiveness features for young 

farmers to intensify their farm operation. Last year the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) introduced 

the FarmStart program to provide this low-cost credit and grants to young farmers who wished to 

intensify their farming operations by adding or expanding a livestock enterprise. Again this was an 

overwhelmingly popular program. Even in the few months, this program has been in operation, well 

over 200 farmers have had loans approved valued at close to $6 million covering a wide range of 

agricultural enterprises. Many more are now being processed. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, legislation was passed to provide for a Farm Machinery Board to give farmers 

protection on parts and warranties. Veterinary services have been expanded tremendously; we now have 

16 new clinics operating or in the process of construction. For the first time, Mr. Speaker, veterinary 

graduates are looking to Saskatchewan locations to start their practices because of improved facilities. 

 

The Agricultural Representative Service has been increased and regional agricultural offices have been 

set up in six areas of the province to bring our extension service closer to farmers. 

 

The Speech from the Throne indicates that legislation will be coming forward at this Session to establish 

a prairie agricultural machinery institute. Members will recall that in the 1950s the CCF Government 

established an agricultural machinery testing program which was of real value to farmers in selecting 

and assessing performance of farm equipment. It was a very popular and valuable service for farmers. 

However, it was not as popular with the larger machine companies who were forced to prove their 

machines. As a result when the Liberal Government came to power in 1964, these friends of large 

corporate enterprises, immediately bowed to the wishes of the companies and scuttled the program by 

relegating it to an insignificant role at the university. We are proud to re-establish this machinery testing 

service. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — The legislation will be prepared so that our sister provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba can join with us. And we are hopeful that federal participation will be forthcoming, so that a 

real meaningful testing service will result. The institute will test, evaluate and appraise all kinds of 

machines under actual working conditions. It will work with manufacturers and innovators to develop 

new machines. It will publish reports on the results of tests and work to the standardization of parts. We 

are confident that this program will have wide acceptance among prairie farmers. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

36 

Further in response to the New Deal, we have established a Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission 

to promote orderly marketing of that product and to stabilize prices. Since its inception, the Marketing 

Commission has been extremely active in promoting and expanding export markets for hogs. It is 

interesting to note that prior to the establishment of the Marketing Commission, prices for slaughter 

hogs in Saskatchewan were consistently be-low Winnipeg prices, often by as much as $2 or $3 per 

hundred. Statistics compiled since the Commission started operating indicate that in that three-month 

period, the price spread has averaged just about 40 cents per hundred. This adjustment alone has been 

worth thousands of dollars to Saskatchewan producers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech indicates a further move to expand 

and promote agricultural products through an Agricultural Products Development Act. This legislation 

will provide for financial and technical assistance to farm groups and individuals to improve their 

marketing techniques, and expand their markets. 

 

This series of programs, developed in response to needs of rural Saskatchewan, are neither haphazard, 

nor unrelated. For too many years we have witnessed the gradual decline of farms and businesses in this 

province. Particularly in the late 1960s and early 1970s rural population dropped dramatically, nor yet 

has it been entirely stopped. With the advent of modernized equipment, farmers are able to farm larger 

acreages and subsequently as some retired or were unable to survive, others purchased their land and 

increased their holdings. Probably some consolidation was necessary in order to provide a viable farm 

operation under modern conditions. However, it is also obvious to most people that if this trend were to 

continue, the rural community would soon be depleted and in many areas community life as we know it 

would cease to exist. 

 

It is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has made and continues to make a major thrust 

to provide the basis for an intensified livestock industry in this province. The alternatives are clear, if a 

continued consolidation takes place, many of our small communities will cease to exist. If we are to 

provide adequate incomes for a large farm population on existing acreages, this income must come from 

production of livestock or other intensified crops. We have determined to develop the latter course, not 

because it is easier, because it is not, but because it is the only course we feel that people in rural areas 

will willingly accept. 

 

In order to provide the stability and security that is necessary to encourage young farmers to make a 

long-term investment in intensified agriculture, it then becomes necessary to provide some form of 

stability in the market place to ensure that when he has produced to his capacity, there are stable markets 

and prices which will warrant the risk. The need, therefore is for a well-planned grain and livestock 

stabilization program, developed on a federal-provincial-farmer basis, which will ensure the farmer a 

price for his produce which will guarantee him a reasonable return above his cost of production. 

 

Last summer, at the Western Economic Opportunities Conference in Calgary, the Western provinces 

strongly endorsed such a 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

37 

program and received assurances from the Federal Minister that serious consideration would be given to 

federal support for such programs. To date we have seen little evidence that such support is forthcoming 

at an early date, if indeed, it comes at all. 

 

In fact, because of Federal Government activities and similar interference in the United States where 

these governments attempted to hold down the effects of inflation by apply-ing price freezes on meat 

products, a very serious imbalance has been created between the price of meat products and the cost of 

feed grains. This has resulted in a situation where Western farmers find themselves in the position of 

feeding out their livestock at severe losses to themselves or selling off their feeders to avoid such losses. 

It is not difficult to guess which alternative an alert farmer would choose. We are faced with attempting 

to encourage livestock production in the face of these artificial obstacles. This, of course, points out 

again the urgent need for a stabilization plan, not only for grain but for all livestock products as well. 

Events of the past few months are sufficient evidence that no one sector of the agricultural scene can be 

dealt with in isolation. 

 

This Government will continue to press the Federal Government for a fully integrated stabilization 

program for agriculture which will not only guarantee security for the farmer on the land, but will 

guarantee to consumers of farm products a reliable supply of good food at more stable prices. 

 

As a result of the sudden rise in input costs in the livestock feeding industry this summer many hog 

producers appeared to be seriously contemplating reducing their operations, in fact, some have done so. 

This Government acted quickly to provide a floor price of $57 per 100, a price which would cover cost 

of production plus a fair margin. This quick action had the result of forestalling a major reduction in hog 

numbers, and has once again instilled confidence in that industry. We would very much have liked to 

institute a similar program for market cattle. However, the financial risks involved are too great to be 

carried on a provincial basis, which once again points up the need for an integrated federal-provincial 

program. 

 

I should like to turn for a minute, Mr. Speaker, to the matter of orderly marketing. Farm organizations 

have from the early 1900s until the present day slowly and painstakingly struggled to ensure for 

themselves a method of marketing their grain crops in a way which would give them the maximum 

return with equal delivery opportunities and a pooled price which would reflect the average selling price 

of their crops throughout the year. Through their efforts the Canadian Wheat Board was established and 

has done a very creditable job for them over the years; it has won the confidence of most prairie farmers. 

So much so, in fact that they have persistently demanded that all grains including rye, flax and rapeseed 

be included under the orderly market system. The concept of orderly marketing under the Canadian 

Wheat Board has always been violently contested by the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange and by 

proponents of the open market system. It was not until this year, however, that they were able to obtain 

any support for their cause from governments. The Minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, 

Otto Lang, has been under heavy political pressure from Eastern livestock interests and from his 

colleague, Mr. James Richardson, whose interest in the international grain trade is well known, to 

remove the sale of feed grain from the Canadian Wheat Board 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

38 

and return it to the open speculative market. The feed grain proposals for 1974 and beyond as outlined 

by Mr. Lang are designed to do exactly that. 

 

Under those proposals marketing of feed grains for domestic consumption would be removed from the 

Canadian Wheat Board leaving them responsible only for export sales. The Board would be required to 

give priority to domestic buyers by providing supplies when and where they are wanted. It would be 

responsible for the movement of all feed grains, but would have no pricing authority or selling function 

over feed grains in Canada. Feed dealers, brokers and speculators would be given freedom to by-pass the 

Board, and to buy grains on a direct basis in western Canada whenever it served their purpose and at 

whatever price they could negotiate. There would be no quota system on these purchases and no initial 

price guarantees for feed grains intended for domestic consumption. One can readily see that this would 

destroy the quota system for all grains and would lead to chaotic conditions in the grain-handling system 

since it would be required to give priority to these purchases. 

 

The unholy alliance of Lang and Richardson would have us believe that because there would be many 

more buyers in western Canada for feed grains that this would result in higher prices to producers. What 

they fail to tell you is that there are over 100,000 individual farmers on the prairies to purchase from. If 

quotas are tight, as a result of transportation difficulties, slow export sales or for any other reason, 

farmers would find themselves in the same dog-eat-dog position they faced only two years ago. Surely, 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot accept such a proposal. 

 

We are fortunate, indeed, Mr. Speaker, that we have a determined and articulate Minister of Agriculture 

who has led the way in opposing the imposition of this infamous proposal on prairie producers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — His opponents have tried to discredit him by saying he is playing politics with 

Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. If it is necessary to play politics with Mr. Lang to protect the 

interest of agricultural producers, then that’s the name of the game. I am sure most thinking farmers will 

agree and sup-port the Minister in that position. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — And he is not alone, Mr. Speaker. Every right minded farm organization which is 

concerned with the long-term welfare of Western agriculture has stood shoulder to shoulder with him in 

his opposition to this feed grain proposal. Nor has the opposition of the Minister of Agriculture or the 

farm organizations been a negative one. On the contrary they have worked together in putting forward 

alternative solutions which would combine the desired wishes of eastern feeders to obtain western grain 

at equitable prices and maintain the full jurisdiction of the Canadian Wheat Board in all aspects of the 

purchase, transportation and sale of these products. In spite of his blatant statements to the contrary, I 

sincerely hope that Mr. Lang will still see the error of his ways and listen to 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

39 

the wishes of Western, farmers. Failure to do so will certainly lead him to the political destruction he so 

well deserves. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — We are now faced with the question of rapeseed marketing. The same powers who 

are so bitterly opposed to orderly marketing of feed grains are once again lined up in the rapeseed 

plebiscite. One wonders, after seeing the prices of rapeseed fluctuate from just over $2 per bushel to 

highs of $7 to $8 and back down to $4 in less than one year, how the open marketing system can have 

any creditability left among rapeseed growers; particularly when one considers that probably 90 per cent 

of the producers received prices on the low end of the scale. 

 

Once again we are being bombarded by propaganda about freedom of choice and all of the other clichés 

that roll so glibly from the lips of the Commodity Exchange and its promoters. Freedom for whom, Mr. 

Speaker? Certainly not for the average producer who is often forced to sell to meet his financial 

obligations or is caught in a position of not being able to deliver because his elevator is congested when 

the prices are high. No, Mr. Speaker, let’s not be fooled by that kind of propaganda. Now as never 

before in recent history, the whole structure of orderly marketing is being attacked, by commodity 

exchanges, grain export companies and international traders. Never before has it been more necessary 

for agricultural producers to stand together to defend their institutions for orderly marketing against 

these forces. I am proud to hear, Mr. Speaker, that there are even at this moment, large numbers of 

farmers visiting from farm to farm encouraging their neighbors to vote for orderly marketing of 

rapeseed. Because more than rapeseed is at stake in this issue. Should the plebiscite fail, and its 

designers have attempted to ensure that it does by requiring a 60 per cent vote and providing for an 

undecided vote, then the pressure will be or to degrade further the orderly marketing system. We must 

not let it fail. I call on all responsible farm organizations to get out and fight to ensure that the whole 

system of orderly marketing is confirmed by a positive vote between now and December 14th. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — I would even challenge the Members on the benches opposite particularly the rural 

Members, to stand up and be counted on this issue. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — I don’t hear a sound. Mr. Speaker, you will recall at the last session the 

Agricultural Committee on the Ownership of Farm Land submitted its report to the Legislature. This 

report indicated that although control of farm lands by corporations and non-residents had not yet 

reached serious proportions in most areas, there was need for legislation to prevent further take-over and 

for gradual repatriation of those lands now held to active farmers. However, with higher grain prices and 

rapidly escalating land prices, there is evidence that a number of outside interests are again attempting to 

purchase blocks of our farm land for speculative purposes. We are 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

40 

concerned that our rural population should not be depleted as it surely would be if such purchases 

continue. Therefore, as a result of the recommendations of the Committee, we shall be presenting 

legislation restricting the ownership of Saskatchewan farm land by corporations and non-residents. 

Safeguards will be written into the legislation to provide tenure in cases of estates, gifts, etc. and 

provision will be made for farmers farming across neighboring borders to safeguard their interests. 

Exemptions will also be provided for family farm corporations and co-operative farm operations. This 

legislation is further evidence of our determination to keep the ownership of our greatest resource in the 

hands of active farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have dwelt at some length on agricultural issues and I do not apologize for that, since it is 

our most important and vulnerable industry. 

 

Tied to agriculture is the whole fibre of rural life in this province. In the New Deal for People we said 

we would provide for rural people those kinds of conveniences and services which would make rural 

living attractive and rewarding. We have gone a long way toward that goal. 

 

Through the Open Roads and Mainstreet programs, we have provided a dust-free access to highways 

into virtually every town and village in Saskatchewan. I look at my own constituency of Saltcoats. 

Oiling programs have been undertaken in all of the larger centres; Esterhazy, Langenburg, 

Churchbridge, Bredenbury, Stockholm, Dubuc, MacNutt and many others. Further oiling will be done in 

the coming year. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, the residents have appreciated this program. 

 

New programs for improvement of parks and recreational areas have gone ahead under a number of 

grant programs. The Spy Hill area of my constituency negotiated a new regional park to serve its 

citizens. 

 

Improved grants under The House Building Assistance Act and Home Repair Grants have assisted many 

people to build new homes or repair and renovate older buildings. The Senior Citizens Repair Grants 

particularly have been a real help to many senior citizens who were unable to make improvements out of 

their meagre incomes. 

 

Through the restructuring of SEDCO, many small businesses are now for the first time eligible to 

receive assistance in financing a new business and in assisting transfers from one owner to another. To 

further strengthen rural life in Saskatchewan the Government is trying to promote industries that either 

process agricultural products or manufacture farm machinery. Through the new “Aid to Trade” Program 

these new small industries are able to obtain assistance to develop new markets and to advertise their 

products on the world market. In my own constituency of Saltcoats, a number of small businesses have 

become established because of this assistance and a camber of others are under consideration. 

 

Through the Winter Works and community betterment programs, large grants have been made available 

to local community centres to provide such things as recreational areas, swimming pools, curling rinks 

and other facilities. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

41 

The community college program has been instituted and many rural people are now attending courses 

which were heretofore available only in the larger centres. 

 

All of these programs have done much to improve the quality of rural life in Saskatchewan and have 

brought a new feeling of well-being to these communities. These programs will be continued and 

expanded. 

 

Much has been said in recent days and weeks with regard to the so-called energy crisis of this country. 

My colleague, the Member for Watrous (MR. CODY) will be dealing at some length with this topic. 

However, I should like to voice my extreme disappointment at recent statements made by our Prime 

Minister. After a great publicity build-up which indicated that he would be making some major 

announcements we were treated to a 15 minute monologue which meant virtually nothing and in which 

he ended by stating that his energy Minister would be making an announcement the following Monday. 

 

On Monday, Mr. MacDonald, the Minister of Energy, spent 10 minutes, but the best he had to offer was 

a few tips on how to save energy, and a few vague promises of an energy board to control the use of oil 

products. Surely we had hoped that the Federal Government in this time of crisis — if there really is a 

crisis — would have come up with a strong national energy policy which would have had power to 

regulate the rates of production and export and which would have guaranteed that the unearned profits 

now being received by oil companies would be used to maintain reasonable prices for Canadian 

consumers. 

 

The least one could have expected would have been that they would have made a commitment to 

maintain the $1.90 tax on the windfall price increases, and pass substantial proportions of this revenue to 

the producing provinces to hold down fuel prices. 

 

Should the expected price increases occur as a result of the promised removal of the export tax, the most 

serious repercussions would again fall on our farmers whose every operation depends on gasoline and 

diesel fuel. Increases of five or six cents per gallon on a private automobile would only result in an 

additional $50 or so annually to the average motorist. To a farmer, however, this could add several 

hundred dollars to his cost of operation, a cost which he is powerless to pass on to the consumer. I would 

suggest that farmers take serious note of this situation and support any provincial action which could be 

taken to protect his interests. 

 

Because of the tremendous increase in highway travel re-sulting from better roads and more leisure time, 

the tourist industry has been growing by leaps and bounds. As indicated by His Honour’s Address, a 

new Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources will be structured to better cope with the 

development of this industry. Few people realize the importance of tourism to the provincial economy. 

Let me give you a few figures. In 1971, the last year statistics are available, the touring public spent over 

$178 million on travel in Saskatchewan. Since that time both the numbers and the spending of tourists 

has increased dramatically. 

 

The new Tourism Department will be responsible for such areas as: programs which will motivate travel 

within the province by Saskatchewan residents, Canadian residents and the 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

42 

residents of the United States and other foreign countries. It will provide advice and information in all 

forms to persons wishing to travel. It will assist local communities through technical advice and grants 

for the development of tourist facilities and tourist attractions. 

 

A new tourism advisory council has already been established, made up of representatives from any 

groups interested in the promotion of the tourist industry, to advise the Department on program 

development. 

 

Although most tourist miles are travelled in the southern half of the province, there is a great, untapped 

potential in the North. This land of fresh water and forested areas, with its myriads of lakes and fishing 

grounds, could become a mecca of many concrete dwellers from our cities. The industry lends itself to 

development by native people whose experience in woodcraft, hunting and as guides would be 

invaluable in this field. It will be the responsibility of the Department of Tourism to promote this field, 

to be responsible to see that the environmental and aesthetic qualities are not ending. 

 

Tied into the tourist program, must be a program of park development and a system of northern roads. 

These areas are receiving serious attention as well. We are hopeful. that we can successfully negotiate an 

agreement with the Department of Regional Economic Expansion to help finance and expedite this 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has long been known as the strong-hold of co-operative development in 

Canada. In the early years of the development of this province, farmers and consumers soon learned the 

value of joining together to provide for themselves the goods and services they needed. When they were 

being gouged by the oil companies, they built the Co-op Refinery. When grain companies attempted to 

exert unfair practices, they organized the Wheat Pools and United Grain Growers. When implement 

companies attempted to overcharge, they organized Co-op Implements. Through these organizations 

they have provided for themselves, at cost, many of the inputs needed in this province, such as 

fertilizers, feeds, petroleum products, lumber supplies, etc. When banking institutions and mortgage 

companies failed to meet their financial requirements they organized credit unions and provided their 

own source of capital. From humble beginnings these co-operatives have grown to where they exert a 

substantial influence in many aspects of our economy. 

 

However, during the seven. lean years of Liberal Government from 1964 to 1971, the Department of 

Co-operation was continuously and persistently down-graded until in 1971 when this Government came 

to power, the Department was demoralized, understaffed and for the most part ineffective. 

 

This Government, Mr. Speaker, believes in co-operation . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — . . . and in co-operative development. Since 1971 the Department has been 

completely reorganized. An active program of development is taking place. New programs are being 

promoted in the field of agriculture, housing, community 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

43 

facilities, in fact in any area where people can band together to provide for their needs on a co-operative 

basis. A number of new co-op farms have been started, alfalfa cubing plants have been started on a 

co-op basis. A machinery co-op has been organized to reduce capital costs for farmers. A new and 

challenging field for co-op development lies with the native people of northern Saskatchewan to provide 

industries and facilities for themselves. 

 

This Government will actively support all of these self-help programs. 

 

Members of this House will know that in my constituency of Saltcoats we have the largest potash mine 

in Saskatchewan with two shafts and two mills. With the increase in the pro-rationing allowance to 68 

per cent of capacity many new jobs have opened up at this plant as in others in Saskatchewan. The 

payroll now is probably near 700. Add to this the many satellite industries and services required by the 

plant, and you will recognize that this industry has had a tremendous impact on our rural communities. 

 

However, this industry, as so many others which are foreign owned, often has a tendency to be more 

concerned about their dividend rate and corporate growth, than they are in the welfare and safety of the 

employees who work to provide those rewards. As a result, the employees formed a union last year, to 

give themselves some bargaining power with respect to wages and working conditions. Although there 

have been times of tension and even work stoppages, the company and the union appear to be gradually 

adjusting themselves to their new positions. 

 

You will remember that in the 1972 session The Labour Act was re-written providing much greater 

security to employees when engaged in union activity. In the same session, The Occupational Health 

and Safety Act was passed, a real milestone in providing for safer and better working conditions for 

employees. 

 

Unfortunately not all employers were willing to co-operate. Employees at the mine have had a difficult 

time in obtaining the necessary co-operation from management, and have had to resort to a walk-out to 

press their position. However, again with the co-operation of the officials of the Department of Labour, 

a working arrangement has been reached and union and management appear to be adjusting to the new 

regulations. Since many of the employees in the Safety and Health Committees are inexperienced and 

not fully aware of their rights, some time may elapse before these committees will work smoothly. 

However, I am convinced that with proper dialogue between union and management many of the 

difficulties will be resolved. Although some inadequacies may exist in the present Safety and Health 

Act, experience will soon uncover them and this Government will do what is necessary to adequately 

protect employees on the job. 

 

Citizens in my constituency continue to be concerned about the environmental dangers present around 

the potash mines and satellite salt plant. Although these industries may be operating within limits set by 

the Department of the Environment, many are questioning the adequacy of these limitations. 

 

Serious disruptions have occurred recently in power supplies in the Esterhazy area and SPC officials 

have indicated that even allowable salt emissions have a serious corrosive effect on their power lines. 

Salt build-ups on power lines become explosive conductors under humid atmospheric conditions, 

resulting 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

44 

in serious power failures. I will be making my recommendations to the Department of Environment to 

improve this program. 

 

We are pleased to note that substantial improvements are being made in the treatment of sewage from 

Regina and Moose Jaw. Since pollution from this source appears to be the major cause of algae 

accumulations in the Qu’Appelle system, my constituents will be looking to early improvement in our 

lakes and cleaner beaches for our citizens. We also look forward to early development of the 

Qu’Appelle Valley scenic highway as recommended by the Qu’Appelle Basin Study. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the Western Economic Opportunities Conference last July, the western provinces met 

with the Federal Government and presented a united stand with regard to many of the problems facing 

this region. All of us watched with eager expectations believing that here, at last, at this conference some 

of our grievances could finally be heard and corrected. We watched through successive days as the talks 

continued and much of our optimism turned to pessimism as the days wore on. One area, however, 

appeared to draw somewhat more response than most others. The case for a new national transportation 

policy was forcefully put by western delegates. Case after case of rank discrimination were produced as 

evidence to bolster our position. One province after another showed discriminatory freight rates 

mitigated against western Canada and forced our industries to sell at a freight disadvantage. 

 

Some fairly substantive commitments were made by Federal spokesmen, promising that corrective 

action would be taken in some of the more glaring cases. However, little hope was held out for any new 

direction in policy or any willingness to use a national transportation policy as an instrument to provide 

the economic equity to our western industry which it so desperately needs to compete with the central 

provinces. To date we have heard little more from Ottawa and it would appear as though the whole 

conference was an exercise in futility. 

 

However, this Government will continue to press with vigor every possible avenue to bring equity to the 

freight rate structure. Nor have we heard any assurance, Mr. Speaker, that the railway companies will 

not be allowed to carry out their rail line abandonment starting in 1975. Many of these branch lines 

continue to deteriorate and abandonment by default appears to be the strategy being employed. Since 

many of the lines do not have the steel to carry the new hopper cars and since the railways appear to 

have suddenly lost all the standard cars, some of these branch lines are getting little or no service. There 

is certainly a need for some direction to the companies to force them to provide the services to which 

they are obligated. 

 

Rail line abandonment, in any case, except where duplication is evident, appears to be rather ridiculous 

particularly with the impending energy shortage. The amount of fuel required to move grain from the 

farm to distant elevators by trucks would surely greatly exceed the amount required to draw the same 

quantity on rail from branch lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been kind to the Members of the Opposition during this three quarters of an hour. 

Their capability to destroy their own credibility in the country in recent months has been so clearly 

demonstrated that I . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

45 

MR. KAEDING: — . . . did not have the heart to add to their burden. 

 

I chose rather to indicate the ability of the Government to provide stable and progressive government in 

response to the needs and demands of our average citizens. As long as we persist in that direction we 

have little to fear from the sniping and innuendoes which is the best we have heard from that side of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe all citizens of this province will recognize that this Government is an open 

government, which attempts in every way possible to communicate with its people. The Provincial 

Cabinet has gone to many centres outside of Regina to meet with groups to discuss their wants and 

aspirations. The Premier spent nine days on the road, talking to citizens and listening to problems. An 

executive office has been set up in Saskatoon to deal more quickly with problems in that major centre. 

We have de-centralized many of our Government departments into regional offices where citizens can 

go to meet Government officials without travelling to Regina. Cabinet Ministers have given unstintingly 

of their time to speak to local groups and organiza-tions. We have sponsored forums and seminars on 

education, health, social services and environment to provide information and attempt to get local input 

into program development. We want these discussions to continue and result in the kinds of programs 

that Saskatchewan people want and deserve. This Government under the able guidance of our energetic 

Premier has proven itself to be courageous and reliable. The Legislative program it has introduced in the 

past three sessions has been well received and accepted. The new legislation outlined in the Speech from 

the Throne, will, I am sure, provide further evidence that this is a government by the people and for the 

people. 

 

I am therefore pleased to move, seconded by my colleague from Watrous (MR. CODY) that a Humble 

Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.W. CODY: (Watrous) — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak in this debate, I want to say how 

deeply honored and gratified I am to have been given this opportunity to second the Address-in-Reply to 

the Speech from the Throne. It is indeed a great honor for the people of the Watrous constituency to 

have their Member given this opportunity. I especially want to thank our Premier on behalf of my 

constituents for having seen fit to give me this opportunity. 

 

Before getting into my main remarks on the many items of this Throne Speech, I should like to say a 

few words about the constituency I represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Watrous constituency is a representative rural constituency and is also fortunate to 

have industry in its midst. We have a potash mine near Colonsay. We have a feed manufacturing plant at 

Bruno; we have a flour mill at Viscount and a manufacturing industry in Watrous. The people of this 

constituency can be justifiably proud of their area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Watrous constituency has one of the most unique recreational facilities and health spas 

in Canada, if not on the North American continent. Of course, I speak of none 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

46 

other than Manitou Beach. This body of water has attracted people from all over the world for its 

therapeutic value. I recommend to the Government today that this area be expanded and publicized for 

the benefit of all people of Saskatchewan and all. Canadians. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, this Government recognizes the rural way of life in this province and has 

designed its programs to better meet that way of life. This is evidenced by some of the benefits my 

constituency has received over the past two and one half years. Just let me outline a few of them: 

 

1. Grants to hospitals and nursing homes $800,000 

2. Construction of a 14-bed addition to 

 Manitou Lodge $ 56,000 

3. Municipal Road Assistance Programs $388,000 

4. Recreational Grants $6,500 

5. Youth Employment $12,0000 

6. School Grants $4.7 million 

7. Your new FarmStart Loans $63,100 

8. Incentive grants through the Department 

 of Industry and Commerce $61,400 

 

One could go on and on, such as: 

9. Property Improvement Grant $700,000 

10. Winter Works Grants $ 27,000 

 

Only to mention things such as Open Roads and Mainstreet, seven communities in my area have 

received. 

 

Another area of concern that the people have had for some time is Highway No. 2. This highway, Mr. 

Speaker, was staked for seven years consecutively under the Members opposite. This Government has 

now seen fit to construct this road at another $1.65 million. The new senior citizens low rental complex 

in Colonsay and a new low rental project at Cudworth are in the works. Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of 

record the New Democrats have. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — This is what I call performance. This is a New Deal for People. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for just ore moment to agriculture. I should like to 

say that the Member from Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding) has done a tremendous job in his address explaining 

the programs that this Government has introduced, and for giving you an indication of the direction in 

which we will be going in the years ahead. 

 

There is, however, one item which I think bears mentioning and repeating over and over again, and that 

being the erosion of the Canadian Wheat Board by the Minister of Justice, the Hon. Otto Lang. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

47 

Mr. Speaker, in all of the years since the Wheat Board been in existence, I have never witnessed such 

pressure being placed upon it and the National Feed Grains Policy, is probably the most vicious of all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province know who their friends are and I am sure they not saying it is 

James Richardson from Portage and Main; I am sure they are not saying it is Alvin Hamilton and Jim 

Balfour who are afraid to speak out; and I am sure they are not saying it is Otto Lang, the professor from 

Saskatoon, but I know what they are saying; they are saying it is the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. They 

are saying it is the National Farmers’ Union and they are saying it is the Saskatchewan Department of 

Agriculture, under their able leader Jack Messer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, what do those organizations say? Well, they have constantly been telling 

Mr. Lang that his Feed Grains policy will only serve to wreck and ruin the Board. Did he consult the 

farmers? No, he didn’t. He didn’t consult the farmers. But, now a strange turn of events, Mr. Speaker. 

Now he has decided to consult the farmers and he is going to give them a vote on the rapeseed question. 

All he is doing, Mr. Sneaker, is he is trying to confuse the farmers. That’s all he is trying to do. Let me 

just quote one line from a release from the National Farmers’ Union. The NF U said: 

 

The Minister had thrown the whole question into confusion by stating; on CBC radio noon broadcast 

over CBK radio, Saskatchewan, on November 16 that the undecided category on the ballot was not, in 

fact, a second place to vote against the Wheat Board marketing of rapeseed. 

 

MR. GUY: — Who said that? 

 

MR. CODY: — If you had been listening you’d know who said it. Mr. Speaker, does this mean that the 

undecided vote then will not be taken into account? If this is the case, why have it there at all? I feel that 

the question should be decided also on a simple majority. But Mr. Lang says ‘no’, 60 per cent. Well, let 

me tell you, if Mr. Lang had needed 60 per cent to be elected, he wouldn’t be the head of the Wheat 

Board. He would be back teaching school in Saskatoon. 

 

What has the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool said? Mr. Speaker, I have a release here dated October 31, 

1973, where they say and I quote: 

 

There would be numerous advantages to producers of rapeseed by orderly marketing through the 

Wheat Board, the Pool Director said. They include (1) a guaranteed initial price; (2) annual pooling of 

returns; (5) a fair quota system; (4) more efficient use of the handling and transportation system; (5) 

and the Wheat Board’s program of market analysis, promotion and development. 

 

Well, that certainly speaks very highly, in my mind, of marketing rapeseed under the Wheat Board. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

48 

Mr. Speaker, this release does, in fact, speak very well for the case of having rapeseed placed under the 

Wheat Board. Mr. Speaker, I urge all farmers to think back, think back to the days of the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange. Think back to when wheat was selling for 20 cents a bushel and oats was being given 

away. Don’t be fooled by Otto Lang and James Richardson. My suggestion to you would be to vote in 

favor of marketing of rapeseed under the Wheat Board. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, turning to labor for a moment. When we came to office in 1971, there 

was virtually no harmony between labor and management. No harmony between labor and farmer. All 

segments of society had been put against each other by the old Liberal Government. That Government, 

the fragments of which you see across the way, took a stance to repress any progressive elements in our 

society and I point out, the labor movement was not spared in this regard. What did this Liberal 

Government do? They invoked the insidious Bill 2, a Bill, Mr. Speaker, which deprived every working 

man and woman in this province of a decent and adequate wage. A Bill which denied good working 

conditions; a Bill which denied the right to withhold their labors. And, above all, what did that 

Government do? They failed and failed miserably to produce any jobs. As a result, thousands and 

thousands of our working people, our tradesmen and our professional workers, left the province to seek 

employment in other areas of Canada. That is the track record of the Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker. I 

am proud to lay before this House the record of this Government. We abolished Bill 2; we restored the 

rights of working people; the right to be on the same level as other people in this province. We 

introduced a new Labour Standards Act; we increased the minimum wage twice and we have created 

thousands and thousands of new jobs. We can now proudly boast, Mr. Speaker, of having the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to see that the Throne Speech indicates employees will enjoy 

three weeks vacation after one year’s service. 

 

The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, makes reference to a development fund which I feel is long overdue. 

It is long overdue that average citizens of this province have an opportunity to invest in a safe 

investment with a guaranteed return and the privilege of redeeming the investment within a reasonable 

period of time. This fund will give the investor a measure of protection against inflation. This fund, Mr. 

Speaker, will serve as new capital which could be made available to help new industries and to expand 

existing industries in the province. I would hope the Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) would see fit and 

give careful consideration to the co-operatives, such as Co-op Insurance and the credit unions, when it 

comes to market outlets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the area of co-operatives, the Department of Co-operation, in the past year, has made 

tremendous strides forward. New co-operatives of all types are springing up and people are once again 

learning to work with each other. The 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

49 

old Liberal Government stands condemned in this area. It was a department which was bankrupt of ideas 

and near death. It was a department, Mr. Speaker, where there was practically not a soul working in it. 

The New Democratic Party revitalized this department and we have shown some of the greatest growth 

and expansion of this business that we have seen in the past ten years. Credit unions, Mr. Speaker, have 

reached a record high, with assets amounting to $508 million. In 1972 assets increased by 27 per cent 

and memberships stood at 358,000. I am grateful, very grateful, Mr. Speaker, to the Ministers of the 

Crown, who saw fit to adhere to some of the motions I made in Crown Corporations committee and 

moved accounts from banks to credit unions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — I would hope that we continue doing this and I would also hope that we could continue 

to expand and develop new co-operatives and more credit unions which will work for the average citizen 

of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the area of housing and urban development, I think this Government will take a back 

seat to no one in the Dominion of Canada. We have more housing starts in Saskatchewan this year than 

any other year on record, in excess of 6,000 housing starts for the current year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a new deal. That’s a New Deal for People. I am pleased to see there 

will be increased grants to urban centres. I would strongly urge this Government to allow some of these 

grants to be unconditional. However, other grants should be specifically earmarked for important 

services such as recreation and transportation, which are becoming a very integral part of our life style 

today and deserve every bit of consideration that is possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I live in the east end of Regina, what is now known as the Qu’Appelle constituency, where 

our recreation facilities are virtually non-existent. And I, together with the Glencairn Community Club, 

will be pressing the city of Regina and the Government for a complete sporting complex, better streets, 

more adequate transportation, and above all, proper access to that subdivision. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What about the mayor? 

 

MR. CODY: — No mayor at all. Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about the Qu’Appelle 

Basin Study. 

 

This precedent-setting study is recognized as a milestone among water basin studies on this continent. It 

illustrated how many agencies of government, committed to identifying problems and developing 

solutions can co-operate and complete a complex task. This province is not resting on its laurels. This 

Govern-ment recognizes the study is only the beginning. Recommendations only chart the course. What 

counts is action in implementation. Over the past eight months we have taken action on several points. 

The Department of the Environment has invited public review and comment. I am pleased to see the 

wide-spread public acceptance 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

50 

of the majority of the reports and 64 recommendations are being accepted. This, Mr. Speaker, is a 

testimony to this Government and this Government’s belief that Saskatchewan citizens want 

environmental problems in this beautiful area to be squarely faced and resolved. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Individual agencies of this province have already initiated many recommendations of a 

strictly provincial nature. Flood control measures at Lumsden have been undertaken; cottages in the 

basin have been surveyed as a prelude to development of regulations to control cottage wastes. Plans for 

a road transportation network to meet traffic demand without destroying the character of this valley are 

proceeding. It is my understanding the report and its recommendations have been reviewed by all 

provincial agencies, and an implementation package covering new programs and new priorities, I am 

hopeful, will be forthcoming during this Session. I am pleased with the position taken by the cities of 

Regina and Moose Jaw. Regina has committed itself to tertiary treatment and the first phase is now 

under way. Moose Jaw is investigating the feasibility of effluent regulation. The residents of these 

communities have recognized their responsibilities and are ready to pay their share for re-medial 

measures. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my optimism is tempered when I review a lack of progress at the federal-provincial 

level. Many of the major recommendations require a significant federal contribution. Trying to negotiate 

a federal-provincial agreement, officials of the Government have been stymied at every turn of the road. 

They have been bounced around like a rubber ball, Mr. Speaker, from one federal agency to another. 

This is a classic example of federal buck-passing and provincial Liberals patting them on the back for 

doing it. When it comes to meeting the costs of pollution control, the Federal Government is all talk and 

no action. Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Government will continue to press for an 

agreement. But at the same time, we will move ahead in line with our continuing commitments to 

restore and maintain the environmental quality of the most beautiful area in this province, the basin, and 

I hope to see more things done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal for a moment with energy. This is one of the most talked about and 

controversial items in the news today. This is what I term ‘a so-called energy crisis’. I think basically 

four questions must be asked. 

 

1. Why is there an energy crisis? 

2. Who brought on the crisis? 

3. What is the role of the Federal Government? 

4. What avenues are open to the Provincial Government? 

 

I will try to deal with these questions in the following order. 

 

The crisis, as I see it, is that eastern Canada imports its crude oil mainly from two sources — Venezuela 

and the Middle East; 44 per cent from Venezuela and 30 per cent from the Middle East. In barrels, this 

means something like 900,000 barrels of crude oil per day. The decision to import this crude was not 

made because there was no available supply in western Canada, but because it was cheaper for the short 

term. I think it is 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

51 

absolutely incredible, Mr. Speaker, to see a Canadian energy crisis when Saskatchewan and Alberta, 

alone in 1972 exported 350,000,000 barrels of crude oil. The consequences of that policy resulted in 

them being tied into contracts with multi-national corporations. These contracts provide that in time of 

shortage or other external factors, the supplying companies are allowed to reduce normal deliveries to 

some buyers and divert oil to other customers, in spite of what Mr. MacDonald is now trying to peddle 

to you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you see the dangerous position this places Canadians in. The Federal Government has 

virtually lost control of this resource and it is in the hands of the multinational corporations to tell us as 

Canadians how much crude oil we can have. 

 

One may be quick to say that the complete problem is the embargo placed by the Arabs, but this is only 

one part of the explanation. The real problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the world oil reserves are owned by 

multinational corporations. These corporations, Mr. Speaker, tell us how much we can have, when we 

can have it and how much we pay for it. 

 

Let me show you just one example. Exxon Corporation through its Venezuelan subsidiary Creole 

Petroleum which is the largest single supplier of Canada’s import crude is at the present time not living 

up to its contracts to supply crude to eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the role of the Federal Government in all of this? First of all I want to make it 

abundantly clear that the absence of any federal energy policy is the direct cause of the energy crisis. 

The lack of this policy led eastern Canada to be exclusively dependent on imported oil. The lack of this 

policy resulted in no transportation of western crude beyond the Ottawa Valley and worst of all, the lack 

of this policy placed Canadians in the hands of multinational corporations. Mr. Speaker, to show you the 

lack of this policy let me just quote from the Leader-Post of November 27th, I quote: 

 

Mr. MacDonald said the Government learned only a week or ten days ago that these contract clauses 

might be used. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, the contracts which he is talking about are those held by corporations like 

Exxon. How can we expect to find an energy policy when the Minister himself didn’t know until 10 

days ago that oil companies could, in fact, gouge the Canadian people by increasing prices and 

withholding oil. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the Prime Minister was on television telling us all to tighten our belts and saying 

his Minister would announce a policy on Monday. On Monday, Mr. MacDonald was on national 

television and had no policy. Mr. Speaker, things are getting so bad because of a lack of policy that even 

the Leader-Post agrees that something should be done. Let me quote from Wednesday’s edition, 

Wednesday, November 28th. 

 

Statements made last Thursday by Prime Minister Trudeau and Monday by Energy Minister 

MacDonald show absolutely clearly that far from not having an integrated comprehensive national 

energy policy in force, Ottawa doesn’t seem to understand what an integrated comprehensive national 

policy is. Ad hoc crisis intervention is the name of the only energy game currently being played in the 

national capital. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

52 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if the Federal Government isn’t prepared to make energy policies, the 

Provincial Govern-ment will have to take over and make them. And I am sure that this Government 

guided by Premier Blakeney is prepared to do just that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — We haven’t been afraid of the giants before and we won’t be afraid of them now. Mr. 

Speaker, I would strongly urge this Government to forge ahead with a new, bold, imaginative and 

socialist energy policy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, as of January 30th the price freeze on increases will be taken off and the 

oil companies stand to make $300 million in Saskatchewan alone. I don’t think this Government can 

stand idly by, I think the citizens of this province want us to act and think they want us to act now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — They don’t want to see $300 million put into the United States, they would rather be 

spending this money on exploration of new oil reserves and to hold the price at a reasonable level for 

consumers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we allow the multinational corporations to sneak off with this price increase for gasoline, 

heating fuels and farm fuels, we will have the worst price increase that this country has ever seen. I, for 

one, am prepared to stop them and stop them now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — I am pleased to see that the Throne Speech indicates there will be measures to control 

the oil resources, to control the oil resources for the Saskatchewan people and not for the multinational 

corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government’s accomplishments also extend into northern Saskatchewan where this 

new department continues to earn the respect and support of northern residents. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — It is no secret that our friends in the Opposition are against the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan. In fact their leader has said publicly that should he live long enough to see the day when 

he forms the next government, one of the first things a Liberal Government will do is to abolish DNS. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . number one! 

 

MR. CODY: — There you are, Mr. Speaker, 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

53 

he just proved it again. Mr. Speaker, his politicking certainly has the shades of the criticisms the party 

raised in 1962 when Medicare was brought to the people in this province by a Social Democrat 

Government. 

 

When our Government brought into being we recognized the immense challenge which was before us. 

Certainly we recognized there were going to be problems, there have been problems and there will be 

more problems in the future. However, it is important to recognize that it was this Government which 

met the northern problem head on, rolled its sleeves up and went to work to do whatever possible to 

improve the social and economic well-being of northern residents. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Now, why didn’t the Liberals do something for northern people when they occupied 

these benches for seven years? All we got out of them was a promise of a pulp mill, which would have 

created more problems than it would have solved. But yet they should be reminded that the single 

agency concept was at their fingertips when they were the Government. However, when they took a look 

at the consultants’ report which was basically the recommendation of a single principle, they chose not 

only to ignore its recommendations but the report conveniently disappeared and it wasn’t until after the 

1971 election that we found the report in the government archives. In the government archives, Mr. 

Speaker! So, Mr. Speaker, the stage was set, the Liberals attempted to hide the fact they weren’t 

prepared to undertake a comprehensive social and economic program in the North. The New Democratic 

Party was willing to accept this responsibility and went ahead with its major commitment, which left the 

Liberals in a bind. When they had the chance to do something they didn’t, but we did, so the only 

avenue they had left is to criticize. I tell you they can certainly do that. Yet despite their deliberate 

attempts to discredit the department and the civil servants working within that department, progress is 

being recorded and I predict that in the years ahead the Department of Northern Saskatchewan will 

occupy an elevated respect on a par with hospitalization and Medicare. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — I have watched the Liberal Opposition very closely on this issue and their reaction is 

about: -that one could expect from a party which is pre-occupied with matters far removed from the 

social goals which this Party aspires to. I remember vividly the arguments of the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) who tried to peddle the argument that all we were doing was transplanting a 

bunch of white civil servants into La Ronge, whose responsibility it was to dictate to northern people. 

He attempted to create the illusion that there was not going to be any consultation. He said the local 

people would have no input into the types of programs and policies which were followed in the North. 

 

I wonder then why this Government made it possible that such bodies as the Northern Municipal 

Council, the Northern Development Advisory Council, local community authorities, northern school 

unit boards, adult education committees, welfare committees and the like be set up to give local people a 

say in 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

54 

the decision making process. Mr. Speaker, half of them are elected, not appointed. Somehow this 

doesn’t look like a dictatorial approach to me, but yet our Liberal friends like to generate suspicion and 

untruths at the expense, Mr. Speaker, of the very people who are benefiting from this new department. 

 

Then they say that DNS has done nothing to promote economic development. One aspect of economic 

development, Mr. Speaker, which is very important in the North centres on the sawmilling industry, 

something you hear little about. Let us look at the record for a minute. In 1964-71 under a Liberal 

Government two sawmills were in operation intermittingly, 40 jobs producing 190,000 board feet. At 

the present time, 1973, under the cap-able leadership of Ted Bowerman 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — . . . not two sawmills in operation, six sawmills in operation at full time. Mr. Speaker, 

not 40 jobs, 200 jobs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, not 190,000 board feet, 2 million board feet, that’s the kind of record we 

have in the North. Our approach to economic development has a marked contrast to our friends on the 

left, who did little to encourage small businesses. Close to 100 project applications have been forwarded 

and many have already been approved. Time does not permit me to list all of them. As an example, 

government assistance to establish such projects as wood cutting, tourist outfitting, boat building, 

commercial trucking, trapping and fishing are but a few industries which we have already been setting 

up, with more to come in the future. We recognize the need to improve educational opportunities as well 

for northern people and the presence of five mobile training units to offer instruction in such things as 

plumbing and electrical work have been met with overflow success. 

 

The La Ronge Community College is established and operating. Regional adult education offices have 

been opened in Uranium City, Buffalo Narrows and La Ronge and a bursary program for post-secondary 

education is currently under study. Mr. Speaker, for a department that isn’t doing anything, a lot is being 

done. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Somehow, our Liberal friends thought they could convince the people of this province 

that our housing program was no good either. Well, let’s go back to the record again. Agreements have 

been reached with Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation for 625 homes over the next five years on 

a subsidized ownership basis for northern residents. It’s not Ad Fab Building, that’s a cinch! 

 

So far this year, 99 homes are under construction and 40 per cent of these units are complete, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition, and an additional 40 houses will be built to main-tain the 125 per year commitment 

which we made and will keep. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

55 

MR. CODY: — Somehow our friend from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) doesn’t think this record is very 

impressive. We recognize the current program as a very significant beginning which will certainly 

alleviate the housing problems which have built up because of a shoddy housing program during the 

Liberal years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our average 125 houses per year; under the Liberal Government 35 per year. Mr. Speaker, 

worst of all, not one home built in 1971. Now I wonder why there would be no homes built that year. 

Well in the months prior to the election the Liberal Government instructed the Housing Branch of the 

Department of Natural Resources to go to the invitational bid system and the Branch was instructed to 

approach Ad Fab Industries of Prince Albert. However, this procedure was shunned by the CMHC, so 

the northern residents didn’t get one single new home in 1971. That’s the record of the Liberal 

Government. So you see, Mr. Speaker, it is very evident that the reason the Liberals are in opposition to 

DNS is because it contrasts their terrible track record in the North and they don’t like to be reminded. 

 

I have just mentioned a few of the accomplishments in a short period of time. Let me mention a few 

more. Well, additional medical staff has and is being hired. A dental care program for west side 

communities was recently finalized. A Child Care Centre is under construction at Sandy Bay. Planning 

and design systems for the first four water and sewer programs are now being completed with 

construction to begin next year. La Ronge received a $220,000 provincial grant for a sewer and water 

system. New wells have been completed at four northern communities. DNS funding is involved in the 

installation of electrical generators at several communities. Saskatchewan Power rates have been 

reduced to compare with residential rates in the South. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Eight road construction projects are either completed or under way, with six 

communities involved in street construction programs. Portable classrooms have been provided for four 

communities, new gymnasiums provided for two communities, a new school is being built in 

Weyakwin, a major school addition is planned for Ile-a-la-Crosse, and school superintendents and 

support staff are now resident in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have listed a number of programs which have been undertaken by this Government and I 

have done so in order that there will be no doubt in people’s minds about the insincerity and loose 

comments which continue to emanate from the benches of the Opposition. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan does have support and 

confidence of the majority of northern residents. 

 

It was interesting to listen to a radio program the other day, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart) on radio told a few supporters at Duck Lake that he personally was going to lead a charge of 

MLAs into the North. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

56 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — They were going to use force if necessary to what he called ‘get to the bottom of DNS.’ 

Well, I guess he realized that as soon as he said it, he shouldn’t have, because what happened? Did Mr. 

Steuart, who admits, Mr. Speaker, that he hasn’t been to La Ronge in 18 months, did he go north with 

his colleagues? And those colleagues of his that did go, did they carry out an intensive investigation? 

Not only did the Leader of the Opposition choose to stay home, but those who did go North made a 

48-hour whirlwind tour. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Convinced themselves they had all the problems identified, ran home to their leader, 

who in turn called a press conference to call for a judicial inquiry into the North. 

 

Once again, it is crystal clear that the professed concern of the Liberal Party is nothing more than 

window-dressing. And obviously there isn’t much concern from the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

He is sneaking out on his northern people now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — They tell me that the Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) is sneaking out. The 

professed champions from the North are now leaving their people behind. 

 

Their past performance in the North shows they don’t care and their present stance shows clearly that all 

they are attempting to do is tear something down before it is built because they realize that once DNS 

realizes its full potential, nobody will listen to them, and is it any wonder? 

 

It was also very interesting the other day, Mr. Speaker, to watch the Member from Athabasca when he 

returned from the North, which includes part of the constituency he is supposed to represent. He 

appeared on an open line show just last Wednesday and I am sure he thought he was going to be able to 

score some political points, because surely no one in the North would call in and the people in the South 

would take his accusations as being true. 

 

Well during that hour I must admit I started to feel sorry for him because he was receiving blast after 

blast from listeners who were well aware of DNS. First he said it was just terrible that the school at 

LaLoche was closed because DNS hadn’t provided adequate sewer and water facilities. But a resident 

from that community called up and clarified that situation, which in turn severely jeopardized Mr. Guy’s 

credibility. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Then he switched to Ile-a-La-Crosse and said it was terrible DNS had flubbed again 

because they had not moved to replace a school which had burned down. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

57 

Well, a local resident phoned in and corrected him again by saying that the children were in class and 

DNS have provided for portable classrooms. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — By now, Mr. Guy was getting a bit flustered so he took on the Northern School Board 

only to be chastised by another northern resident who works in Education. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Things were getting bad by now so he turned right on the Minister by saying he didn’t 

believe Mr. Bowerman had the confidence of the northern people and he pointed to the Métis Society. 

Well, the Métis Society phoned in . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — . . . and they blasted him for refusing to attend one of their functions despite repeated 

invitations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — And they went on to say, Mr. Speaker, while there were problems the situation would 

be unbearable had DNS been under a Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Well by now the situation was critical, so he decided to use the bogeyman argument of 

compulsion, only to be confronted by another caller who reminded him that this was the same Liberal 

tactics used during hospitalization and Medicare, which today are the most successful programs despite 

Liberal criticism and condemnation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY. — Mr. Speaker, call after call came in and not one caller sided with the views of the 

Member from Athabasca. And yet, they call for an investigation. I agree there might be need for an 

investigation, however, it is the credibility and sincerity of the Liberal Party which should be 

investigated. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, before I conclude my remarks I want to remind this House, once regain, 

that they should question very seriously the motives of the Liberal Opposition. They say there should be 

consultation; they say we should give northerners more opportunities to participate in decision-making. I 

agree with that. But we should all remember one thing, remember that it was the two northern MLAs, 

the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and the Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) who stood 

alone in this House, to see that the North wouldn’t get 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

58 

two representatives in this Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — That is the kind of thing that they did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech shows clearly that this Government is going to do much more for the 

North in the months ahead. I agree wholeheartedly with what has been done up to the present and what 

will be done and accomplished in the future, I congratulate my colleague, the Hon. Mr. Bowerman, for 

his dedication. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, for his dedication for looking into the future and not be drawn down to 

the level of some of those people who are committed to a campaign designed to use any ploy possible 

for their narrow political interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government was elected on a program, a New Deal for People. This Throne Speech is 

one more of the steps towards fulfilling this New Deal. I am sure the people of Saskatchewan will 

endorse these programs. I challenge the Opposition to stand up and be counted and come up big for a 

change and vote for this Speech, vote for progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, I should first like to congratulate 

the addresses on the Speech from the Throne. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Why? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Because it is traditional, that’s why. No, they did a fine job. They had a great deal 

of difficulty but they did a fine job. 

 

I should like to start in with a few remarks that were made by the Member for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding). I 

wonder why they picked this particular individual or that particular individual to move and second the 

Speech from the Throne. I think I know why Mr. Kaeding was picked. He is a very fine gentleman and I 

think they wanted to make sure that he made one major speech in this House before Bill Peasley 

replaces him after the next provincial election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — He will soon have the nomination I am sure but I should just like to say Thank 

You, congratulations and farewell. It will be an open convention but he is so popular out there I am sure 

that he will just sweep in. He will have no 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

59 

problem. We will have our usual 800 or 900 out fighting for the nominations as in Lakeview. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — 800 or 900? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Yes, 800 or 900 as you will find out when the Lakeview votes are counted in a 

couple of days. 

 

I might say that he mentioned FarmStart and I will have something more to say about FarmStart 

tomorrow, but I should just like to say one thing. He said in his remarks that FarmStart has done a great 

job and it has helped a great many farmers. As a matter of fact in the Speech from the Throne it says, 

“FarmStart has helped exactly 205 farmers.” 

 

Well now, 205 farmers — I suppose you could consider it to be a good start if you are on that side of the 

House. I should like to point out there are about 80,000 farmers in Saskatchewan. So if there are about 

40,000 who could use some help then I calculate at the rate you are going — 205 per year — it should 

be about 200 years before you get around to look after the rest of them. He talked about the Hog 

Commission and, again, I will have more to say on that tomorrow. 

 

I should just like to point out that since the Hog Commission was forced on the farmers and the people 

of Saskatchewan that hog deliveries since then are down in this province, lower in percentage than in 

any other province in Canada, and actually down from anywhere from 20 to 25 per cent. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Do you get your figures . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — No, I get my figures from the proper source. I get them from Statistics Canada and 

then I even check them, once in awhile, with the Department of Agriculture. In this particular case oddly 

enough both figures check. The Department of Agriculture of the Government of Saskatchewan had 

exactly the same figure. They are not the ones that you use, I don’t think, most of the time but they 

certainly are the same figures used by your Department and by people in Ottawa. 

 

I shall now deal, for a minute or two, with the Member for Watrous (Mr. Cody). I want him to know that 

we checked those phone calls that came in for Mr. Guy who was on the open line show — four were 

from Watrous; two from Shellbrook. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — All I want to say is that I hope you haven’t used up all your phone allowance for 

the full year. You know when you listen to Mr. Cody you must remember where it comes from. I have a 

press clipping that I think says much about Mr. Cody and the speech he just made and all the wild 

charges he made. I want to read it. It came out of the last session from the Star-Phoenix, March 28, 

1973. Fittingly enough it is in red ink. The title is: “Striking Absurdity”. It goes on to say: 

 

One of the more striking examples of absurdity to come out of the current Legislative Session was 

Don Cody’s recent rationalization for 34 per cent increase in 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

60 

traffic accidents in Saskatchewan in 1972. 

The New Democratic Member from Watrous said, with as far as we know the utmost seriousness, 

prosperity brought about by his Party was responsible for more people driving and thus, more 

accidents. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It goes on to say: 

 

Residents of Saskatchewan could not afford to drive during the seven years of Liberal power. 

Following Mr. Cody’s reasoning for the sake of argument, only, the residents of this province may not 

be able to cope with prosperity of the scale promised by the New Democrats. We will kill each other 

off on the roads and highways as our income increases leaving the spoils of economic achievement to 

the invaders of less fortunate provinces. Before that takes place, the people may turn the New 

Democratic Party out of office and put the Liberal arty back in, in the simple interests of improving 

traffic safety, of course. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Cody said that the first thing I would do if I be-came Premier, or when I 

become Premier, is to end the DNS. It will be the second thing as the first thing we will do is restore that 

drugstore back to Bruno. I can tell you that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But there is something interesting about Mr. Cody. I don’t know if he realizes the 

greatness that he has had thrust upon him. I am told that everyone — Mr. Tchorzewski and Mr. Taylor 

— who had been asked by the Premier to second the Speech from the Throne, were shortly after brought 

into the Cabinet. I understand there is a new Cabinet position coming up — the Minister of Tourism and 

something else. It can’t be Industry as we already have a Minister of Industry .and it is bad enough that 

we are getting few enough industries with one Minister and we don’t need another one. 

 

I should also like to congratulate him for coming -up from the oil filter King to being in charge of their 

energy program or their energy spokesman. But, seriously, I want to deal with some of the more 

nonsensical things he said about the energy crisis and I will deal, again, in more detail. tomorrow with 

the energy crisis. 

 

This was started off by Mr. Thorson, the Minister of Industry, when he talked about and came out 

publicly to say — I don’t know whether he was misquoted or not;-and I certainly hope he was, because 

it; ass without a doubt the silliest statement I have ever heard. When Mr. Macdonald asked the people of 

Canada, he was talking more to the people in eastern Canada, I presume, but it was to all the people of 

Canada too that in a time when it looks as if we have in some parts of Canada a serious shortage of oil 

and possibly there will be a more serious shortage, that they might take some steps to conserve energy 

— turn down the heat a little and slow down our driving, 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

61 

Mr. Thorson immediately spoke out and said, “We, in Saskatchewan, we won’t do it, we won’t lower 

our standard of living.” 

 

Exactly what turning down thermostats three or four degrees and slowing down your car to 50 miles per 

hour has to do with the standard of living I don’t know. But I do want to say this: He keeps saying that 

the Federal Government has no energy policy, no oil policy. They have had one and whether it has been 

sufficient or it hasn’t been sufficient is open for debate. I just want to point out that this Government, the 

NDP, have been in power for two and a half years and in those two and one-half years what has 

happened to oil in this province? Production is down; the discovery of new oil reserves is down; we 

have less proven oil reserves than we had two and one-half years ago when they came into power. The 

price of gasoline, diesel oil and heating oil are all up anywhere from 17 to 30 per cent. So all that we 

have had so far is the threat to do something. Oh, we have had the whining to Ottawa as usual. We have 

had the usual pointing to the large corporations and saying that they are the villains. We have been 

threatened with something called Saskoil. I don’t know where it is. The latest we heard was when the 

Premier was apologizing to the NDP convention and said, “Don’t rush us, ladies and gentlemen, we 

can’t find any experts to run Saskoil”. So that is what has passed for a government policy. How they 

have the nerve to say anything to any government, including the Federal Government, about an oil 

policy or a lack of an oil policy, I don’t know. 

 

Mr. Cody dealt with the DNS at some length with an apology for the Minister, who has left to rewrite 

the script, I guess. I am not going to deal with that plate of worms today, I shall deal with it tomorrow. 

When he was quoting the statement that I had not been in the North for 18 months, it was the Minister of 

Northern Saskatchewan who said that I haven’t been in. the North for 18 months. I have been in the 

North since that time. I was up there 12 months ago along with Mr. Guy and several others. We came in 

just after the flying circus, led by the Premier. We came out of there very successfully. I can tell Mr. 

Cody and the Members opposite that our record in the North as judged by the people who live in the 

North, is pretty good. It is much better than the old CCF or much better than the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We have consistently won those seats. And when Mr. Guy and Mr. Coupland 

stood up in this House to talk about northern representation, what they said was this, and we agreed with 

them. If you are going to set up a Boundaries Commission allow them to draw the boundaries for all the 

area in this province. And don’t say to the people in far northern Saskatchewan, you will have this many 

seats and no more. It was the NDP Government that said to that part of the province, just one more 

example . . . 

 

MR. MESSER: — You better check . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — Oh, granted you said to the rest of the province, we will give you a so-called 

independent Boundaries Commission, but again, what you said to the people in the North, ‘we know 

better than you what is better for you than any Commission or anyone else.’ You, the NDP, never gave 

than a chance to be 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

62 

heard, never gave the people in the far North of this province a chance to come before that commission 

and say, this is how we want to be represented. This is where we want the line, this is where we want the 

boundaries to be. No, sir, you did that to every other part of the province. And that is what you can’t get 

through your heads is wrong with the DNS, is what is wrong with your policy in the North. It is why 

they in the North turn to us every chance they get and why I predict they will continue to turn you out of 

the North. When we have asked Allan Guy and Hal Coupland not to run in the far North, again we are 

recognizing the facts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Oh, they can get re-elected. Don’t worry about that. They can get re-elected. Mr. 

Coupland was the only Member on this side who increased his majority, so don’t worry about that. Mr. 

Guy in spite of everything you threw at him, in spite of lowering the electrical rates just before the 

election, in spite of flooding — I think maybe because of flooding it with Cabinet Ministers and the 

Premier — we have no problem winning the North, no problem at all. We are saying to the native 

people whom you people turned your back on, we are saying those seats are open. If you want to go and 

win the nominations we will support you. Not like you people did before the Athabasca by-election. 

When a native person had your nomination he had it sewed up, he had it won. What did the NDP do, the 

hierarchy, the Party? They got together in a kangaroo court and they kicked him out. They said to you 

very clearly that’s another reason you lost and you will continue to lose in the North, we are not 

interested in you. You said, oh, he went out and he bought people memberships. Well, Henry Baker can 

tell you a few stories about one time he tried to get a nomination here. It was Mr. Clarence Fines who 

decided the present Premier would be handed a nice seat in Regina and they turned their back on Henry 

Baker. There were a few memberships bought in those days. And if Henry wanted to get up and tell the 

story he could tell a pretty good story in that case too. So don’t let anybody say that the NDP throughout 

their history have never gone out and hustled memberships when they were trying to win a nomination. 

Of course they have. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Who did that? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Ray Jones did it, the Indian member. It was a different thing. They kicked him 

out. As a result you know what the Indian population did to you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a few minutes about the question of the rapeseed vote by the farmers of 

this province who grow rapeseed. About how they want their product sent to market. I want to deal in a 

little detail with the grandstand play that was put on by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) but 

failed so badly. 

 

Let’s go back and take a look at the marketing of rapeseed. It was about three years ago when people 

began to discuss seriously the question of marketing rapeseed. Up until that time there had been no 

question. It was a relatively small cash crop and it was sold on the open market. As it grew in 

importance, serious people, responsible farmers and farm leaders 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

63 

began to discuss, ‘should it stay under the open market or should it go under the Wheat Board’? The 

Federal Government under Otto Lang began studies two years ago. He has made those studies available. 

 

MR. MESSER: — It is confusing to talk about it. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Just listen for a minute and you will find out if it is confusing to talk about. He 

went out across this country and they talked to every farm organization and as a matter of fact they 

talked to every one of the Prairie governments. He went further than that. He asked the Rapeseed 

Associations, all the Rapeseed Associations to get together, make up a pamphlet, put the case for the 

open market as far as rapeseed is concerned. He asked the Wheat Pools of Manitoba, of Saskatchewan 

and of Alberta to do the same thing and put the case for marketing rapeseed through the Canadian Wheat 

Board. Then at the expense of the Federal Government they had these two booklets, sent them out to 

over 37,000 farmers who have been concerned with growing rapeseed, sent them out to farm 

organizations, sent them out to anybody who was interested. 

 

They went farther than that. On June 13th they appointed Mr. George Turner, he has been involved with 

the Manitoba Wheat Pools for about 40 years. He is a well known knowledgeable and respected man in 

the farm community. They asked him to carry out a study of how a vote should be taken to allow those 

farmers who grow rapeseed to decide themselves, very openly and democratically how they wanted their 

product marketed. He went to all farm organizations, to all Prairie governments. What did he do? First, 

they talked about who could vote. It was decided only after he consulted with all the groups concerned, 

farm groups, with the wheat pools, with the rapeseed associations, with Unifarm, Palliser and with the 

governments of the three Prairie Provinces. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Who did that? 

 

MR. STEUART: — I’ll tell you who did it. You just listen. You don’t know, that is the point. I’ll make 

that point in a minute. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — He came back and he said, “We will let all those people who have grown rapeseed 

in any two out of the last three years vote. On top of that all new farmers who have grown rapeseed 

either this year or last year, we will let them vote.” There were 37,000 people in all. The decision was 

made then that if 60 per cent of these people who grow the rapeseed voted for a change, voted in favor 

of marketing their product through the Wheat Board that the necessary changes in the legislation would 

be brought in as soon as possible before the next crop year. That would change the way the rapeseed 

crop in Western Canada would be marketed. 

 

Why 60 per cent? What did Mr. Turner do? First, he went to the Wheat Pools, Manitoba, Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. They said if you have a vote we would like the vote to be 50 per cent plus one. He went 

to the Rapeseed Association of Canada. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

64 

He went to the Rapeseed Associations of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta. They said, if you want 

to change the system, and it would be a change, then we would ask that you demand at least 66 and 

two-thirds per cent. That two-thirds of the rapeseed growers must vote in favor of the Wheat Board if it 

is to be used as a marketing agent. Sixty-six and two-thirds per cent from those organizations who are 

concerned solely with the growers of rapeseed in the three Prairie Provinces. He went to the United 

Grain Growers and they said 66 and two-thirds. He went to Unifarm, the largest farm organization in 

Canada and they said 60 per cent. He talked to the three Prairie governments. Now what about 

Saskatchewan? He phoned the Deputy Minister, Mr. McArthur and he talked to him. I said, surely Mr. 

Messer got in touch with Mr. Turner and said come out and have a meeting with us. The answer was no. 

The Government of Alberta asked for a meeting with Mr. Turner. He went out there and he spent half a 

day. I am informed that your Government, the NDP Government, outside of the talk that he had before 

the poll. was made, before it was decided how the vote will be taken, that you never even asked for a 

meeting. He contacted your Government somewhere between June 13th and July 11th, over five months 

ago. You were aware or should have been aware through the Press or your own Deputy Minister that 

they were then making studies and deciding on how the vote would be taken. Who would be eligible to 

vote and exactly which way the vote would be counted, what would be on the ballot. All those people 

who are concerned with the growing of rapeseed said 66 and two-thirds. Most other farm organizations 

said 60. The Wheat Pool did say 50 per cent plus one. A compromise was recommended by Mr. Turner. 

It was accepted by the Federal Government and by Otto Lang. So the decision was made 60 per cent. If 

60 per cent of the farmers voting said they wanted their rapeseed marketed through the Wheat Board the 

law will be changed and that is the way it will be done. 

 

The ballots for the vote say: 

1. Do you want your rapeseed marketed through the Wheat Board? 

2. Do you want your rapeseed marketed on the open market as it is today or, 

3. Undecided. 

 

Now why undecided? I find it pretty hypocritical that anyone of that side would even talk about 

anything that was on any kind of a democratic ballot when you think of their record. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART — Let’s keep in mind that what we are asking is a very serious question. We are 

asking the people who grow the rapeseed, who started that crop, who through their own associations, 

free associations developed, managed, run and organized by themselves have said, we like the open 

market. That is surely their business. It has been a pretty good open market for them. They have been 

able to sell all the rapeseed they have grown and by and large they have had good prices. But anyway 

they said there are people who can’t make up their minds. Now there might not be many of them. But if 

you just say, Wheat Board vote, open market vote, you are, in effect, saying to those people who really 

are undecided in spite of the fact that the Federal Government has given them both sides of the 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

65 

question, in spite of the fact that the Government of Alberta went out and held meetings to listen to both 

sides of the question, something you didn’t do Mr. Messer or Mr. Blakeney’s Government didn’t do on 

behalf of our farmers, never gave them a chance to talk on both sides of the question. In spite of that 

there are farmers who are undecided, and that is legitimate. It is their rapeseed, it is their product by the 

sweat of their brows. So if you deny them a vote, you are saying either you are forced to vote “yes” or 

“no,” or you are forced to stay home. That is why they decided to put “undecided.” If the vote comes up 

with a very large undecided, then I think it is incumbent upon farm leaders and Prairie governments and 

the Federal Government to go back out and do a better job of explaining. This isn’t the end of the world 

if a vote goes with the Wheat Board or against the Wheat Board. There can always be another vote taken 

next year or the year after. That is why the undecided vote is on that ballot. 

 

MR. MESSER: — How do they count the ballots? 

 

MR. STEUART: — How are they going to count the ballots? The day the rapeseed is marketed on the 

open market and there are four rapeseed organizations, voluntary, open, free organizations, every-one of 

them have said, we like the present system. Now if you want to change the present system, the Federal 

Government is giving through this vote to the farmers the opportunity of saying, yes, we want to change 

the system. If a man is undecided that means he doesn’t know if he wants to change the system. Maybe 

there is another way. There might be a third way. As a matter of fact, I think it is very interesting when 

you compare this democratic type of vote to the way the NDP have acted. 

 

Let’s take a look at the Hog Commission. What did the Hog Commission do? Did they get an undecided 

vote or a yes vote or a no vote? They got a slap in the face by the Blakeney NIP Government. No vote. 

Mr. Messer, Mr. Blakeney, the rest of you, what did you say? Oh, you say we were given a mandate by 

the people of Saskatchewan. That gives us the right to do any-thing we want. If we decide the city of 

Regina and Saskatoon should have the ward system, do we have to ask them how they will elect their 

own local democratic government? No, we don’t have to ask them that we will just force it on them. If 

they dare to say anything we will have a little secret meeting in the building, we will send our fellows 

out and threaten them and phone them and give them a few instructions. Here is what you do, you say 

the Trade Union won’t vote for members of council, they have the guts to stand up for their own rights 

and freedom, we will defeat them at the polls and I think you did a pretty good job on some of those 

people the way it turned out. And somebody claps his hands, it turned out pretty well. 

 

Let’s see what it says in your New Deal for People. You ought to see what you say yourselves about 

your own democratic vote. Item 12 on page 2 of the New Deal for People says, if you are elected to 

government you would establish a provincial producer controlled hog marketing board. You have 

broken that promise. You have got a Hog Marketing Commission, not a board, and it is no more 

producer controlled than it is controlled by us or by anyone else. It is controlled by the NDP 

Government of Saskatchewan. That is the comparison. And they have the 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

66 

nerve to stand up and talk about how the vote goes. 

 

I want to make it very clear an undecided vote is a vote evidently to leave things the way they are. If a 

man is undecided surely he has got that right. You wouldn’t even give them a vote at all. So I don’t 

know how you have the gall to stand up and talk about any vote. 

 

Let’s take a look at the record of Otto Lang compared to the record of the NDP. Otto Lang has 

guaranteed the farmers a fair and democratic vote. Not only that, he said if you want to maintain the 

open system, he has taken a neutral stand. If that is your decision, Otto Lang said in Edmonton recently, 

that he would do two things. He said he would put in a government paid and hired supervisor over the 

commodity exchange. Many farmers, some for good reasons, have been very suspicious over the years 

of the commodity exchange. The commodity exchange themselves have said, fine we will welcome a 

supervisor. So that is number one. Mr. Lang has also said there might be a third way if there are a great 

many people undecided. You might not have to go the Wheat Board way or you might not have to stay 

the way you are because there are a great many farmers who like the open market but they would like a 

pooling arrangement. They are all aware that if they go and sell their rapeseed at the wrong time they 

might get $2.50 or $3 and if they held it for a week they could get $5. If they sell it for $5 their neighbor 

goes down the next week, and it has gone down to $4. So they say we would like a pooling arrangement. 

And you can have a pooling arrangement without going through the Wheat Board. Otto Lang has 

promised them that if that is their decision, if that is their desire, he will change the legislation and he 

will make it possible for the farmers who grow rapeseed, if they want it, to have a voluntary pooling 

arrangement. This is the same man who gave the farmers a free vote on how they wanted the two-price 

system distributed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But look what has happened to our Minister of Agriculture. He got up and he 

called this phoney emergency debate. He said this is an emergency. He knew from June 13th to July 

10th, if he talks to his Deputy Minister of Agriculture, that they were already studying how that vote 

would be taken and when it would be taken. Why did he wait? Why did the Premier allow him to wait? 

We know it was a grandstand play and it backfired. We know that this is a small time operator with a big 

head who is jealous, almost paranoiac about Otto Lang. Because he knows that Otto has been decent, 

fair, and he is one man that has really helped the farmers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It must give him some peculiar kick, I guess, to think that maybe he can get up and 

get some publicity about a national figure like Otto Lang. That is understandable. But why would the 

Premier let him? This is a little more difficult to understand. To begin with why that grandstand play on 

the second day? If it was such an emergency and the ballots were going to go out as of today, the 

Premier could have called the Session a week or two weeks earlier. He could have had a special session. 

He could have got up in the House and said 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

67 

we are going to read the Speech from the Throne and then because we think this matter is so serious we 

are going to set aside a day or two to debate the whole question of the rapeseed vote, how it will take 

place, who will get the ballots and so on. He didn’t do that. He didn’t say a word about it. If the Premier 

of the province had come to us and said we want to debate this, we would have given him permission. 

We would have agreed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — What did Mr. Messer do? Sneaked in here at 8:30 in the morning to the Speaker’s 

office and put that on the desk. I was very pleased and very proud of the Speaker when he rightfully 

turned it down and labelled it for exactly what it was, a cheap grandstand play. 

 

The Premier knows better. Why does he allow it? Well, I think I know why he does. I think his record 

shows why he allowed it to happen. I think Mr. Messer or his Deputy Minister or some of those brain 

trusters he has got there decided this would be a cute play. We will get a little publicity before this vote. 

I don’t think Mr. Blakeney really thought that but he can’t stand up under the pressure. You just have to 

go from the day you became the Government, Mr. Blakeney made a decision to leave the Member from 

North Battleford (Mr. Kramer) out of the Cabinet. And subsequent events have proven it was a very 

wise decision. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Not only is he a bull in the china shop, he is the only bull I know who takes his 

own china shop around the country with him. The Bowerman mess, and it is a mess. Everything he has 

touched whether it is hunter safety regulations, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, whatever. 

What is this sign they’ve got out here? You talk about the Métis, the Métis are happy. Here’s the New 

Breed, that’s their official paper. What has it got on the back? 

 

Missing Ted Bowerman, Alias Ted Bowerman. People in northern Saskatchewan would like to know 

the whereabouts of this man Ted Bowerman, alias Ted Bowerman, last seen in the Shellbrook area 

during the election of June, 1971 when he was appointed the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 

According to rumors next probable sighting will be in Shellbrook area in 1975. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I predict that if he is sighted at that time he will be sunk on the same day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Where is the record? Any time anybody stands up to the Premier of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Blakeney, he backs off. They brought in a bill to do something about the foreign ownership and 

control of land. I didn’t like the bill and many other people didn’t like it. They withdrew it. Oh, Mr. 

Blakeney 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

68 

said it was just a White Paper. Well, it was on white paper all right, but there was no White Paper 

brought in by his Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). Great storm rose up, he backed away. Then they 

brought in the bill where they were going to change the University of Saskatchewan. They were going to 

keep their word, their promise to some of the people here in Regina or somewhere else. They were going 

to totally change the structure of the University of Saskatchewan. Again, there was an outcry. Again, 

what happened? Within a day or two days when the president of the University had the intestinal 

fortitude to stand up against that bill, they backed off. 

 

We got the most recent, rather unpleasant sight of the Premier sneaking a little $100,000, 10 cents per 

gallon subsidy for the breweries. He announced it, he got up on the television and radio and said, “Oh, 

it’s not a subsidy. No, no, a subsidy isn’t when you give the breweries money out of the Treasury,” he 

says, “that’s not Treasury money, it’s money from the liquor profits.” Where do the liquor profits go? 

I’ll tell you where they go, if this is a normal government. They keep more in the corner right where 

they got most of them right now. When they need them they bring them into general revenue. Liquor 

profits are the same as taxes. They belong to the people of Saskatchewan and they eventually end up, if 

they are not siphoned off, to some of their friends somewhere, they eventually end up in general 

revenue. So when the Premier said to the breweries, I’ll give you 10 cents a gallon which works out to 

about $100,000 a month, he was giving them a subsidy. What else was it? He said here it is, we won’t 

raise the price of beer until when? He said I think I’ll do it after the first of the year. When we raised the 

subject they happened to be having a caucus, one of his Members there — I don’t know if he will ever 

be a Minister now or not, but he should be because he’s got some character to him — he’s not afraid to 

stand up and be counted. He said he thought it was a dreadful thing. 

 

The Premier had a caucus. I should have liked to have heard that caucus, because I have a funny feeling 

a lot of the other Members stood up behind those closed doors. The didn’t have the nerve of the Member 

from Arm River (Mr. Faris) and said we don’t like it, you are in trouble. Everybody around the country 

said, what are you playing with the breweries for? We didn’t know you were friendly with the 

breweries, we thought those were the Liberals. You’re out of character, Mr. Blakeney. You’ve got the 

wrong team, we are friendly with the trade unions, that’s where we get our money. We get ours from the 

trade unions. It’s the Liberals that do the other kind of tricks. What did he do, did he wait until January? 

Did he wait until December? He ran for cover, you could hardly see him going. So I am pleased because 

any man who couldn’t find a little money to subsidize the price of bread or the price of milk or any of 

the kind of necessities of life, I think was a bit surprising he was a little out of character and a bit 

surprising . As to the Premier, friends say all these things are really kind of low profile. I am not sure if 

they are a low profile or no backbone or low backbone or what they are, but I say this, that it’s time the 

Premier had a talk with the Minister of Agriculture. It is time that he recognize the antics, the 

irresponsible antics of the Minister of Agriculture, that are hurting the farmers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

69 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Minister of Agriculture begin thinking of the farmers first and your own little 

image in the New Democratic Party second or third. 

 

Let’s talk about the feed grains. Let’s talk about the feed grains and take a look at the record of the NDP 

Government opposite in connection with the feed grains. To begin with for some time for many years, 

responsible and I use the word responsible, farm leaders all over this country have said, we’ve got to do 

something about feed grains. Don’t try and tell anybody that for years there was an orderly marketing of 

feed grains. There was not. Don’t try to say that feed grains situation accrued to the benefit of either the 

producer or the cattleman in western Canada. It didn’t. Most of the time it accrued to the benefit of some 

of those people who were buying three bushels of barley for $1. As far as the producer was concerned, 

he never knew from one year to the next if he could sell his barley. Let’s not downgrade the fact that 

some of our best customers, over the years, have been the farmers of eastern Canada. They have bought 

hundreds and hundreds of millions of bushels of our feed grain. Let’s not forget that they are not captive 

customers, that they can buy American corn, and there have been years when the control of feed grain 

was under the control of the Wheat Board and that one year alone over 30 million bushels of American 

corn were brought into Ontario at the same time we had barley rotting in the elevators here in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So let no one try to kid anyone that the handling of our feed grains over the years has always been in the 

best interests of our own people. 

 

There have been disadvantages. We haven’t been able to take advantage of our own natural position. 

With the freight rate structure it has been more advantageous over the years, to ship cattle and finished 

beef East and ship feeders East and ship the feed grains East and not stay here in the West where we 

could finish our cattle and finalize the production through our packing houses. Those things are facts, 

and again, one man in this country has had the nerve to tackle it — Otto Lang. And he said let’s get into 

this and see if we can straighten it out. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Let’s say something else. I don’t care how you do it, you are not going to please 

everybody when it comes to a policy for feed grains. No question about that. Let’s take a look at what he 

has done and what he asked. 

 

What kind of feed policy should we have? We need one where there’s equity across this country. We 

need a feed policy where we, in the West, will be able to keep and take advantage of our natural 

position. We should get the highest price pos-sible for producers and we should be able to encourage a 

situation so that many of our cattle as possible are finished here in the West that the packing houses can 

flourish here in the West, so that we can process our animals from the farmer right through to the 

finished product. That’s what we want to try to develop in a feed grain policy. 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

70 

Mr. Lang has called on responsible people in the farming industry all across this country to give him 

their ideas. We’ve got an interim year, we are going to start a new long range policy August 1, 1974. 

What has he received from solid farm organizations, farm leaders? He has received a great variety of 

very good advice. What has he received from Mr. Blakeney and Mr. Messer and the NDP opposite? He 

has received political slogans, he has received half-truths, he has received smears, in fact, he has 

received everything but sound solid advice. We hear this all the time. “Under this new plan the East is 

leading the West. Otto Lang is the greatest enemy of the Wheat Board. He will do away with the Wheat 

Board.” That is not only nonsense, not even a half-truth, that is an outright lie. There has been no man in 

Canada, now or in the last 10 or 20 years, who has done more to strengthen the position of the Canadian 

Wheat Board and make it once again, and it was not for the last few years, make it once again a very 

respected institution here in Western Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Okay, what about the East bleeding the West? Let’s take look. The last prices that 

are available show eastern farmers were paying the highest prices in history for western barley. To land 

western barley in central Ontario and southern Ontario was costing them about $2.45 a bushel. Feeders 

in the West wore paying a little over $2.03 a bushel. 

 

You know it is very interesting to hear the Members opposite talk about orderly marketing and making 

sure that the farmers are not set one against the other. A very interesting little item appeared in a 

Watrous paper a little while ago. What did it say? 

 

Call for tender. Tenders will be accepted until 4:00 p.m. Monday, October 1, 1973 to supply 

approximately 2,000 bushels number one feed oats, 1,000 bushels feed barley delivered to the Matador 

Community Pasture, headquarters located southwest 18-21-13 west of the third. Tenders to be 

enclosed in unsealed envelope and marked Matador feed grain, on the outside of the envelop. The 

Department reserves the right to reject any or all tenders. Further information can be obtained by 

contacting the Lands Branch, Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture, Administrative Building, 

Regina. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Orderly marketing. What did Mr. Messer do? His own Department, when they 

want feed grain themselves, they don’t go through the Wheat Board. They didn’t go to the Agricultural 

Products Board. They set farmer against farmer. Oh, yes, we checked up on that. You know what they 

told us, they didn’t buy any. You know why they didn’t buy any, because they didn’t get it cheap 

enough, that’s why they didn’t buy any. The farmers were too smart for them. 

 

You know when it comes to the NDP attitude about the feed grain situation there is an editorial in the 

Winnipeg Free Press of September, and I want to read it into the records because I want to tell you 

something and I hope you fellows 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

71 

over there listen to it because it tells you exactly what your Minister of Agriculture is doing, what your 

Premier is allowing him to do and I say it’s to the detriment of the farmers of this province. It’s called 

“Saskatchewan Copies.” 

 

Apparently not content to follow Manitoba’s lead in smaller tactical errors related to the proposed 

federal feed grains policy, Saskatchewan has now copied this province by establishing its own feed 

grains marketing commission. Mr. Messer, when announcing establishment of the Saskatchewan 

Commission, indicated that he intends to follow a pricing policy similar to that of Manitoba. A policy 

that has caused total confusion in Manitoba and is unlikely to do anything else in Saskatchewan. It 

would appear that in its timing and attitude the Saskatchewan Commission is to be used as a political 

lever to try to force Otto Lang to the bargaining table. Such action can only create further havoc in the 

western grains industry, already plagued by uncertainty and concern over the state of feed grains and 

pricing on the prairies. Mr. Messer has said that he hopes the setting up of this Commission will 

encourage an orderly marketing system and bolster what he claims would be an undermined Canadian 

Wheat Board, under the new federal policy. But a Saskatchewan Commission, if organized along the 

lines of the Manitoba Commission will create such confusion about prices that no potential buyer will 

be willing to purchase local grain at the price demanded and the Saskatchewan Minister’s beliefs that 

the wheat board will be strengthened by his move is clearly unfounded. Mr. Lang has already stated 

that prices set by the Agricultural Products Board, the board which the province claims is undermining 

the wheat board will not, I repeat, not take into account feed grain prices set the Provincial. 

Commissions. The only loser in this political manoeuvring will be the farmer. Nor should Mr. Messer 

be deluded into thinking that by following Manitoba’s example he will force the Federal Government 

to play the ball game his way. Ottawa has already clearly indicated that it will not. 

 

I just say this, that it is time that the NDP led by their Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, put 

forward a, concrete, positive plan for the feed grains if they have one and stop whining and complaining 

and confusing the issue and playing politics with the future of the province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — What has been suggested? Let’s take a look at what they are attacking. Here are 

some of the things that Otto Lang has suggested he would like to see in the feed grains policy, every one 

of which have been attacked by the NDP Government opposite. A floor price that will be a absolute 

basic requirement of any long range feed policy. A sensible sound floor price. That’s something the 

farmers have fought for for years More cash advances. That’s something they have fought for for years. 

To pay farmers storage for storing feed grains and other grains on the farm. Another thing they have 

fought for for years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

72 

AN. HON. MEMBER: — . . . recommended that. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Ah, recommended that! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — You didn’t even know about the vote. You didn’t even know about the vote until 

Monday morning. The other, and I think one of the most basic important principles that will be in if Otto 

Lang has his way and if we on this side of the House have our way, will be equity in freight rates so that 

there will be no favoritism in the shipping of feed grain to any part of Canada, no favoritism in shipping 

finished cattle and live cattle over feed grains to any part of the country. 

 

Now, those are basics of any sound, long range feed grains policy. Why haven’t the NDP spoken out on 

that? Why have they just taken the cheap political route and said they are ruining the Wheat Board, they 

are handing things over to eastern Canada. 

 

We, in the West, have fought for years, regardless of our political stripe, for a more equitable deal on a 

whole variety of fronts from Ottawa and central Canada. We have a right to this kind of a deal. For the 

first time in Calgary, in July, we had a Federal Government and a Prime Minister who said, “We agree, 

there has been inequity, there has been unfairness and we are prepared to change it.” And I am going to 

point out tomorrow that they have done a great many things. I am going to point out just two today to 

show you the kind of a ball game we are playing and to show you what we can accomplish if we can get 

the rules of the game changed. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You didn’t do anything in seven years. 

 

MR. STEUART: — We did lots in seven years. The Federal Government intervened with the Canadian 

Transport Commission, and there was a change made in the shipment of rape meal from Western 

Canada to the East Coast and the West Coast. A change that Premier Blakeney pooh-poohed the other 

day and said we’d never go that route again. That one change alone saved the producers of rape meal. 

Wheat Pool is one of them, Agro in Nipawin is another. It saved them $400,000 a year. Recently Otto 

Lang, just before the Western Opportunities Conference, announced that he would change the stopover 

charges on flour milled in western Canada. That is saving flour mills in western Canada $500,000 a year 

and one of them is the Wheat Fool. Those two savings alone, and they are just the beginning, they 

indicate what is possible in saving producers in western Canada $900,000 a year. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You are a mile off 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well, then, you phone the Wheat Pool like I did yesterday and you talk to them 

and ask them how much they save. They say this saving alone to us is $170,000 a year. I wrote Agro. I 

am a way off eh! In Nipawin they said it saved them nearly a $100,000 a year and there are three others. 

All right the total saving was printed in the paper and was backed up by the statements I got from them, 

the people in the business, Mr. Attorney General, the saving is $400,000 a year and I know 



 

December 3, 1973 

 

 

73 

the saving on changing the stopover deal is going to cost the Federal Government half a million. I am 

just trying to point out to you that what we are trying to achieve and you are trying to achieve it as much 

as we are in regard to equity and freight rates, in regard to changes in tariffs, in regard to other things we 

fought for for years, can do more to benefit everyone in western Canada, farmers of Saskatchewan, 

working people of Saskatchewan, investors in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to tell you this, if we now say to Ontario, to the farmers of Ontario, the farmers of Quebec, 

“Look we’ve got you over a barrel the next year or so on things like feed grains and things like oil and 

we are going to take advantage of you for every nickel we can get,” then I say to you we can’t go to 

them on one hand and say, look, we think we haven’t had fair treatment for years, you are beginning to 

listen to us. They haven’t made very much progress. But it has only been four months since the meeting 

in Calgary and there has been a great deal of progress made in that four months. Thanks more to the 

Federal Government than the actions of you people. How can we go to the people of eastern Canada and 

say we want a fair deal from you but the first time we get a chance to stick it into you, man we are going 

to take it. That is exactly what you people are doing. In this particular feed grains issue you are taking a 

narrow, negative, short range view. You are doing it because, as usual, you think it will help you 

politically. You think you are going to get a little bit of political credit from some people who can’t see 

past their noses. Well, you might, but I say to you and the people of Saskatchewan, when we develop 

our long range feed grain policy, of course, we should look after ourselves, but we should remember just 

as when we develop our long range oil and energy policy that we are Canadians and that we can’t very 

well go to eastern Canada on one hand and demand as we have been doing with some success lately, a 

fair and equitable deal and then turn on the other hand and say, but when it comes to us, when it is 

something we have the advantage we are going to balkanize this country and we are going to say to 

people in the rest of Canada, “We are not interested, we will gouge you for everything we’ve got.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to get into the mess in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I want to talk 

about energy in a serious way. Since I have a great deal to say and you couldn’t even begin to touch the 

plate of worms called the Department of Northern Saskatchewan unless you wanted to stay here until 

10:00 or 11:00 o’clock tonight, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:05 o’clock p.m. 


