



















































Hansard: December 04, 1973


74 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

4th Day 

 

Tuesday, December 4, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. E.F. GARDNER: (Moosomin) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of students 

from the Moosomin High School. They are located in the east gallery and they are accompanied by their 

teacher Mr. Dayday and their bus driver, Mr. Bob Bruce. They are members of the Grade Twelve social 

studies class and I should like to commend them for coming to watch our proceedings today. I hope they 

find the afternoon very interesting and informative. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK: (Saskatoon Mayfair) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and to all Members of the House, a group of 38 Grade Twelve students 

from Bedford Road Collegiate in the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. I believe they are situated in 

part, if not the entire group, in the west gallery. They are accompanied by two of their teachers, Mr. 

Mike Serienko and Miss Bonnie Stevenson. I welcome them here and hope they have an interesting day. 

The students from Bedford Road Collegiate, it seems, traditionally come down on the day that the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) speaks. They are serious students of the political arts. They then 

go home and analyze what they heard in the Legislature. I have found the results extremely heartening in 

Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce some guests to the 

Legislature. I don’t think they are strictly students except as we all are students of the political arts. I 

first want to welcome and acknowledge the presence of the Hon. Herb Grey, Minister of Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs, who is seated behind the rail on the Liberal side. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I then wish to acknowledge the presence and welcome two Members of the 

Legislative Assembly of the Province of British Columbia. The Member for Alberni, Mr. Robert Skelly 

and the Member for Richmond, Mr. Harold Staves. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

75 

QUESTIONS 
 

INCREASED FAMILY ALLOWANCE 
 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to 

direct a question to the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor). On October 27th the Minister indicated 

that increased family allowances would be passed on to welfare recipients in the Province of 

Saskatchewan even though calculated as income. I have had a tremendous number of complaints from 

welfare recipients over the past month that this is in fact not happening. Yesterday a widow with six 

children came to see me and indicated the change in welfare allowances from October to November in 

her family allowance was $51 but after the Minister of Social Services deducted the increased federal. 

family allowance she received $21. Not an increase of 15 per cent. I have two questions for the Minister. 

Is it the Minister’s intention that the only mothers in Saskatchewan and probably the only mothers in the 

Dominion of Canada who will not receive the benefit of the increased family allowances, regardless of 

their income, rich or poor, are the mothers on welfare in the Province of Saskatchewan. Those that need 

it the most? 

 

The second question, is it a fact that all people on welfare without children, in other words single people, 

couples, employables, transients, you name it, receive the full benefit of all increased welfare payments 

as of November 1st, except mothers who are having the increased family allowances deducted: 

 

HON. A. TAYLOR: (Minister of Social Services) — Speaker, I am not really sure where the 

statement started and left off and the question started. As I announced earlier, Mr. Speaker, increases 

were being provided to all recipients of assistance including the people the Member refers to and those 

who do not have children, such as senior citizens. 

 

It is rather amazing that a Member of the Opposition who have been screaming that 17 per cent is too 

much of an increase, now asks why there isn’t a larger increase. Mr. Speaker, we did provide an 

increase, an increase which is costing the province over $4 million a year and not just the Federal 

Government. The Member asked on a particular case. He knows well that no one can answer for that 

case unless he has the individual circumstances. I will provide to all Members of the House examples of 

the rates in August and examples of the rates that will be in effect in January. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Speaker, I say that this is the most disgraceful policy the Blakeney 

Government has instituted. Mr. Speaker, the NDP makes a living out of welfare. They are committing, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I must insist that Members ask questions and don’t make statements on the 

question period because we get into trouble. 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

76 

MR. MacDONALD: — I have some further calculations of great importance. The question is this: 

When the family allowance increases from $12 to $20 and the increase in welfare allowances in January 

for this same family come along and the Minister deducts the $20 from the increase, it will be an 

increase of less than one-half per cent for that mother with her six children. Is this policy going to 

continue? We are the only province, we are the only people who are discriminated against . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I must rule the Hon. Member’s question out of order because he is not 

asking a question, he is making a statement. I must insist that it be a question. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — May I ask the Minister, are you going to continue to calculate and deny 

mothers on welfare the very purpose of the increase in family allowances being given by the Federal 

Government on your January 1st increases in welfare payments? 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, the way that question is phrased, I might ask the Member — has he 

stopped beating his wife? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — He is assuming that we have not passed on increases and we have passed on 

increases. As to our future policy, as is always the case, it will be announced in due course. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

PROVINCIAL FEED GRAINS COMMISSION 
 

MR. E.F. GARDNER: (Moosomin) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask a question of the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer). 

 

As you know, it was reported in early September that the Minister was establishing, and with some great 

urgency, a Provincial Feed Grains Commission, supposedly to set floor prices for feed grains. If the 

Member from the Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) would keep quiet I could get to my question. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — On a Point of Order. 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Does the Minister intend and indeed plan on setting such floor prices in the near 

future? Three months have gone by since the Commission was set up and really we have neither heard 

of the Commission nor the floor prices. 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER: (Minister of Agriculture) — Mr. Speaker, there was a letter sent out by the two 

commissioners of the Feed Grains Commission. I believe that it covers fully the question that the 

Member asks. I am sure that he has one in his own mailbox at home. If not, we will certainly provide 

him with one immediately. 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

77 

MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, if I could ask a supplementary question. Then the answer, of course, 

indicates that the Commission is indeed a failure. Would the Minister consider abolishing the Provincial 

Feed Grains Commission? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the Commission certainly is not a failure, and the Government will not 

consider disbanding the Commission and I suggest that the Member pay attention to the kind of progress 

that has been made in regard to the formation of an equitable feed grains policy since the Commission 

was formed in September. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

BOTTLE RETURN PROGRAM 
 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD: (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers). 

 

In view of the public opposition to the Government’s disastrous bottle return program, and in view of 

the fact that the Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris) announced his resignation in the caucus, unbeknown 

to the Premier I might add, does the Government contemplate in this Session a change in The Litter 

Control Act that will be more acceptable to the public? 

 

MR. N.E. BYERS: (Minister of Environment) — No. 

 

SPEAKER’S RULING 
 

NOTION FOR RETURN NO. 31 
 

On 31 1 have looked over this question and I would like to make a statement on 31. 

 

I have carefully examined Motion for Return No. 31 and in my opinion it asks for the tabling of 

privileged correspondence. Citation No. 183 of Beauchesne’s Fourth Edition states that: 

 

Consideration of a public policy and in due regard to the interests of the state, occasionally demand 

that information sought for by Members of Parliament should be withheld at the discretion and upon 

the general responsibility of ministers. 

 

Disraeli once said in the House that if the House were to insist upon the production of papers and 

correspondence which concern the preparation and preliminary considerational measures, confidential 

reports given frankly and freely for the heads of departments, will be discontinued and we shall have a 

system of reports framed for laying upon the Table of the House. 

 

Furthermore, in Erskine May on Page 421 it reads: 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

78 

On August 10, 1893, the Speaker ruled that confidential documents or documents of privileged nature 

passed between officers and offices of the department cited in debate are not necessarily laid on the 

Table of the House, especially if the Minister declares that they are of a confidential nature. 

 

Consequently, I rule Motion for Return No. 31 out of order on the ground that it requests privileged 

correspondence. 

 

MR. A.R. GUY: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, the names of the civil servants that were reprimanded by 

the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman) have already been made public, at least a 

number of them. Surely if some of them have been made public there is nothing wrong with asking for 

the list of some others that may have been reprimanded under the same situation. I find it very difficult 

to see that the Minister who will make names public in one instance and who didn’t say that he was not 

prepared to let that Motion for Return go through, should not be allowed to provide the information 

requested. So, I wish you would reconsider your decision. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If a Minister wishes to make statements, that’s his responsibility outside the 

House, that is his responsibility. But I feel that it is my responsibility to try to see as close as possible 

that we do adhere to the general principles of the rules and, therefore, I think the Members must find 

other means of ascertaining the information they request rather than using the rules of the House. 

Therefore, I rule it out of order. 

 

MR. D. BOLDT: (Rosthern) — Mr. Speaker, are you suggesting that we follow the procedure of the 

Watergate investigation hearings? 

 

This is something like Watergate. You know he has been out in the country telling who these people are 

and you are making the decision. We have the right. If he wants to give us that information it is not your 

right to deny him giving us that information. Let’s have him deny it. Or we will have to go to the courts 

if we want that kind of information. 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC: (Wilkie) — Mr. Speaker, if I may say a word on your ruling. I wonder if we are 

not establishing somewhat of a precedent, I don’t know if we are or not in your ruling. But, it seems to 

me that we’ve had motions in the past that would result in perhaps giving privileged information, if 

indeed they were passed by the House. But, in those cases, when the present Government were sitting in 

Opposition benches and when some of us were in the Government, it was felt by the Government of the 

day that such correspondence was indeed privileged the motion was turned down. I just question 

whether or not we should be making a beginning to decide from the Chair, and presume to know 

whether or not this correspondence is indeed privileged. It’s interdepartmental mail you might say. 

Certainly the mail perhaps from one of the employees to the Minister. Who is to say? Who is to say this 

is privileged? The Minister himself may not feel that this is privileged 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

79 

information. He may be very happy to provide it and I just question, as I say, whether or not we should 

be establishing a precedent for the Chair to decide and perhaps you well could, within the guidelines. 

But whether we should make that beginning or not, or whether we should leave it and we’ll debate it and 

let the Minister decide, if indeed that correspondence is privileged. 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS: (Saskatoon University) — Mr. Speaker, I find that I can be in complete 

agreement with your ruling — part 2 — out of order, inasmuch as this deals with correspondence with 

the Minister, which I think is privileged information. However, with the core of the question posed by 

this motion, is the question of whether the Minister acted appropriately in criticizing certain people, or 

whether the civil servants were exercising their perfect rights as citizens of the province to state their 

opinions about government policy. And, to that extent I think that it’s a motion which is in order and I 

would request that you should reserve your judgment as to whether the first section is in or out of order 

until you have heard some of the debate both from the mover of the motion, Mr. Guy and from the 

Minister in response. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, on the matter before us, have you yourself seen the 

information, or have been advised on the information? Have you yourself been advised of the names of 

the civil servants, and have you yourself seen the copies of the correspondence in order to make a ruling 

of privilege? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Is there any further comment on this ruling before I . . . 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General) — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how I can comment 

on the ruling other than to say that quite obviously the question implies this is interdepartmental 

communication in some form or other. That I think is clear, if you look at items 1 or 2 and I don’t think 

that you can separate them as my colleague from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) says. To me, the 

ruling that you enunciated was clear and to the best of my knowledge (limited knowledge of the rules) 

consistent with parliamentary practice, ancient parliamentary practice as stated by yourself. With 

respect, Mr. Speaker, nothing that has been advanced to this date by any of the Members opposite, in my 

judgment, should give grounds for you now to reconsider. So, I support your reasoning behind the 

ruling. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, may I just say one word in reply to my friend the Attorney General. 

 

It is true, it is true that decisions by yourself, Sir, can certainly be made based on past rulings and 

parliamentary procedures and so on, in this House and indeed in other Houses. But, I think it is also true, 

as all Members are aware, that rulings and decisions of this kind are evolved by way of the practices that 

have gone on in the past in this particular Legislature. I don’t recall — I haven’t been here that many 

long years as some have — I don’t recall ever of ruling out 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

80 

a motion of this kind. It could have been many times in the past, but I just question whether we are 

embarking on a departure from what has been practised in this Legislature, whether or not it could have 

been done to previous motions. It is for that reason I would ask that we reconsider, or you Sir, that you 

reconsider the ruling. 

 

MR. LANE: — One more point on that. In the ruling in Beauchesne it was quite clear that the Speaker 

saw the documentation before he made the ruling as to privilege and unless you’ve seen it you can’t 

make the ruling. 

 

Certainly the Minister can stand up and demand it, say it is privileged, but that call wasn’t made. I don’t 

think you have a choice in this matter, unless you yourself have seen the information and the names of 

the civil servants and the other information that is requested. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I thank the Hon. Members for their contribution on this ruling. 

 

The Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) said that he agreed that the last part was out of 

order, but the first part was in order. The rules are quite clear if any part of a motion is out of order the 

whole motion is out of order, and the Speaker does have a right to change motions which sometimes the 

Speaker does do to facilitate the work of Members, but the Speaker doesn’t have to change motions to 

put them in order. I must be bound by the rules of the House as I see them and I feel if members wish 

information from the Minister on his activities or Department they could do as is done on numerous 

occasions before. Discuss it with him and he can then put a motion on to bring out the information 

wanted. But, in my opinion I think the statements of Disraeli are quite appropriate that confidential 

reports given frankly and freely for the heads of departments will be discontinued and we shall have a 

system of reports free for laying upon the Table of the House, if this procedure continues, so, therefore, I 

rule this out of order. Not saying that the Member can’t resubmit it in a different form to get the 

information which he may require. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — It just occurs to me in the light of your ruling with respect to Order for Return 

No. 31, if I might direct your attention, Mr. Speaker, to Order for Return No. 19, which asks for copies 

of communications issued by the Cabinet or individual Members to civil servants much along the lines 

and we called debate on it before anything transpired further. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if you might care, 

in the light of the ruling of Order for Return No. 31, a similar decision be made with respect to 19? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I believe when 19 is on the motion as debated now and it comes up again the 

minister concerned at that time can raise the point and it can be debated at that time. Now. I don’t want 

to be ruling on all them that may involve a portion of the statements I have tried to bring forth this 

afternoon. It will then be the Minister’s responsibility to question any infringements made by my ruling. 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

81 

MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, either on the motion or a Point of Order, but when one looks 

at Motion No. 33 to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 33 showing, if we were 

to follow basically the same argument given in throwing out motion 31, we’d almost have to rule out 

this one. This is the point that I think I was trying to make and we could find ourselves looking at a lot 

of these. If we wanted to be really sticky you would have to rule them out of order and that’s why I 

would hope you could reconsider the points made on the previous motion because we are asking again 

for copies of correspondence and perhaps even more confidential correspondence than that alluded to in 

the previous motion you ruled out of order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — As I pointed out when these motions come up for debate, those points can be made 

at that time and I did not wish to take the time of the House to go over each motion and say if I thought 

parts of them were out of order or the Minister can amend them or some Member can amend them if he 

feels it is out of order. 

 

MR. LANE: — For this Nixonian approach . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! It’s not debatable any further. It’s not debatable. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. E. Kaeding (Saltcoats) for 

an Address-in-Reply. 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Bless your little hearts. Before I start, Mr. 

Speaker, I should like to make an apology to the Government Members opposite. I have, I think, 

yesterday or at other times, accused them of being rather narrow and small in their outlook, but 

something has come to my attention that has certainly changed that. I noticed in yesterday’s Leader-Post 

there was an advertisement by the Saskatchewan Government, Department of Government Services, 

Purchasing Agency, Sales and Salvage Division. I see the Premier has read it. In fact, he was probably 

down at the sale. It advertises some watches for sale, which kind of surprises me, but anyway we have 

watches for sale. When you get right down to the bottom, and I looked about ten times to make sure it 

was in this Government ad, it’s got, “Christmas Special while they last — selling at $1.00 each, size 52 

brassieres.” 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We have heard about Blakeney bologna and Messer’s meatballs. I think they are 

going very well, although they are a little high-priced and the quality may be questionable. I can tell you 

Brock, as an old merchandiser you’ll never sell them this way. I admire you . . . I mean I must say that 

you’ve taken a big attitude here on this whole question. I have a suggestion 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

82 

 though, you could put a big ad in, “Brock’s Brassieres — half off.” 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We should like a little report on this if we may get it because I should like to know 

where you got them or where they came from, or who fits in them, or . . . anyway, we would like to meet 

the ah . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — They were left over from the previous administration. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well we did things in a big way. I’ll tell you that, but I don’t think we did them 

that big. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I talked about the feed grain situation and I should like to make it very clear that 

when the Federal Government and Otto Lang asked people in Western Canada, governments and farm 

leaders, to give him the advantage of their experience in developing a long-term feed grain policy, that 

we on this side of the House will do that and we will fight to have certain basic requirements in that 

floor price, equalized freight rates between eastern and western Canada in regard to both feed grains, 

cattle and finished beef. We will also ask the Federal Government to fulfil their commitment about 

increased cash advances and the beginning of payments to farmers for farm stored feed grains and other 

grain. Again I would ask the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) to quit playing 

politics, both with the rapeseed vote and with the feed grain policy and put forward some concrete 

proposals to try and solve both these very vexing problems. 

 

I ask them to think of the farmers first for a change and the NDP second. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a look at the Throne Speech would indicate that we should know such a request is really 

hopeless. A look at the Throne Speech indicates that there is nothing really new for the farmers. Oh, 

there is some welcome news that FarmStart will be continued and that more money will be put into that 

program. But again, I ask the Minister of Agriculture to take an honest look at the regulations of 

FarmStart. I’ve got them here in my hand and they are unbelievable. Any farmer who could fill that out 

or could read these regulations, he’d have to be three kinds of Philadelphia lawyer before he’d know 

whether he qualified or he didn’t qualify. 

 

I want to give you just one little paragraph in here and ask if Mr. Messer himself would explain this. On 

page 384, The Saskatchewan Gazette, that lays out the regulations, under Section 7 pursuant to clause 

(1) of Section 10, This is the Purpose of Loans, under A (i). I just want to read this to give you some 

idea of the red tape! 

 

The funds so obtained are used by the Association, partnership or corporation, for purposes consistent 

with the purposes for which the loans may be made under Section 10 of the Act or under clause (a) 

and (b) of 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

83 

Section 24 of these regulations or (b) the funds so obtained are used to purchase equity for a retiring 

member of the association, partnership or corporation, provided the amount of the equity so purchased 

does not exceed EL/T where E equals the total equity of the retiring members, L equals the value of 

productive farm assets controlled by the association, partnership or corporation of a kind, the purchase 

of which would in accordance with the purposes set forward in Section 10 of the Act or of clause (a) 

or (b) of Section 24 of the regulations and T equals to the total value of productive farm assets 

controlled by the association, partnership, corporation, . . . 

 

Now I’m going to tell you look at these regulations and I’m telling you most farmers would reckon that 

they would have an easier time getting a loan from a gimlet-eyed banker in a small town on the prairies 

in the mid-thirties. But, they ask for the attitude of the farmer, the attitude of the family, the attitude of 

his wife, they’ve got lists of things in here that the average farmer would have difficulty understanding 

and would have far more difficulty filling out. 

 

I think FarmStart is a good program, but the limit is too low and the red tape is too unbelievable. You 

boasted in the Throne Speech they’d already made over 200 applications. I thought it was a year. I said 

at that rate it would take them 200 years to get around to everybody. They said it was in one month, I’m 

sorry, it will only take you 33 years to get around to everybody at the rate you’re going. 

 

MR. MESSER: — How marry did you give? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Thousands. Look at the Guaranteed Livestock . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — Yes, the Guaranteed Livestock Loan we gave it to thousands of farmers, they 

didn’t have to fill out this nonsense and the limits weren’t on it. I’m asking you quite sincerely to take a 

look at that, you didn’t invent that red tape, your bureaucrats did. Take an honest look at it, it doesn’t 

need to be that complicated. I think it’s a good program but it can be a better program. 

 

I would ask you also, while you’re doing that to take a look at the Land Bank. Again, I want to say and 

want to go on record that what you’ve got is not a Land Bank, it’s a Land Grab Act. You haven’t sold 

any land, you don’t intend to sell any land, the option you put in the Act is actually a phoney one. You 

know that and everyone else that thinks or could read that Act knows that it’s phoney. You have no 

intention of selling any land. I say you’re taking agriculture that has been successful in this province and 

taking it down the wrong road. Give our farmers a chance to buy that land, let them lease it for a year or 

two years and then if they prove efficient, give them a reasonable chance with long-term credit and low 

interest to buy the land. 

 

I ask the Government, the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, just take a look around the world. Our 

farmers here in Saskatchewan and Western Canada are the best farmers in the world and they are the 

freest farmers in the world and that 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

84 

tenure system you got is not a new tenure system. It goes back to feudal times. You will find it behind 

the Iron Curtain and we find that our free Saskatchewan farmers, most of them, farming the land that 

they own are in fact feeding the tenants of state farming in Russia and China. Why is that? Because it 

has not proven successful over there and will not prove successful here. 

 

Sure the Land Bank may look popular right now. Any kind of land that anybody can buy or lease might 

look popular with today’s prices for grain and cattle, but I say you’re leading them into a trap. With land 

prices today there are many farmers, too many farmers who are going to be leasing that land, land you 

pay too much money for and making commitments that in the years ahead, when agriculture gets tough 

they won’t be able to meet their commitments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same thing is true of the Hog Commission. The Hog Commission, because it was 

forced on our farmers, has already proven a failure. It has, without a doubt, been one of the causes for 

the drop in hog production in this province of 20-25 per cent, a more serious drop than in any other 

province in Canada. You’re driving our farmers out of the hog business at a time when you should be 

encouraging them to stay in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those things are bad, but they are not the worst thing the NDP has done both here and in 

Ottawa to the farmers of Saskatchewan. I say that I think the point is proven beyond any doubt that the 

worst thing the NDP has ever done to the farmers of Western Canada was when it sabotaged the Grain 

Income Stabilization Plan put forward by Otto Lang in 1971. Make no mistake the NDP, including Mr. 

Messer and the Attorney General, were leaders in this. I go back to the Leader-Post in October, 1971, 

 

NDP Said Back of Court Action 

 

The New Democratic Party instigated the court action against Federal Finance Minister E.J. Benson, 

said one of the farmers who signed the application for writ of mandanus. 

 

They actually sabotaged that plan and let’s see what would have happened had it been put in. 

 

Without any doubt the most hypocritical statement in the Throne Speech and the one that has been 

repeated many times by the NDP is a call to the Federal Government to put in a Farm Income 

Stabilization Program. I think we should never let the farmers forget that it was the NDP who scuttled 

and sabotaged the Federal Government’s Grain Income Stabilization Plan in 1971. Had this plan been 

put into operation in ’71, in view of the tremendous income from grain received by farmers during the 

last three years there would have been close to $300 million in a fund ready to be paid out to western 

farmers the first year their income dropped. Two-thirds of this money, Mr. Speaker, would have been a 

gift from the Canadian taxpayers, since the Federal Government had agreed to put in $2 into the fund for 

every $1 put up by the western farmers. 

 

Let’s review the figures and see exactly how much the NDP sabotage has cost the farmers of 

Saskatchewan already. To 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

85 

establish the amount of money that would have been in the fund at the end of this crop year we have to 

go back five years. Beginning in 1969-70 we find that gross income from grain sales was about $770 

million; 70-71 — $780 million; 71-72 — $1.2 billion; 72-73 —$1.5 billion and the estimate for this crop 

year will be $3.7 billion of income. This gives us a five year average of $1.57 billion gross income from 

grain for prairie farmers. The first year that farmers could have a serious drop in income would be next 

year, the 74-75 crop year. If income in that year from grain sales dropped to the 68-69 level, which was 

$774 million and by no means was that the worst year in the last ten, farmers would be paid over $350 

million from the fund. Since Saskatchewan has about 80,000 farmers which represents 60 per cent of all 

prairie farmers, they would be entitled to over $200 million, or an average of something better than 

$2,500 for every farmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we went back to a very poor year like 61-62 we’d be talking about $3,000 a farmer. 

 

With the excellent farm income we have received since 1971 the five year average will stay high for at 

least the next five years. It simply means that our farmers could have depended on a substantial yearly 

cash payment from the Stabilization fund from now until at least 1979 even if they faced a series of bad 

years. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, with the world demand for Canadian grain predicted to stay at a high 

level for the next few years and with the assurance of reasonably high prices I think we could honestly 

say that the Stabilization Plan that was killed by the NDP would give our farmers income security for 

the next ten years and well beyond. Mr. Speaker, this plan might not have been perfect, it could have 

and would have been improved, but it was a giant step forward in bringing stabilization and security for 

the first time in history to the Saskatchewan farmers. Led by people like Premier Blakeney, Jack Messer, 

the Attorney General and some farm leaders who followed them, the Saskatchewan farmer was betrayed 

as never before. 

 

Saskatchewan’s press has since 1971 called on the Federal Government various times to bring in another 

Grain Income Stabilization Program. I believe they should be reminding the people of exactly what the 

actions of NDP politicians and others have actually cost our farm industry. 

 

Now in fairness, no one predicted the unbelievable increases in farm income we have witnessed these 

last years. However, this does not excuse those who by their actions or inactions allowed this plan to be 

defeated. I would hope that the independent press of Saskatchewan would check my figures and if they 

find what I say to be factual, and I say it is, they would call on all politicians and all farm organizations 

to take an honest realistic look at what we threw away in the stabilization plan of 1971 and ask the 

Federal Government to immediately implement this program. I think, Mr. Speaker, we may have trouble 

selling it to Members of Parliament from other parts of Canada now that they realize how much it would 

have cost the Federal Treasury, but a united front on our part might overcome this. I say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the farmers in this province are lucky that they have got someone like Otto Lang. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

86 

MR. STEUART: — I tell you that there is no such luck for the business community. 

 

The Department of Industry, in the Throne Speech last year, was quite optimistic, very optimistic. The 

Department of Industry asked for more men and more money and they made great promises, that was 

the Throne Speech a year ago. What happened in this speech this year? Practically nothing! The only 

similarity is that again somebody is going to Japan, “We are looking to the Far Exist for new markets.” 

The only similarity. This year the Throne Speech is almost silent on the subject of industrial 

development. I wonder why? I think that the problem is that the Minister, Mr. Thorson, is tired. I think 

he must be tired from chasing the Roumanians all over this country and in Roumania. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is some story. I should like to bring the House up to date on it, as I have done 

each year. I think it is my duty to bring the House up to date, every year on the famous or infamous story 

of the Roumanian Tractor Factory. I think that the title should be, “Kim Thorson, the young socialist 

Minister of No Industry in his vigorous pursuit of the Roumanian Tractor Factory”. It is kind of a 

socialist love story, but I am afraid it has an unhappy ending. The question is: will the Minister get the 

Roumanian tractors in the end? Well I think he got them somewhere, but he didn’t get them in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s deal with it. It all began way back in December of 1971. You remember that, 

December 8, 1971 it started. Headline in the Leader-Post: “They’re Coming, They’re Coming.” That 

was the Roumanians who were coming. Then on December 15, 1971 the Roumanians stated that the 

final decision will be based on hard economic factors and the labor and facilities available. You will 

notice that all the way through this that everyone is interested in hard economic factors. Then the 

propaganda thickened. The Star-Phoenix, December, 1971, we read: “Tractor Plant May Open in City 

(that’s Saskatoon) in a Year’s Time.” Well things were kind of quiet from December, 1971 until 

February 1972 when the Moose Jaw City Council got into the act. They moved on stage and they took 

off for Roumania in March. This was followed by another outburst in headlines: “Moose Jaw Extends 

Roumanian Tour”, Leader-Post March 18, 1972. “Plant Statement Today”, “Saskatoon Complains to 

Government”, April 6, 1972. “Moose Jaw Favoured”. This was a statement by Kim Thorson, Minister of 

Industry, that the Government of Saskatchewan preferred Moose Jaw, but the final decision would again 

be based on hard economic facts. Then we had another headline, “Government Said at Fault if Tractor 

Plant Lost”. Alberta and Manitoba were now being rumoured as alternate sites. 

 

Then Saskatoon really got into the act and they sent a delegation to Roumania themselves. The 

Leader-Post and Star-Phoenix of April 13 and 14, and the 15th had headlines reading: “Factory Location 

Unknown”; “Where oh Where,” and another one, “Nobody Really Knows”. Then on April 17th, the 

Premier got into the act and we read, “Blakeney Raps Tractor Dispute”. Mr. Blakeney said: 

 

The feasibility study currently being conducted regarding the proposed Roumanian Tractor Plant in 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

87 

Saskatchewan has shown up some little problems in regard to marketing. “Negotiations are 

continuing,” Premier Blakeney said Wednesday. 

 

Well, I think by June 1972 things were looking up. Another headline, Leader-Post, “Roumanians 

Expected by June 15th.” That was the Leader-Post of June 6th, but by June 26th the Leader-Post 

headline was, “Roumanians Expected Next Month.” Well in July they didn’t get there, there was a flurry 

of speculation regarding the illusive Roumanian delegation. Here was another headline, “Roumanians 

Are Still Coming. The Question is Still When.” That was in the Moose Jaw Times Herald. Then another 

headline, Leader-Post, July 11th, “Two Roumanians Arrive, Others Expected Later.” Then on July 14, 

1972 in the Leader-Post, we have another headline, “No Sign of Roumanians Yet.” But on July 19th, the 

Roumanians had finally arrived. The headlines read, “Roumanians Land but Tractor Factory Still up in 

the Air.” But at last on July 25, 1972, after eight long months of negotiation it was announced that the 

Tractor Assembly Plant was to be built in Saskatoon. 

 

In the meantime, of course, the Saskatchewan Government had sent a delegation to Roumania. You have 

to begin to wonder if this was really a kind of tourist promotion by the Roumanian Government. Then 

things were kind of quiet. Then we had another headline on August 5, 1972. “Thorson Confirms 

Saskatchewan to Own 49 Per Cent of the Plant.” Oh yes, 2,500 tractors were to be made a year and 135 

men to be employed. Then on August 9th, four days later, John Richards (that’s when John was a good 

guy on their side of the House), John got into the act, he said: 

 

“Not enough bargaining.” The NDP Government has announced the Roumanians will have 51 per cent 

control of the plant while the province will only have 49 per cent. Mr. Richards said in an interview it 

should be government policy that Saskatchewan controls the plant. 

 

I want to tell you if John Richards doesn’t trust those communists, he ought to know, they should have 

listened to him. In fact, you wonder whom you can trust if you are a socialist. You can’t trust those dirty 

Yankees, you can’t trust the people in the East, and now according to John (Mr. Richards) you can’t 

trust the Roumanians. Anyway, John wanted harder bargaining than 51 per cent. 

 

Well the Government took that into consideration I guess, but on November 13, 1972, the Roumanians 

themselves got into the act. They said, “Tractor Verdict in Six Weeks,” that was November 13th. Now 

you read it and they say they are still going to make 2,500 tractors, still going to make them in 

Saskatoon, but they are going to employ 100 men. I don’t know what happened to the 35 men between 

August and November but they went somewhere. 

 

Well we get to December 23, 1972, another headline, “Saskatchewan Factory Dream Hits Snag,” it was 

in the Globe and Mail by Ned Bowers who used to live in Saskatoon. Now we are up to 150 men, the 

factory is in a little trouble, the factory has gone down but the men have gone up. Now we have 150 to 

200 men but the tractor factory is just a little dicey. 

 

Now we get to March 1973. There is quite a gap in 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

88 

there, a lot of negotiations, what’s the headline? Kim is back on track again, he says, “Cabinet will soon 

get tractor agreement,” and they sent the mission to Roumania. I don’t know whether they call it 

‘mission impossible or mission improbable’ but they’re still at 49 per cent and the number of employees 

was running at 135. 

 

Then back in August of this year: 

 

Roumanian Agreement Said Near. The long delayed agreement for the Roumanian Tractor Assembly 

Plant may be completed this month. 

 

The workers were staying steady this time, 150 to 200, the plan could cost $4 million and there was no 

doubt it was going to be in Saskatoon. Well Kim got a little lonesome, so on September 13, he had 

another meeting with the tractor factory people. He said that things were looking well and he expected to 

make a final announcement any time. 

 

October 11, 1973, here is the headline, “SEDCO Would Own 51 per cent of the Plant.” Now we have 51 

per cent of the plant, mind you the plant is nothing, but 51 per cent of nothing according to the NDP is 

better than 49 per cent. That was on October 11th. 

 

Then we get to November 9th, 1973, ‘black Friday’ and there was a black headline here put out by our 

good friend Kim Thorson, he says: 

 

“Roumania is not prepared to proceed with the tractor assembly project in Saskatoon as negotiated by 

the Provincial Government’s delegation in Roumania in March 1973,” the Minister of Industry and 

Commerce announced today. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t so pitiful it would be funny, but the spectacle of that Government, 

their one great industrial development project since they became the Government, their one and only, 

chasing the Roumanians all over this country encouraging the city council of Moose Jaw to wander all 

over Roumania at great expense, then a bunch of businessmen from Saskatoon, then a delegation from 

the Government. They wouldn’t go near Massey Ferguson, no, they don’t trust them; they wouldn’t go 

near John Deere, no, they don’t trust them; they wouldn’t even go near Co-op Implements, I guess they 

don’t trust them either. Of course we said from the beginning that it probably wouldn’t materialize and it 

didn’t. That’s why I guess they didn’t have the nerve this year in the Throne Speech really to talk about 

industrial development. 

 

In the last year what has happened? They lost Burns. Let’s see what else has happened. I have here a 

booklet put out by Statistics Canada covering the first six months of 1973, this year. If you look in it, 

you find that New Brunswick got 17 new manufacturing plants; Nova Scotia 21; little Newfoundland 

got 20; you find Alberta got 61; you find Saskatchewan got 16. When you look at these, most of them 

are one or two or three or four employees, they would hardly rate to be called manufacturing plants. 

Well at first you think it must be the socialists, the NDP, but no. Manitoba got 35, two and half times 

almost as much as we got and British Columbia — the last thing I heard out there, they still had a 

socialist government — I wish you fellows 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

89 

when you are here would have a little talk with Kim Thorson and tell him how you do it — good old 

NDP British Columbia got 132 plants in the first six months of this year. Whether it is their fault or it is 

just the momentum that Mr. Bennett left before he retired gracefully out of office, I don’t know. That’s 

what Mr. Bennett told me that he retired gracefully, now there may be another story. 

 

Let’s face it, in all of Canada in the first six months this year, where did we rank? We ranked only in 

front little Prince Edward island, every other province in Canada got more manufacturing plants into 

their provinces than we got herein the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. FEDUNIAK: — That’s more than you did in seven years! 

 

MR. STEUART: — In seven years we were right up there, we were ahead of Manitoba, we were ahead 

of New Brunswick, we were ahead of Nova Scotia and we were sure ahead of Newfoundland, that’s 

where we got in seven years, if you would wake up and look at the facto! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The fact is, that in spite of the agricultural boom, thanks to you fellows, you can’t 

even produce enough jobs here to keep our population at home. 

 

But there is one bright spot in the Throne Speech, and that is the Saskatchewan Development Fund, I 

think this might be a good idea. The only thing is, I would advise the Premier to get some businessmen 

to run this. I should like to remind him of IPSCO and Intercon and by all means don’t talk to Mr. 

Thorson, don’t let Mr. Messer, don’t let Mr. Bowerman or the Attorney General anywhere near this 

fund. Let’s take a look at what happened. In March last year the Government went out to the capitalistic 

stock market down in Toronto and they bought $288,800 worth of shares of IPSCO and they paid 

$15.75. You know what it is worth today, $12.50, they lost almost 11 million in that deal alone. 

 

The second big deal they had, Intercontinental. We tried to stop them, we tried to save them. We told 

them that they had Intercontinental’s balance sheet on record in SEDCO, it was there; here’s a copy, I 

gave it to Mr. Thorson, I asked him is that a genuine statement? He didn’t deny it, of course it was. 

What does it say? It says that the total equity of the shares that Mr. Mendel owns were worth about $7 

million, 100 per cent of what Mr. Mendel owns worth $7 million. What did those geniuses over there do, 

and they boasted they did it in a week, they paid $10.2 million for less than 45 per cent of something 

that was only worth $7 million. What’s their loss there? The loss in IPSCO’s share, Mr. Premier I just 

checked for your information, IPSCO shares you paid $15.75 last March, they are down to $12.50 today, 

that little touch cost the people of Saskatchewan $1 million and you lost $7 million on the Intercon deal, 

I don’t know what the stock is worth today it is not on the market. I know if it is not doing less business 

certainly it has less employees than it had about one year 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

90 

ago when you bought the shares. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that that investment plan works. I hope they do invite the people to invest, but I 

again urge the Premier not to let any of his Cabinet Ministers have anything to do with the board of 

directors or however they set it up, go out and ask some common sense experienced businessmen to 

advise you and maybe, just maybe, it will be a success. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: (Moose Jaw) — How about Mike Feduniak? 

 

MR. STEUART: — There’s an idea. Mike’s an idea, it’s a bad idea, but an idea. 

 

MR. FEDUNIAK: — Tell them about the German Mark. 

 

MR. STEUART: — The German Mark, if they had brains enough to use the clause I put in there to sell 

them six months later, you would have saved all that money. They were too stupid . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I was hoping you would ask about that, Mike! 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no place in the Throne Speech that surprised and shocked the people of 

Saskatchewan more than the paragraph in there about the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. In the 

Press and in the investigation that we carried out, we proved that the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan is in a mess, the money is being mishandled, funds are being misallocated, are being 

wasted. Instead of saying yes, “we’ll look into that” as any sensible man would do, what did the Premier 

say? “We’ll give them more money, we’ll send more good money after bad, we’ll give them more 

power.” 

 

Yesterday when I talked about the DNS, they said that’s you Liberals, you dirty Liberals are going up 

there and stirring all the trouble up. Everybody that goes up there and talks has an axe to grind. Oh, they 

are terrible enemies. Let’s take a look at this, they like to toss around the names of the people in the 

Métis Society. I’ve got the paper the “New Breed”, that’s the one that has the picture of Mr. Bowerman 

on the back ‘Wanted’. They have got the centre page, in fact more than the centre page, I won’t read it 

all, but I suggest that the Premier read it if he hasn’t. It is called a “Trail of Broken Promises.” There are 

listed, I would say, about 75 or 80 complaints, serious genuine complaints, complaints about the 

mismanagement of funds, complaints about schools being closed, complaints about health hazards, 

complaints about the way the money is spent up there being handed over to friends of the Government. 

They are here, this isn’t a Liberal paper, they are not our friends, they sure are not your friends either. If 

they are friends of anybody, they are friends of the native people who live in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — What they are saying here very clearly, they are 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

91 

saying this is rotten, this is wrong, the money is not being used to help us and they are asking you, Mr. 

Premier, to face your responsibility and do something about it. I say today we must have an 

investigation. These people have asked for an investigation. The Minister himself took the Press up there 

for a big tour, he was going to show off. It was about as disastrous as that Cabinet circus you had before 

the by-election. Maybe it was even worse. What happened when he got the Press up there. Unfortunately 

he had forgotten to muzzle the people. So the people showed up and they took him limb from trunk 

almost. Even the people that worked for him had the courage to complain. We saw in the House they 

were reprimanded very seriously and some of them aren’t working for the Government any more. 

Reprimanded very seriously. We asked for the information, maybe we shouldn’t have got it. If the 

Speaker, or you Mr. Blakeney say it is wrong, if they weren’t reprimanded, then ask Mr. Bowerman to 

take back the list. He gave a list publicly of employees of the DNS who had been reprimanded for 

talking to the Press. He didn’t have to reprimand anybody for talking to us, he had put the fear of the 

Lord into them by the time we got up there. I tell you this, there shouldn’t be one more cent of public 

funds spent in northern Saskatchewan until an investigation is carried out, an independent investigation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We will ask this House to reduce the DNS estimates when they come before the 

House to $1 if the Premier hasn’t faced his responsibility and sent someone up there to look at what is 

going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked for a minute or two yesterday about the energy situation. The Provincial 

Government has talked about the lack of policy of the Federal Government, the lack of an oil policy, the 

lack of an energy policy. I just want to point out, and I am not defending the Federal Government 

whether their policy is adequate or inadequate or what it is, that is their problem, that is their 

responsibility. I want to just point out some historical facts. Back in 1961 this country was divided at the 

Ottawa valley. I think it is interesting for Saskatchewan people to remember that when that happened the 

people in Ontario who could have purchased oil from South America and the Middle East cheaper were 

forced by that decision of the Federal Government to buy their oil from Saskatchewan and Alberta at 

higher prices. Now, they weren’t much higher prices. Certainly if the same deal had been forced as was 

suggested by the Member who moved the Speech from the Throne Debate that the same deal should 

have been forced on the people of the Maritimes and Quebec, those people down there would have had 

to pay a much higher price for oil than they have paid for the last 12 years. I wonder how the workers 

down there would have felt, if the Government had said, because we want you to use Alberta and 

Saskatchewan oil you are being denied the chance to be competitive in world markets with your 

factories, your shipbuilding yards and so on. I think the policy that was put in by the Federal 

Government at that time was very fair. I think it was reasonable and it helped the people of western 

Canada. 

 

Obviously no one foresaw what would happen with the Arabs, no one foresaw what would happen to the 

supply of oil in the world as it affects the United States and as it effects, to some extent, eastern Canada. 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

92 

What has this Government done? Let’s take a look. I find it rather amusing when the NDP talk about the 

oil industry and the oil resources of this province being in the hands of the big American or 

multinational corporations. And it is in the hands of Imperial Oil, Gulf Oil and many other American 

owned oil companies. I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, who put it there? It wasn’t the Liberal Party that 

put it there, it was the old CCF and some of them are still sitting there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The Premier, if he wasn’t a Member back in the ’50s, he was one of their chief 

advisors. There are many Members including the Member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) who sat 

on the Government side of the house during the ’50s when the oil resources of this province were not 

just handed over to the American oil companies, they pleaded with them, they boasted about it. I am not 

criticizing them, but I find it rather hypocritical for the same people to stand up now, and decry the use 

of our resources, they are all in the hands of those dirty big Americans. Well they should look at their 

own hands because their hands are dirty if that is the case, because you handed it over to them. 

 

What have you done since you became the Government two and one-half years ago? Crude oil 

production has gone down. The proven reserves have gone down, they are now under 600 million 

barrels. They have gone down again this year. Production has gone down this year. Part of the reason 

production has gone down this year is because the National Energy Board under the Federal 

Government has slowed down the export of oil from this province and from this country to the United 

States. But notwithstanding that, the production of oil went down. What has happened to the price of 

oil? The price of oil has risen. The price of heating oil, the price of diesel oil and the price of gasoline at 

the pump. A year ago the NDP said the same thing. Blakeney, through the Speech from the Throne, said 

we are going to do something about oil. We are going to do something about this great resource, we are 

going to do something to secure it better than we have in the past for the people of the province. He 

created or said he would create something called Saskoil. Well the only thing we have ever seen of 

Saskoil, you can usually tell a Waffler because he has got a Saskoil sticker on the back of his 

Volkswagen. That is about all we have ever seen of it. The only other time we have ever heart of it is 

when the Premier got up and apologized at the NDP convention that he hadn’t been able to do anything 

with Saskoil because he hadn’t found anybody evidently with brains enough to know how to put it into 

operation. Well, in that part I admire him. Because I guess after Intercon and IPSCO he didn’t want to 

take a chance with any of the people he had. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — What happened when we were the Government? Let me give you the record. In 

1965 the oil reserves in this province were, 661 million barrels. In 1966 they went up to 596 million 

barrels. In 1967 they went up to 725 million barrels. From then they started to go down from 720 to 680 

million, they have kept going down since. The reason they went up during those first few years of our 

government is that we sat down with the oil 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

93 

industry and we put in an incentive program. An incentive program that the people over there criticized 

and ridiculed. Maybe we gave away too much. I don’t think we did because we found some oil. Oil that 

has paid oft since then. 

 

What else did we do: We went into northern Saskatchewan and we put in an incentive program and got 

people in the mining industry to come in. And as a result another great source of energy was discovered 

in the Province of Saskatchewan, not for the first time but certainly for the first time in many years. And 

that resulted in the Cluff Lake mineral development, a uranium development and the Rabbit Lake 

development, Gulf Minerals. Both of those came about as a result of the mineral incentive program that 

was put in by the Liberal Government after we came to power in 1964. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It is strange that in the two and one-half years since the NDP came to power they 

may be progressing. I saw a television review by the CBC regarding the Cluff Lake Development, and it 

appears to be coming along very well. What is happening to Gulf Minerals, I don’t know. I hope it is 

still coming along very well. But there doesn’t seem to be that much progress, I hope there has been. 

 

Those two developments came about no thanks to anything the NDP did, but thanks to policies put in by 

the Liberal Government. 

 

Coal production in the Estevan area went up similarly under our Government. Similarly because we 

talked to people in the industry and they came in and took a new look at that great energy source. What 

has been the answer of this Government? No new uranium, less oil, no new activity in the coal fields, no 

new resources of natural gas proven. 

 

Now, they say Ottawa needs some kind of an energy policy. Well, they announced one last night that 

sounds pretty tough and pretty stiff to me and I hope it works. However, if there is anybody in this 

country — and it was interesting to note that at the symposium yesterday or the day before that someone 

who is supposed to be an expert and I presume is, said that no province in Canada has a greater variety 

of energy resources than Saskatchewan, gas, oil, coal, uranium and water power. The Government has 

been in power now for almost three years and I ask the Premier when he stands to tell us why he has 

done nothing except threaten the oil industry, whine to Ottawa, and promise somewhere down the road, 

they are going to control those big oil companies for the benefit of Saskatchewan taxpayers and 

Saskatchewan citizens. I tell him he had better make up his mind if he is going to develop his own oil 

resources with his own government finances and his own government experts, let him get on with the 

job. He has had two and one-half years. If he is going to get the oil industry to do it then tell him to quit 

harassing them, tell him to quit moving in on them, tell him to sit down with them and deal with them as 

one human being to another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just talk, as I finish my address, about the opening remarks in the Throne Speech 

that was delivered to this House last week, which dealt with the NDP’s attitude 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

94 

towards the Federal Government, specifically the Western Economic Opportunities Conference held in 

Calgary in the summer of this year. The Throne Speech complained that they went to that conference 

with high hopes but the hopes were soon dashed. And in the five months that have followed that little or 

nothing has been done and hope is fading in Saskatchewan for any action by the Federal Government 

and people are becoming more and more disillusioned with the present government and with 

confederation I presume. Okay, let’s look at the record. 

 

The Western Economic Opportunities Conference represented a fundamental recognition by the 

Government of Canada that changes had to be made to improve the role of western Canada in 

confederation. It is important to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, the impetus, the initiative was entirely Federal. 

It came from the Prime Minister of Canada and it came from Otto Lang. It was the Prime Minister who 

asked the provincial premiers to participate. It was the Prime Minister who suggested that the 

discussions deal specifically with causes of immediate concern together with the more basic questions 

underlying those immediate concerns. This sort of development had never happened before in our 

history. It is truly historic. For the first time in our history the Government of Canada called together the 

elected spokesmen, federal and provincial, of a major region of the country and devised plans for the 

solution of the economic difficulties that have plagued that region for decades and made the people of 

that region feel alienated from other parts of Canada. The Government of Canada had put a tremendous 

amount of effort into its role coming into the Western Economic Opportunities Conference. In 

particular, the crucial Departments of Regional Economic Expansion, Transport, Agriculture, Supply 

and Services, Energy, Mines and Resources, Finance, Industry and Trade and Commerce, the Treasury 

Board and the Grains Group, devoted literally hundreds of man-hours working towards that Conference. 

The truth is that most of this effort on the part of the Government of Canada is continuing at the same 

vigorous pace since the Conference as before. 

 

For decades the West has complained about inequities and injustices. Mr. Speaker, a great many, if not 

most, of these complaints were justified. Mr. Speaker, a parade of federal governments, some Liberal 

and some Conservative down through the years have paid lip service to these problems but we in the 

West have become steeled to talk of new initiatives and new policies and new answers for western 

Canada but little action. But the present Federal Government, the Government of Trudeau and of Otto 

Lang has started to do something positive and practical about the long standing difficulties. The Western 

Economic Conference was just the first step, a good first step and they are keeping up their efforts. We 

in the West have received a fundamental commitment from the Government of Canada to seek and root 

out the frustrating problems with which we have struggled for so long. In the face of that kind of 

commitment what have the NDP done, what do they continue to do? They snipe and they gripe and they 

complain and they take pot shots. Before their chairs at the Calgary Conference had a chance to cool off, 

Premier Blakeney and his apologists were crying and whining. Mr. Speaker, this bunch of snivelling 

pessimists wouldn’t know an opportunity if it came up and hit them in the face. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

95 

MR. STEUART: — And that is a tragedy for Saskatchewan. The Government of Canada has created a 

golden opportunity for Saskatchewan in a positive and constructive way to begin to rebuild 

confederation. To devise a new national policy for Canada, in which the hopes and the aspiration of 

westerners will be given full expression. The opportunity is there but with the petty political 

short-sightedness of the NDP, Saskatchewan is missing the boat. This Government, Mr. Speaker, is 

simply incapable of making the best use of the opportunity before us. The NDP can’t even see that an 

opportunity exists except an opportunity to play cheap politics, and the people of Saskatchewan stand to 

be the losers. What is the real point? The point is that after decades of problems, frustrations, unfairness 

and inequity, the Federal Government has finally given us a commitment. We can’t expect to wipe away 

the trouble of a hundred years at a single conference. Everything can’t be fixed up overnight or in four 

months. But we now have a commitment, the Federal Government is working and I say they are 

working hard on short and long-term problems. 

 

Let’s look at some concrete examples. DREE, the Department of Regional Economic Expansion has 

undergone some fundamental changes in its administrative approach, as well as a distinct change in the 

role it played in the creation and development of new projects. The head office in Ottawa for example 

was where all the final decisions were made. In the past it was the policy that the decision making 

process be entirely located in Ottawa. As a result of the in-depth studies the commitments brought to a 

head by the Western Economic Opportunities Conference last summer, the Department of Regional 

Economic Expansion was instructed to take a new approach. This was one of the first direct results of 

the Government of Canada’s commitment to develop a new national policy. Under the new directive 

DREE has ceased as a centralized decision making body, it has begun to adapt itself to a more regional 

approach. The charge in the past that it was a centralized control, the decision makers were so far 

removed, so unfamiliar with existing situations in regions that projects were not being given proper 

consideration. The new regional headquarters for the prairies is now being located in Saskatoon. The 

office will be in full operation within weeks. This comes only a few short months after the original 

commitment was made. Not only have the administrative techniques of DREE been reformed but an 

entirely new role has been established for it in a concentrated effort towards economic development in 

Western Canada. The challenge is now for DREE to recognize the needs and aspirations of prospective 

projects at the local level and do their utmost to assist in the establishment of new enterprises. 

 

As far as transportation is concerned the important and really fundamental thing to keep in mind when 

we are talking about a transportation policy for western Canada is again the commitment given by the 

Prime Minister at the Calgary conference. Prime Minister Trudeau said, I am quoting from the record: 

 

With respect to transportation policy what we can assure you and what we are assuring you is that the 

discriminatory practices against you will be removed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

96 

MR. STEUART: — It was no idle promise. Work is going on right now towards keeping it. 

 

Immediately, Mr. Speaker, upon conclusion of the WEOC conference and upon the recommendation of 

the Federal Minister of Transportation, the Hon. Jean Marchand, a committee of Federal and Provincial 

officials set to work to tackle the problems of western transportation. The objectives of the 

Federal-Provincial committee on western transportation is within the context of a more regionally 

balanced national economy, to contribute to the economic development of the four western provinces. 

This committee has been hard working ever since its first meeting was held in August, only twelve days 

after the conference concluded. Since then, I am told the committee has met on four more occasions, 

September 6, September 21, October 23 and November 22. 

 

The Committee is studying and collecting basic information over the problems of cost disclosure, 

railroad building, prairie highway standardization, freight rates and the need for rate subsidization, port 

improvement on the West Coast and so on. Clearly, its work is of critical importance and it is to revise 

the transportation system to more acceptably meet western needs. 

 

In addition to this Committee of federal and provincial officials, action in the area of transportation 

policy has been going on on other levels. Later this month in Winnipeg the Federal Transportation 

Minister, Mr. Marchand will chair a meeting of Ministers responsible for transportation in the West to 

assess the progress that is being made on western problems. 

 

With respect to the issue of cost disclosure, the Federal-Provincial committee of officials has been 

collecting information from both the Federal Government and the Provincial Government on rail and 

truck transport. The information is being given to the Canadian Transport Commission for study and the 

CAC is expected to make a report later this month. 

 

In this area the main onus is now on the provinces to make a specific submission about what they feel 

are the facts and what they feel should be done. 

 

With respect to the problem of discriminatory freight rates, 163 specific problems have been identified 

and forwarded to the CTC for examination. A progress report on this problem will be made available to 

the ministers, and I hope they will make it available to the public, at their meeting in Winnipeg later this 

month and there will be a more complete report prepared on this topic later in December. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned to the House yesterday that there were some specific examples where the 

Federal Government had already acted to eliminate discriminatory freight rates, which have in the past 

operated against the interests of Western Canada. I referred to the decision of the Canadian Transport 

Commission which forced the railway to charge western rapeseed crushers the same freight rate east 

from Thunder Bay for rapeseed meal as they charge for raw rapeseed. We all knew that western crushers 

before that ruling were being discriminated against and there was a danger that artificial freight 

difference would discourage the western industry. 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

97 

I said that the saving amounted to about $400,000 a year and I have checked those facts. The people in 

the business tell me that those figures are true. The Federal Government, the Minister responsible for the 

Wheat Board, Otto Lang, announced that the western Canadian flour millers would no longer have to 

pay higher freight stop off charges than eastern Canadian millers were paying, and that in itself will cost 

the Federal Treasury at least a half a million dollars in the full year. Before this policy change, 

westerners had to pay a higher charge. Again, these are just two examples of federal action to eliminate 

freight rate discrimination. 

 

Finally, of course, we have from Otto Lang and the Federal Government, the commitment that by 

August 1st, 1974 there will be a balance in the freight rates on the shipment of feed grains, meat and 

livestock across the country West to East. We have a commitment. I will repeat it again — from Otto 

Lang that the Federal. Government by August 1, 1974, that there will be a balance in the freight rates on 

shipments on feed grains, meat and livestock across the country West and East. To the people of 

Canada, to the people of western Canada, to the people of this Province of Saskatchewan, that’s what 

was said publicly and it will be done. 

 

This move is coupled with the phasing out of feed freight assistance to most of eastern Canada. And if 

you haven’t heard that commitment I am very pleased to announce it today. Maybe you should have 

your Minister . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . in charge of freight rates — if it is the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) — 

show up at some of the meetings attend them all. I understand that that commitment has 

been given. I tell you that’s a commitment that has been made. 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . it’s on the record? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Yes, it is on the record, it sure is. By August 1, 1974 a discrimination between the 

rates to move feed grain, finished cattle and meat will be removed. 

 

Let me give you a few more commitments which were made, commitments for which we fought for 

many years. There was a commitment to construct the Ashcroft Clinton bypass to facilitate movement of 

prairie grain to market and to rationalize shipping by rail in southern British Columbia. A commitment 

by the Minister of Justice to intervene in public interest in CTC freight rate hearings. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY — When? 

 

MR. STEUART: — You ask him! You haven’t even asked him yet. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . 68 and he never. . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — I am telling you that in July at Calgary he made the offer to you and you haven’t 

made one . . . And I asked the chairman of the CTC if you made any one 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

98 

commitment and he said, no, you haven’t. So don’t tell me you haven’t this information. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Rubbish! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Establishment of a joint federal western provinces committee on transportation; 

imposition of an 18-month freeze on unprotected branch lines; offered to Alberta, Saskatchewan and 

Manitoba to share 50/50 the cost of upgrading their primary highway network to the same capacity as 

that now pertains in British Columbia; proposed agreement for mineral development for northwestern 

British Columbia and northern Saskatchewan; agreement to work with each province on programs for 

social and economic development of the western northland; commitment to establish a new crop 

development fund to stimulate development and adaptation of new crops, new varieties and new protein 

sources; commitment to increase advance payments available for western grains; commitment to 

establish a research centre for western Canadian protein and oil crops in Saskatoon already underway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just say this in conclusion. There has never been a time when this Government, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, not particularly NDP, just the Government of Saskatchewan or the 

people of Saskatchewan, have been treated better or with more consideration by a Federal Government 

than is now the case. There is hardly a department of that Government that doesn’t receive money 

directly and indirectly from the Federal Treasury. The Federal Government gave outright grants, 

equalization grants, that amount to over $100 million this year. They give money for secondary 

education; they give money for post-secondary education; they give money for agriculture; they give 

money for highways; they give money for the development of the North; they give money for medicare; 

they give money for hospitalization; welfare. I don’t think there is hardly a department of this 

Government that either hasn’t got a signed cost-sharing agreement with the Federal Government or is in 

the process of making one. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, over $4 of every $10 that this Government spends comes directly or indirectly from 

the Federal Government. It never had so many millions paid to our farmers for the two-price system. 

Boxcars purchased for the first time in our history. 

 

You can say that we have this coming. Sure we have had a lot of this coming. But I say to the people of 

this province that we have made great breakthroughs, we have made tremendous breakthroughs. We 

have been given a golden opportunity in Calgary to change some of the long-standing grievances and 

inequities that we, all the people, not NDP people, nor Liberal people or Conservative people, have put 

up with ever since Confederation. 

 

The point is simple. Before the Western Economic Opportunities Conference and since then the 

Government of Canada has been hard at work trying to grapple with the problems which have in the past 

contributed to western alienation. The Government of Canada is committed to find solutions, both in the 

short-term and in the long-term. They are serious about building a new national policy. The construction 

of that policy is well underway. The only problem is that the political 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

99 

backstabbing from the NDP in Saskatchewan. . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . is not contributing to that effort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech indicated it very clearly. Sure we expect the Government opposite to 

play politics. Sure we don’t expect them to fall over and praise the Liberal administration in Ottawa. But 

I think the people of Saskatchewan, if they knew the whole truth and knew the half-truths, the smears, 

the outright misrepresentations that are made day in and day out by that Government that has anything 

to do with the Federal Government, with any program of the Federal Government, with the efforts of the 

Federal Government to be fair and reasonable, then when the Federal Government is wrong by all means 

let’s attack regardless of the political stripe. But when the Federal Government has at long last said to 

the people of Saskatchewan, we are prepared to sit down and talk to you and start changing some of the 

rules of the game, the unfair rules of the game we have been putting up with sometimes for as long as 60 

and 70 years, then I think they deserve something better than they are getting from that Government led 

by Premier Blakeney. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Cheap politics, day in and day out, that is the order of the day, cheap politics 

across everything. Sure, where you disagree with the Feeds Grain Policy, disagree with it. If you think it 

should be under the Wheat Board that is your right and responsibility to do everything you can to change 

it, and I don’t blame you. 

 

When the Federal Government is actually trying to do something and you misrepresent it to the public 

all over the province, in meetings, in this House and in the Press, then I say you are doing a serious 

disservice to your own cause and a serious disservice to the people you represent and that is to all the 

people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support the Throne Speech. It has nothing new for agriculture; it does nothing 

really to develop the great resources of this province. Not only did it not mention the serious problem of 

inflation, but it will probably worsen inflation as much as this Government is able to in this province. 

 

Again, the Throne Speech indicates that the NDP will continue to increase their grab for power over the 

lives of our people and for these reasons I cannot and will not support the Throne Speech and I propose 

the following amendment: 

 

I move, seconded by Mr. Grant that the following words be added to the motion: 

 

But this Assembly regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has completely ignored the 

provisions of new programs to stabilize the farm economy, that it has ignored the persistently 

expanding inflation and has, in fact, merely contributed to that inflation, that no 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

100 

proposals have been put forward to free the industrial and resource development, and that, through its 

present programs, is continuing to erode the individual rights of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

The debate continued on the motion and on the amendment concurrently. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure all of us have been puzzling to know 

what has happened lately. We are trying to explain the performance of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart). We are trying to explain to ourselves and to others just what caused this particular effort on the 

part of the Leader of the Opposition to explain Federal Government policies. Then we remember that we 

have talked to MPs, and I am sure that they have talked to MPs. They have read the papers, and they 

know there is a crucial vote coming up in the House of Commons. They know that the life of the Liberal 

Government is on the line. They know that it is likely that the Liberal Government is going to have to 

face the electors. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — How else do you explain this deathbed repentance, the evidence of which we 

have seen today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — What do you say about the executive assistant for the Minister of Justice, the 

Member for Prince Albert West, when he comes in here and tells us that Otto Lang is giving us a 

commitment that he is going to intervene. The National Transportation Act has been on the books since 

1968 — five years. Five years, the Government of Canada has had an opportunity to intervene on behalf 

of western Canadians in freight rate issues. For five years it has been part of the law of Canada that if the 

Minister of Justice felt that the freight rates were unjust he could intervene. And for five years the 

Minister of justice under the Trudeau Government has intervened not once. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Month after month, year after year, Otto Lang sat as Minister of Justice and his 

predecessors sat as Ministers of Justice, while both the Liberal Party opposite, when they were -the 

Government, and our Government complained about freight rate injustices. And month after month, and 

year after year, the Trudeau Liberals have not intervened once on behalf of the public. And the Member 

for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) now comes and says, Mr. Lang has given us a commitment. For 

five years they have done nothing and, now, faced with a vote seven days hence, we are told that there is 

a commitment. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Trust me one more time! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Trust me one more time! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

101 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We are told about the fact that the Prime Minister called the Western Economic 

Opportunities Conference. And indeed he did. One year ago he suffered severely at the hands of the 

electorate and in his first Throne Speech he looked at the problem of western Canada and said, “We 

have to say something; we are certainly not going to do anything.” So, faced with the need to say 

something when he was not going to do anything, he called a conference. And he did! He called a 

conference and he indicated that so far as he was concerned he wanted that conference to be a general 

discussion of the economic problems of western Canada. 

 

I invite the Member for Prince Albert West and the Members opposite to get a copy of the agenda 

proposed by the Federal Government to the four western provinces, the agenda of what this conference 

was supposed to talk about. I invite them to look at that. It came to the four western Premiers and we 

considered it in Winnipeg, in March, and said ‘no dice’. We want to talk about specific things. We want 

to talk about rail freight rates, specific rates. We want to talk about opportunities for secondary 

industries, specific opportunities. We don’t want to talk about whether it would be a good idea to have 

secondary industry in western Canada; we want to talk about whether we can have our livestock 

industry, whether we could have a petrochemical industry, whether we can have a lumber industry. 

These were actually discussed and it was the Premiers who insisted that that conference get down to 

brass tacks. It was the Premiers who insisted that we discuss rail transportation — not in broad 

generalities but in specifics. 

 

And when we did try to get down to specifics, the Federal Government refused to change the National 

Transportation Act. They refused to agree to make any changes. They said, “Let’s talk about it. Let’s 

have some more committees.” And we have had some more committees and I concede to the Member 

for Prince Albert West that there has been a lot of committee activity and we are still hopeful that 

something might come out of it. We are still hopeful that the Federal Government will go so far as to tell 

their agency, the Canadian Transportation Commission, that they must insist on cost disclosure. But we 

haven’t got it yet! 

 

The Member for Prince Albert West is giving us announcements from the Federal Government. I tell 

you that we haven’t received them. The Minister in charge of Transportation has not received what you 

said he is going to hear from Mr. Marchand on December 13th. You may know it, but we don’t. The 

Federal Government has not given us the courtesy of any sort of communication as to what they are 

going to say. If they have told you, good. Apparently they are using as their vehicle for communication 

in this province, the, Member for Prince Albert West (MR. STEUART). And, if they are, they mustn’t 

be surprised if the information gets a little distorted in the transmission. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We have, we are told, a commitment from the Prime Minister that 

discriminatory practices against the West will be removed. We are told that there is a commitment; 

nothing stops them from moving now. Nothing stops them from 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

102 

putting that commitment into action. We are not saying that they must act only on our agreement. We 

are perfectly happy for them to lower freight rates in western Canada to make them equal to eastern 

Canada. They don’t need any more consent to remove that discrimination and I think what the people of 

western Canada want is not another commitment from the Trudeau Government but some action from 

the Trudeau Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, we heard the Leader of the Opposition speak for well 

over two hours. No, I guess it just seemed like two hours; it was an hour yesterday and an hour today. 

He spent an hour yesterday telling us of the virtues of Otto Lang and his policies. I can understand why 

he took so long because it is not easy to make a convincing case for Otto Lang. It’s not the sort of thing 

you can do in 15 minutes. It’s not the sort of thing you can do in a half hour. The Leader of the 

Opposition showed us, in fact, that it is not the sort of thing you can do in an hour. You can’t convince 

any fair-minded person that the rapeseed vote is not loaded in favor of James Richardson and the 

Winnipeg Commodity Market. You can’t convince the National Farmers’ Union, you can’t convince the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 

You can’t convince any fair-minded person that the feed grains policy is not loaded against western 

livestock producers. You can’t convince the National Farmers’ Union and you can’t convince the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Indeed, they believe that the whole wheat board marketing system may be in 

danger. Anyone who thinks that the Federal Liberals are friends of the Wheat Board doesn’t know much 

about western agriculture. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Who put it in? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The Wheat Board, as a matter of fact, was put in by the Conservative 

Government between 1930 and 1935 as a partially compulsory board. I will say a little more about this 

tomorrow but just in case you don’t know, when the Liberals got in in 1935, they made it a voluntary 

board. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, the old Winnipeg Grain Exchange. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, why did the Leader of the Opposition feel it necessary to 

give us this stirring defence of Otto Lang and the Federal Liberals, a defence which even his own 

Members opposite couldn’t work up much enthusiasm for? Can it be that the provincial Liberals are 

looking for Federal Liberal support? Well, surely not. The Opposition is in a parlous state but surely 

they are not dependent on Federal Liberal support in this province. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, they are tied in there now. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — As a matter of fact, short months ago — some of us have memories that go back 

a few months — short months ago the Saskatchewan Liberals made a profession, a literal profession, 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

103 

of baiting the Federal Liberals at Ottawa and particularly Otto Lang. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Those were the good old days, Dave. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I think we could all remember this; we could all remember the sharp, sharp 

cleavage, indeed dispute, between the Saskatchewan Liberals when they sat on this side of the House 

and the Federal Liberals and Otto Lang. I wouldn’t call it a change; I would call it a conversion, a 

conversion that would make Saul’s conversion on the road to Damascus pale by comparison. What 

could possibly be the explanation? Well certainly it can’t be because the Federal Liberals have changed 

because we know they haven’t. It certainly can’t be because the provincial Liberals are looking for 

federal Liberal support because they don’t have any support to give. Could it be that the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) wants to join Mr. Sparrow and Mr. Argue in the Senate . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . and occupy a seat which it was very widely rumoured was going to go to the 

late Member for Lakeview, Mr. Don McPherson. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Say it isn’t so, Dave. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Surely that is the most likely explanation. But all I want to say to the Member 

for Prince Albert West and the Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) and all those others who 

may be looking for a senatorship or a judgeship that December 10th is coming. The hour is late, and all I 

can say to them is, “ask not for whom the bell tolls”. It tolls for them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn this afternoon to a consideration of a couple of major 

provisions in the Speech from the Throne. Before I do so I want to say what I think of the job done by 

the mover (Mr. Kaeding) and the seconder (Mr. Cody), the Member for Saltcoats and the Member for 

Watrous. I nave sat in this House for a good number of years and I have heard movers and seconders 

move the traditional Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne, and I think that looking back over 

the years I have rarely heard two better jobs. I want to commend and commend most heartily the 

Member for Saltcoats and the Member for Watrous. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Without in any way detracting from their efforts I do say that they had a 

relatively easy task because it was a good speech and a meaty speech, a speech which outlined programs 

which are visionary programs which offer real opportunities and real benefits for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

104 

MR. BLAKENEY: — There is a lengthy section on energy. The Leader of the Opposition spent some 

of his time telling us about energy. What he didn’t tell us at all was the policy of the Liberal Party on 

energy, the policy of the Liberal Party, federal or provincial. And that is understandable because if 

anybody knows what the policy of the Liberal Party is on energy it is a carefully guarded secret. 

Provincially it doesn’t matter much because the Liberal Party is not in power and in this province there 

is no danger of them getting into power. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — But federally the matter is more serious. The Liberal Party is in office, at least 

for the time being, and Canada desperately needs a new national energy policy. The Saskatchewan 

Government has called for a new national energy policy. The New Democratic Party both inside and 

outside Parliament has called for a new national energy policy. But the Liberal and Conservative parties 

inside parliament and out have ignored this call. Now it is not strictly true to say that Canada doesn’t 

have a national energy policy. We do have a skeleton national energy policy, introduced by the Tory 

Government in the early 1960s. It was a policy that had three basic principles: First, oil from western 

Canada should be developed by private international oil corporations and largely exported to the United 

States; secondly, Canada, east of the Ottawa Valley, should remain dependent on foreign oil for its 

supply, no pipeline was needed to take western oil to Montreal; thirdly, no national electric power grid 

was needed or desirable. This policy was even then unacceptable to the New Democrats. New 

Democrats called for the public development of oil for the benefit of all Canadians. New Democrats 

called ten years ago for the building of an oil pipeline to Montreal. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — New Democrats called ten years ago for a national power grid. 

 

The Tory energy policy was supported by the Liberals, federal and provincial, until a few weeks ago. 

And those policies have brought us to a position unique I think in the whole world. We are a large 

producer of oil; we are a large exporter of oil and yet we have major oil shortages in heavily populated 

areas of this country. No other nation in the world is a large producer of oil, a large exporter of oil and a 

nation with large shortages of oil in its populated areas. The people of Saskatchewan, the people of 

Canada, find themselves in this position because of 15 years of Tory and Liberal neglect. The people of 

Canada are now suffering from major oil shortages and sharply rising prices, not because we have no oil 

but because we have no oil policy, no sensible government policy to see that Canadian oil is used to 

benefit Canada. You may ask, how could this have happened? How could successive Tory and Liberal 

governments have been so inept? The answer is simple. We have had policies in Canada, we have had 

energy policies, but not government energy policies. We have had energy policies made by the 

international oil corporations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

105 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now these corporations wished to have the rich market of eastern Canada served 

by crude from Arab states and from Venezuela because they knew that the day might come when these 

foreign sources of supply might be cut off. The oil companies wanted to get out that foreign crude from 

the Arabian states and Venezuela while the getting was good and that makes good sense from their point 

of view. but what doesn’t make good sense or any sense, is that any government Canada would allow 

eastern Canada to be almost wholly dependent on supplies from the Arab states and Venezuela at a time 

when a cut-off of these supplies because of wars and threats of wars, because of the possibility of war at 

sea, was some distant remote possibility but was, in fact, the a, front and centre, in the minds of the 

international oil corporations. It was because of the risk that supplies of oil would be cut off or would be 

overpriced that the oil companies wanted eastern Canada to be supplied from the Arab States and 

Venezuela. And in spite of this identified risk, the Tory governments and the Liberal government at 

Ottawa took no precautions no pipeline to Montreal. They didn’t even insist that the oil companies 

provide that in time of stress and scarcity they not divert to the oil markets with higher prices. It is 

possible, of course, that it was a wise idea to have eastern Canada supplied from off shore supplies, but 

what isn’t wise at all is to have allowed ourselves to be wholly dependent on that, to have no guarantees 

from the oil corporations, to have no back-up pipeline. That is where successive Tory and Liberal 

governments failed. 

 

New Democrats have spoken out against the folly of these policies. We spoke out in 1961; over and over 

again we have called for a national energy policy. Nobody can now deny the need for that policy, but it 

is still not clear that we have such a policy. `The people of Canada are waiting to know what oil policy 

of Canada is. They have listened to the Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources and they are still 

waiting. They have listened to the Prime Minister and they are still waiting. Are we to have a National 

Oil Corporation? We are waiting for an answer. Are we to have a pipeline to Montreal and if so, when? 

We are waiting for an answer. Are steps to be taken to have a national energy power grid? We are 

waiting for an answer. The Government of Saskatchewan believes Canada needs a national energy 

policy. We believe that oil resources are not the property of the international oil corporations to be 

exploited only for profit. We believe this resource should be developed for the benefit of all Canadians 

and we believe that that is how the Government of Canada should act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that we think that we should have a 

national oil policy. I want to emphasize it because I don’t want any actions by the Government of 

Saskatchewan in the weeks and months ahead to be misconstrued. We do not seek to exploit the present 

misfortunes of fellow Canadians in other parts of Canada. We do seek to have policies which will 

protect Canadians both in Saskatchewan and elsewhere from the folly of our current national oil 

policies, policies not made by the Government of Canada but by the international oil industry. The time 

has long since come for some public oil 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

106 

policy in Canada, a policy not made by the oil companies to enrich their shareholders but by government 

to protect the public interest. The Government of Canada has not acted. Therefore, the Government of 

Saskatchewan must act, and act we will. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Now let me turn, Mr. Speaker, to the specific steps which appear to be necessary 

or desirable. In the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, government policy is set out in six principles. 

Let me deal with the first two of those principles: 

 

1. Control of the oil resource as with other basic resources must be firmly vested in the people of 

Saskatchewan; 

 

2. Future supplies of petroleum for Saskatchewan farmers and other Saskatchewan users must be 

assured. 

 

Let me turn first to the control and continuity of supplies. We first ask, does the Government of Canada 

have any policy to guarantee to Canadians a firm supply of oil in the decades ahead at reasonable prices? 

The answer is, unfortunately, No. Therefore, Saskatchewan must act to ensure a firm supply of oil for 

Saskatchewan people in the decades ahead at reasonable prices. The need for this action is clear and 

evident. Few people in Canada are as dependent on reliable supplies of gas and oil at fair prices as is the 

Saskatchewan farmer. It is absolutely imperative that the Government of Saskatchewan do everything in 

its power to guarantee supplies of gas and oil for farmers in the decades ahead. Policies of preserving 

rural life in Saskatchewan, policies of the Land Bank and the other things, however good, will fail if 

farmers can be held to ransom by the oil companies for their needed oil and gas. That I think must be 

clear to all. 

 

And I think it must be equally clear to all that prices for that gas and oil cannot depend upon what some 

foreign government or foreign oil company thinks it can extort from us in a time of world crisis. Our 

farmers till the soil of this rich farm land; our oil is beneath the soil of this rich farm land, and that oil 

must be used to make that farm land pour forth its riches for the benefit not only of the people of 

Saskatchewan but also of hungry people all over the world. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — That oil must be there to make that farm land fruitful not only in this decade but 

also for generations yet to come. How can we see that this happens? 

 

Well let’s look at the present situation. Our reserves of crude are about 800 million barrels and here I am 

quoting the Department of Mineral Resources figures. The Leader of the Opposition quoted the 

Canadian Petroleum Association figures which are always somewhat lower than the Mineral Resources 

figures since the CPA does not include highly probable reserves and the Department of Mineral 

Resources does and always has. Using those figures, our supply of crude is about 800 million barrels. In 

Saskatchewan we use each year about 22 million 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

107 

barrels. So if we refined and used our own crude oil we have supplies for 35 or 40 years. But, in fact, we 

import into this province Alberta crude of about 20 or 22 million barrels a year, just about all we use in 

Saskatchewan. So, if we didn’t export any and if we continued to import Alberta crude, we would have 

oil for many, many decades. 

 

But we do export oil. We export from Saskatchewan a great deal of oil. In fact, we export about 85 

million barrels a year. So you can see, that at that rate of export, we have only enough oil to last for 10 

years. Using these rough calculations only, the wells could run dry in 10 years. Now that’s not going 

happen. We will not keep sending oil out of Saskatchewan until every well is dry in 10 years and we 

will find more oil and hopefully quite a bit more oil in the meantime. I’ll say some more about that in a 

few minutes, but the warning is clear. We must act now. We must act to reduce the amount of oil 

leaving this province and we must act to step up, if possible, the amount of oil found in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — You might well ask, if it will ever be necessary for Saskatchewan people to use 

Saskatchewan oil. Why can’t we continue to keep getting our oil from Alberta? The answer to that is 

that Saskatchewan people could only be sure of the supply and price of Alberta oil if Canada had a clear 

National Energy Policy. But Canada has no such policy. Saskatchewan people cannot know whether 

they will be able to get Alberta oil five years from now and at what price. Therefore, Saskatchewan must 

act to protect its own people, we have no alternative. 

 

Now this is going to have some results which at first hearing, at least, sound bad. Oil production in 

Saskatchewan will decline, but remember, that’s good. That means that more of our oil is being saved 

for the 1980s and 1990s. And we believe that it’s better to have more of our oil saved for use in 

Saskatchewan in the 1980s and 1990s than to have it shipped off to Chicago and Minneapolis to be used 

in the 1970s. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Just what do we propose? We propose legislation to strengthen our oil and gas 

conservation board so that it can act to regulate the rate of production of our crude oil. There are 

excellent conservation reasons to regulate production and we propose to do just that. I do not anticipate 

that there will be an immediate and dramatic cutback of oil production. Indeed, there has been a 

substantial cutback of oil production already because of the application of the federal policy. Currently 

there are shortages of oil in eastern Canada and the United States. We hope they are temporary, and we 

have no wish to aggravate their problems by any sudden curtailment of production. We do, however, 

anticipate that over a period of time a significant: curtailment of production is likely to take place. This 

could cause some short-term difficulties, but unless there are major oil discoveries, production cuts are 

necessary if Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan consumers are to be assured oil in the 1980s and 

1990s. 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

108 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We are aware that other steps in addition to strengthening the conservation board 

will probably be necessary. For a number of reasons, one of which is the apparent attitude of the Federal 

Government to conservation boards, a strengthened board may not be enough to give Saskatchewan 

people fully effective control over. their own oil resources. And we have increasing evidence that the 

Federal Government proposes to challenge the rights of provincial governments to control their 

resources through conservation boards. If this is the case, then other steps may well be necessary to give 

Saskatchewan people this necessary control. 

 

Let me turn now to the next two principles in the Speech from the Throne: 

 

3. Increases in Saskatchewan wholesale prices for petroleum products which do not reflect increases in 

the cost of operations must be limited; 

 

4. Future unearned increments in crude oil prices, over and above the level of prices which have 

prevailed during the immediate past period, must be retained for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We all know that the world market is in a state of total confusion. Because of the Middle East oil crisis, 

because of actions in the producing countries such as the Arab States and Venezuela, prices charged on 

the world market are skyrocketing. I picked up the Globe and Mail here of November 29th and I see a 

little story which indicates that the Nigerian oil price doubled on one sale to $16.40 a barrel. Now if we 

are in that sort of a world market, who can say what is going to happen to world prices in Canada or 

elsewhere. 

 

About a year ago the price of oil was perhaps $2.50 a barrel. Now we hear people talk about prices 

regularly being $5 and $6 a barrel. These developments pose serious questions for Saskatchewan people. 

Among them are these: 

 

Should Saskatchewan people suffer huge increases in the price they pay for gas and oil, increases which 

do not represent increases in cost of production, but, represent only events in the world of international 

oil politics? 

 

Another, question — should huge windfall profits go to the international oil companies from the sale of 

our oil in Saskatchewan for the sale of that oil. outside Saskatchewan: 

 

Let me review a few facts. 

 

In September, 1972, the average well-head price for crude oil in Saskatchewan was about $2.40 a barrel. 

In September of ’73 it had increased to $3.30 a barrel. Now that’s an increase of 93 cents a barrel in one 

year. There may have been some small increases in costs, but possibly 90 cents of that increase 

represents increased profits. On the production of 85 million barrels, that represents over $75 million in 

increased profits in one year. Some of that, under 20 per cent, will have gone to the Crown and private 

mineral owners in 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

109 

in royalties, but certainly well over $60 million went to the oil companies in windfall profit last year. 

That’s not all. there is now a real possibility that $3.37 will not be the price, but rather it will be $5, 

perhaps $6. It is distinctly possible that there may be an addition to those windfall profits of at least $2 a 

barrel. And that would mean a further additional extra profit of $150 million in one year. 

 

Now some people try to tell us that we should be happy about this increase in oil prices. They tell us that 

it represents extra wealth for Saskatchewan. Well it should mean extra wealth for Saskatchewan, but 

under present arrangements it doesn’t mean that. And here’s why. 

 

Suppose we assume that all these royalties that I spoke of, either Crown or private, came back to 

Saskatchewan, and we know well that most of the private royalties don’t. But even if we counted that 

money as money coming back to Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan would only get 15 cents of every dollar 

of increase. But we consume about 25 per cent as much as we produce; therefore, every time the price of 

oil goes up we have to pay 25 cents on the dollar of the increase and we get back in royalties only 15 

cents. Under present arrangements the higher the price, the poorer we get. But someone will say, “Ah! 

but think of the extra money that the oil companies make and they will spend all that extra money in 

development in Saskatchewan.” Well it’s simply not true and I will show you that. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . royalties? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I am very sure that the Liberals don’t believe that story. They have very good 

grounds for not believing it because when they were the government it didn’t happen. When they were 

the government the major profits made by the international oil companies went out of this province in 

their tens and hundreds of millions of dollars and only a pittance was spent on development, only a 

pittance was spent on exploration. And all I can say is that we are not doing any better than they did with 

respect to exploration. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Worse. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The oil companies have already made large windfall profits. Further increases in 

prices due to world oil politics could result in further windfall profits. 

 

The Members opposite have had seven years to give us the benefit of their ideas. The Members opposite 

have illustrated to the people of Saskatchewan what they would do about all of these problems for seven 

years and for seven years I think we heard nothing from them except paeans of praise for the 

international oil companies. We are now saying that our policy, Mr. Speaker, is as follows: 

 

We will act through a series of measures, one being increased royalties and increased taxes, to capture 

for Saskatchewan people the profits flowing from the unearned increments in crude oil prices. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

110 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We will have a base line for the prices which have prevailed over the immediate 

past period, and over and above that base line we will act to recapture for the people of Saskatchewan 

the great bulk of those unearned profits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — And we make no apology for securing for the public these windfall profits. They 

properly belong to the people of Saskatchewan and these profits are needed to allow us to control 

wholesale prices of gas and oil in Saskatchewan and allow us to spend more on oil exploration. 

 

We will use part of the proceeds of these windfall profits to control wholesale prices of gas and oil in 

Saskatchewan. We will be very interested in knowing whether or not Members opposite agree that the 

wholesale prices of oil in this province should be controlled, because, Mr. Speaker, they are going to 

have an opportunity to vote on this issue and we are going to be very interested to see how they vote. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that most of the oil and gas used in Saskatchewan 

comes from Alberta crude oil, and if prices of Alberta crude rise, our refineries would have to charge 

more because their feed stock would cost more. We, therefore, must act to freeze the cost of the feed 

stock going into the refineries. This we propose to do. Subject to minor adjustments to cover increased 

operating costs, wholesale prices of gas and oil would thus be effectively controlled. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we have no wish to see Saskatchewan people paying 75 cents a 

gallon for gasoline, 45 cents a gallon for heating oil, as may well be the case in other parts of Canada. 

We don’t want to see people in this province scrambling for oil and gas. We don’t want to see headlines 

like this applying to us — “Easterners Shop for Gas.” We don’t want that to be — “Saskatchewan 

People Shop for Gas.” We don’t want to see headlines like — “Fuel Prices Jump.” This one says — 

“East of Ottawa Gasoline at 64 cents to 75 cents.” We don’t want that to happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We don’t want to see headlines like this in Saskatchewan — “Gasoline and Oil 

Prices Increase in the East.” No doubt there may be modest increases but we don’t want to see this 75 

cent gasoline. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, with the oil under our feet, oil which we own, a price of 75 cents a gallon for 

gasoline is just too much. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

111 

MR. BLAKENEY: — And we are going to be very, very interested to see how Members opposite, who 

are now applauding, vote on the measures: which will be necessary to make this happen. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Further details of these policies will be outlined by the appropriate Ministers 

when the legislation is introduced. 

 

Let me now turn to principles 5 and 6: 

 

5. The returns from producing lands owned by farmers and other small holders of freehold acreage 

should not be disturbed; 

 

6. Oil exploration in Saskatchewan should be stepped up over the low exploration levels of the past 

several years. 

 

Let me deal first with exploration. Members opposite say that they have the magic formula for 

exploration and wondering why we aren’t somehow getting all this exploration going. They must have 

learned the magic formula only recently since they didn’t have it in 1970 and 1971. It is sometimes said 

that we must see that the oil industry makes big profits, otherwise they won’t have any money for 

exploration. I don’t know whether this makes sense on a world basis. It may be that someone could say 

that the international oil companies on a world basis have to make a profit or they won’t explore. But I 

say this, it makes no sense in Saskatchewan terms; it makes no sense in Saskatchewan terms for us to 

pay high prices and make big profits for the international oil companies . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . all based on some distant hope that they may spend some of that money in 

Saskatchewan on exploration. Some may say that the oil companies have a right to a fair profit and we 

agree with that, but it depends on what you call fair, Mr. Speaker. Between 1970 and 1972 the profits of 

Imperial Oil ant up from $105 million to $151 million. Up $46 million — 44 per cent. Shell’s profits 

didn’t go up 44 per cent, they went up 55 per cent. Gulf’s profits didn’t go up 55 per cent, they went up 

64 per cent. Texaco’s profits didn’t go up 64 per rent, they went up 75 per cent. In two years, in two 

years, Mr. Speaker, profits up 41 per cent, 55 per cent, 64 per cent, 75 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

performance. And I want to tell you this, Mr. Speaker, these were comparisons between 1970 and 1972. 

We haven’t yet seen the effects of the windfall profits of 1973 when the well-head price of oil went up 

nearly $1.00 a barrel. Their 1973 figures will indeed be impressive. I think nobody, not even the 

Members opposite, need feel sorry for the profits of the oil companies and nobody need jump to the 

defence of their windfall profits. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the oil industry in this province has invested up to now about $2.3 

billion and they have taken out of this province in revenues about $3.1 billion. Now considering these 

figures only, the oil industry in this province has made a gross profit of $800 million. 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

112 

Now even if I overstate these figures a little bit, they have made a profit of at least $500 million. Mr. 

Speaker, they reached payout — they broke even — in 1964, so since 1964 they have made over $500 

million in profits. What did they spend in exploration? In 1965 they spent about $44 million; in 1966 

about $33 million; in 1967 about $44 million; in 1968 about $44 million. But what happened, Mr. 

Speaker, after 1968? What happened after 1968? Down! 1969 — $32 million; 1970 $21 million; 1971 

$19 million; 1972 up to $21 million again: 1973 probably $19 million or $20 million. So, since 1967 

under Liberal Governments and New Democratic Governments the oil industry has spent very little 

money on exploration in this province. If a profit of $500 million in 1964 causes the oil industry to cut 

back its oil exploration by 50 per cent, what kind of a profit do they need to expand their oil 

exploration? I don’t know what it is, but as the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) says, it 

boggles the mind. It will be billions of dollars rind whatever it is it is too high. and we are not going to 

pay it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Very clearly, Mr. Speaker, the amount of profit that the companies make has 

little or nothing to do with how much exploration they do and that’s understandable, because they take 

their profits and they explore where they think it is best. They explore in Alaska and they explore in the 

North Sea. That makes sense for them, but it doesn’t make any sense for us. Can they guarantee that 

Alaska oil will be available for Saskatchewan farmers in 1990? They cannot! Can they guarantee that 

North Sea oil will be available for Saskatchewan farmers in 1990? They cannot! Therefore, some of that 

tens and hundreds of millions of dollars has got to be spent here in Saskatchewan so that we can 

guarantee that there will be oil for Saskatchewan farmers in 1990. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We intend to see to it that some of these millions of windfall profits are spent to 

increase oil exploration in Saskatchewan, are spent to find oil for the people of Saskatchewan, for 

Saskatchewan farmers, for Saskatchewan consumers in the 1980s and the 1990s. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that we do not propose to disturb the position of farmers 

and other small holders of freehold acreage. Is it they who are making the tens of millions of dollars? It 

is the oil companies who are making these windfall profits. 

 

We believe that an oil policy such as I have outlined will protect the people of Saskatchewan, will 

protect them from being out of oil ten or fifteen years from now, will protect from paying sky high 

prices next year and the year after that, will protect them from having their resources exploited for the 

benefit of the international oil corporations. We believe the people of Saskatchewan will support that 

policy and we are going to invite all Members of the House to support that policy, we are going to invite 

all Members of the House to support the legislation which enacts this policy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 4, 1973 

 

 

113 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We will be very interested in seeing whether Members opposite examine the 

legislation to find some reason to vote against the legislation and to side with their long time friends and 

financiers, the international oil companies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We have not long to wait I am happy to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I leave this discussion on energy make one small, parenthetic comment. Ten years 

ago, New Democrats called for a publicly owned national oil pipeline going east to Montreal. No action 

was taken, today we have crisis. If we do not act on a national power grid it is possible that in five or ten 

years we are going to have a similar crisis with respect to electric power. I call on the Federal 

Government to act now to launch a national electric power grid extending all across Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Saskatchewan will co-operate fully in planning such a grid and will welcome 

proposals to use Canadian electric power for the benefit of all Canadians. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have touched only on energy, there are a good number of other 

aspects of the Speech from the Throne which deserve comment and explanation and accordingly I beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 o’clock p.m. 


