



















































Hansard: April 17, 1973


2800 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Seventeenth Legislature 

59th Day 
 

Tuesday, April 17, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — (Morse) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to introduce to you 

and through you to the Members of this House 14 grade twelve students from the high school at 

Eyebrow. They have had a very busy day I understand starting out this morning at 10:30. They toured 

the Computer Centre in the Administration Building and spent some time over at the RCMP Barracks. 

They are accompanied this afternoon by their teacher, Mrs. Agnes Wilson, bus driver, Mr. Depper. I 

understand that Mrs. Depper is along this afternoon as well. 

 

I should like to sincerely welcome them here this afternoon and I hope that they enjoy the proceedings. I 

understand that I shall have the privilege of meeting with them around 3:15 and I am looking forward to 

that. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down, I should like at this time – I believe this will probably be the 

last group of students which will be coming from the Morse constituency during this Session – to thank 

your secretary, Mrs. Armstrong, for all the work which she has done in making the arrangements and the 

tours for the students which certainly has helped make my job much easier and has certainly been a 

benefit to the students who have come in to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. P. Mostoway: — (Hanley) Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a group of students to introduce right now, 

but I should like to go on record that a group of students from Allan School visited the building this 

morning and thoroughly enjoyed themselves. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J. E. Brockelbank: — (Saskatoon-Mayfair) Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity 

along with the other Members to welcome to this Chamber a group of students from Vincent Massey 

School in Saskatoon-Mayfair constituency. I understand that they are accompanied by Mr. Wensley, 

their teacher. They are grade seven students, 37 in number. I hope they find this day interesting. Since 

this is private Member’s day, they’ll probably see a greater variety of material coming before the House 

than they would on some other days. I am sure that all Members here will join with me in extending a 

welcome to these students from Vincent Massey School and wish them a safe journey back to 

Saskatoon-Mayfair. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2801 

QUESTIONS 
 

Land Title Forms 
 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 

question to the Premier. I understand that in the House last night information was given in response to 

questions by the Opposition that the rules, regulations and policy have been changed so that when the 

Land Bank registers sales in the Land Titles Office, the true consideration or the price of the land does 

not now have to be put on that document. We have been told many times when we have asked for 

information in this House regarding the price paid by the Land Bank to pay 50 cents and go down to the 

Land Titles Office and the information would be available to anyone. If this is a fact, then we now have 

one set of rules for the general public and one set of rules for the Government. First, I should like to ask 

if this is a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I believe that information which comes out in committee should not be raised 

on Orders of the Day. I think it can be raised in Estimates of that department. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It wasn’t in debate, Mr. Speaker, it was just a statement made. I don’t know whether it 

was made in error. I should just like to have it clarified if that is a fact. I am asking the Premier if this is 

a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would say that information that comes out during debates in committee proceedings 

should be debated at that time or if Members want further information, they could put a motion on the 

Order Paper if they wish to debate it fully. I don’t think the Chair can permit discussion of what happens 

in debates in committee to come up on Orders of the Day. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this is discussion, this is just a question asked of the 

Premier or anyone in the Government to confirm whether or not this is a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe this was raised yesterday in committee and that is the time the committee 

should ascertain whether it is a fact or not. If they are not satisfied, put a motion on the Order Paper. I 

don’t think the Chair can permit debates on Orders of the Day on details of things that happen in 

committee. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, there are two points. First of all this isn’t detail, it is a pretty key policy 

change. The Premier, I understand, wasn’t here last night and neither was the agriculture critic. It is a 

very key question. It is just a matter of clarification, is this or is this not the policy, that’s all the Leader 

of the Opposition asked. 

 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, I quite frankly don’t know the answer to the question. 

But may I point out something that is pretty obvious to the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) – 

unless my memory 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2802 

plays me tricks – there are two standard forms of land transfer, one where the transferee is an individual 

and one where the transferee is a corporation. When the transferee is a corporation there is no affidavit 

of true consideration at any time. As I say, unless my memory is playing me tricks, that’s the situation. I 

think, again, I am not aware of any form being used which is not a perfectly standard Land Titles form 

for the Land Bank. However, I do say that the matter can be pursued when the Land Bank Estimates are 

before the House. I am not aware of anything that is out of the ordinary at all. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It was the Minister of Agriculture that made the statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I cannot permit debate on this question. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Then I’ll ask a supplementary question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think this could be debated back in Estimates. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It is not a debate. Surely, it is a vital matter to this House. What I am saying is that the 

Government has been deceitful with the people, they have misrepresented their policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — My question is to the Premier. When will they tell the Opposition and the public what 

they paid for this land? When are they going to quit hiding the facts and tell the public? I direct that to 

the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have to rule those questions out of order at this time. They can be raised in the 

Estimates and not on the Orders of the Day. That is not what this period is intended for. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Surely, this period is intended to find out information. Surely, that is the object of this 

period. If the Government wants to hide behind the majority and behind your ruling, I can’t stop them. 

I’d like to know . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The rule book says quite plainly that when questions are asked on Orders of the 

Day they are seeking information and not seeking to give information. We can get into a debate here 

which does not pertain to this order of business. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — When can I ask for information? When is the Government going to tell the public how 

much they are paying for the land they are buying through the Land Bank? They have lied to us, they 

have been deceitful, they have misrepresented . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2803 

Mr. Messer: — In answer to the Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I can’t permit this matter because it is out of order to start with. Two wrongs 

don’t make a right. 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) The whole matter may well have been approached in a 

more proper and somewhat different manner before the House. I think the question that we are really 

trying to find out is, can the Government explain to us how it discovered that there were two forms for 

the Land Titles Office after we had raised this point in the House? They told us, Mr. Speaker, as you 

will recall, that we only had to take 50 cents out of our pocket, go down . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your question? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I am merely backgrounding my question, Mr. Speaker. The question is this. They 

suddenly, according to the Premier, point out that there are two forms in the Land Titles Act, one for 

corporations and one for non-corporations. They discovered that interesting little bit of news after we 

had drawn it to the attention of the House. We wonder if there is a change in policy . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I am on my feet. Will the Hon. Member take his seat. These questions are 

definitely out of order. I cannot permit this line of questioning at this time. It can be raised in the 

Estimates under the Department of Agriculture or it can be raised in the Estimates dealing with the Land 

Titles Office or others. It is not a question that should be dealt with on the Orders of the Day. 

 

Hon. E. I. Kramer: — (Minister of Highways and Transportation) Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition said that Members on this side had lied to him. If you are going to let him go, I am going to 

say there is not a bigger liar in this House than the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I realize Members make statements at times in the heat of their argument 

and I don’t think it is good to make issues of statements on these occasions. 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Additional House Sittings 
 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

move, seconded by the Hon. Premier (Mr. Blakeney) by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That on Wednesday, April 18, 1973, Rule 3(3) be suspended so that the sitting of this Assembly 

may be continued from 7:00 o’clock p.m. until 9:30 o’clock p.m. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2804 

QUESTIONS 
 

Half-Ton Truck Rates 
 

Mr. D. Boldt: — (Rosthern) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should really have liked to ask 

a question of the Minister of Finance but he is not in. I will direct my question to the Attorney General. I 

have in my hand a registration for a half-ton truck, gross weight 7,500 pounds. A good number of 

farmers have been advised by the licence issuers that they can register this truck at 7,501 pounds and 

then buy their licence plates for $25 less. As a matter of fact, one licence issuer in my constituency has 

information from the Department of Finance that this is possible. A good number of farmers have 

bought their half-ton truck licence plates for $40 or 45. Now I understand a directive has gone out 

asking these farmers to reimburse the issuing office with $25. Is this a fact? 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Attorney General) I will have to check into it to see exactly what the wording 

in the directive said. I do know that a directive has gone out drawing to the attention of all motor licence 

issuers the fact that there are for the first time two categories, the 7,500 pounds and under and the 7,500 

pounds and over in terms of registration for insurance purposes. This was not done by way of regulation 

at the time of the Automobile Accident Insurance rates, we did it subsequently. I asked the officials to 

issue a directive to advice all people involved. I should have to check into the exact wording of the 

directive in order to be absolutely sure what, in fact, is in it. I will so undertake for the Member and 

advise him as soon as I can. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — A supplementary. Will these people be charged extra now. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well the Order-in-Council is not made retroactive. The Order-in-Council is as of the 

time, making the differentiation of 7,500 under and 7,500 over, not retroactive. I am not sure whether on 

legal grounds we could. Certainly, I would have to check in the directive whether we are pursuing them 

in this area. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Is it fair to say then, I was honest and paid $70 and some will get away with $45? Is that 

right? 

 

Contracts for Hogs in Manitoba 
 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Agriculture. It appears that Saskatchewan is going to be associated with 

Manitoba in marketing hogs. I should like to ask him if Saskatchewan will be associated in any way 

with the disastrous contracts already made between Manitoba and Japan whereby the people there are 

getting about 36 cents for their hogs while producers here are enjoying a much higher price? 

 

Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker, I know of no such contracts. I know 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2805 

Manitoba has supposedly made a contract with Japan. I do not know that the price has been disclosed in 

regard to that contract. I don’t know how the Member opposite can refer to disastrously low prices. We 

assume that the formation of this agency will strengthen the price for hogs as they relate to producers. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — I should just as a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Incidentally, I have a 

newspaper report saying 36 cents, however, that is not my supplementary question. I should like to ask 

him if the producers will be informed in advance about the details and price of contracts that will be 

made in the future by this export board. 

 

Mr. Messer: — There will be liaison discussions with the producer both at the Natural Products 

Marketing Council level, at the Commission level and the overall agency level. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 19 – To Bring the Potash Industry Under 

Public Ownership 
 

Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University) moved, seconded by Mr. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to consider the feasibility of 

bringing the potash industry under public ownership. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we may be in some small way, establishing a precedent here. There have not been 

many occasions when back benchers have independently put forward motions on subjects which may, in 

part, be embarrassing to the Government or, at least, independent of government wishes at the moment. I 

plead guilty of setting that precedent and I hope thereby in some way to establish some valuable 

precedents in this House of the Legislature taking seriously its responsibilities to consider in detail 

policy developments in the general direction of government policy. 

 

Substantively, Mr. Speaker, I am making a plea for public debate about new resource development 

policies and, in particular, new policies for the potash industry. What I shall say, Mr. Speaker, may seen 

tedious to some who are aware of the basic facts of the industry and who are intimately involved in it. I 

don’t profess that at the end I am going to finish with a ringing solution to all the world’s problems or 

even all the problems of the potash industry. There will be many unanswered questions, there will be 

many loose ends which will remain to be talked about and discussed. I am of the firm belief as a 

politician that progress is basically a function of people understanding and moving on issues and that 

once people get some basic understanding of the issues then and only then can progress be made in 

implementing them and drawing up the blueprints and the details of how these new policies should be 

implemented. I don’t pretend as a back bench MLA to be able to give the detailed blueprint which 

would allow us to proceed along a new resource development policy in the potash industry. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2806 

Mr. Speaker, let me take a historical perspective on this. Let me go right back to 1914 when MacLean 

and Wallace, two federal geologists, reported in the Geological Survey of Canada about their analysis of 

the mineral content and sample of saline water found in some Manitoba sloughs. I quote their 

comments: 

 

The percentage of potash and the total solids is unusually high, much higher than in most of the 

waters which have been investigated for potash on this continent. 

 

To my knowledge that is the very first reference to potash in the western Canadian prairies. These two 

gentlemen then went on with a very telling little economic piece of analysis and I quote again: 

 

The fact that a powerful monopoly has been established in the potash industry renders it difficult 

to forecast the success of a venture in this field. 

 

Those words were spoken in 1914, Mr. Speaker, and the monopoly referred to was in France and 

Germany but in 1973 I would submit that the analysis holds all too true and that the cartel dominated by 

the multi-national potash companies and, in particular, by International Minerals and Chemicals 

Corporation again renders difficult and uncertain the future of new potash development policies in the 

province. 

 

After that nothing happened for 30 years until in 1943 accidentally in a deep hole for oil at the depth of 

7,500 feet potash was again discovered in south east Saskatchewan. Then in 1946 potash was discovered 

at 3,500 feet in north western Saskatchewan and finally something had happened. Finally potash had 

been discovered at a depth which was subject to commercial room and pillar mining techniques. In the 

late 1940s expensive mapping proceeded throughout Saskatchewan and it became realized by 1950 that 

Saskatchewan possessed the largest reserves of potash in the western world matched only by the 

reserves in the Soviet Union and even including the Soviet Union reserves we have at least 40 per cent. 

Then came the questions, Mr. Speaker, how, why, when to develop a potash industry in Saskatchewan. 

At that time the CCF Government considered the feasibility of a Crown corporation. Feasibility studies 

were commissioned in the new Department of Mineral Resources and apart from a very serious 

underestimation of the problems of penetrating the Blairmore formation the estimates were moderately 

accurate. 

 

The Cabinet of the day chose, however, not to proceed for two reasons. One, the CCF conceived its 

major concern to be in the people department, as it is sometimes called, health, education, welfare and 

not in the “thing” departments, minerals, natural resources, etc. This was perceived as putting too many 

eggs in one basket, it was perceived as not the high priority given the tasks to be accomplished in 

Medicare, for example. 

 

Then there was a second argument, the argument that this was too risky, was too big for a mere 

provincial government to undertake. What would happen, people said with hindsight, if the Provincial 

Government had gone into this venture in the early 1950s and experience all the trouble of penetrating 

the Blairmore formation, the trouble which PCA, the Potash Company of America, for example, 

experienced at its Patience Lake mine near Saskatoon. 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2807 

All of these arguments have some credibility, Mr. Speaker, and it is very easy with hindsight to say that 

the Government then should have proceeded with the development via a Crown corporation. However, 

the decision taken then not to proceed means that in some sense the CCF are as responsible as are the 

Liberals for the fiasco and the depression which later struck the potash industry, inasmuch as we 

absolved ourselves at that date from taking the responsibility for planning the development in the 

province. 

 

Now it is obviously common knowledge to all Members what happened thereafter. For three basic 

reasons there was a tremendous potash boom in Saskatchewan during the 1960s. The annual growth in 

demand for potash grew from something in the order of six to something in the order of 10 per cent in 

the middle 1960s. There were high expectations of large purchases for governments for foreign aid 

assistance in developing the agriculture of underdeveloped countries in the world. Third, there was the 

depleting of the United States’ reserves which made it seem increasingly necessary for developing 

Saskatchewan. At the peak of this boom in 1965 there occurred the symbolic event of the potash 

symposium in Saskatoon at which time Thomas Weir was quoted in his very famous quote, “Nothing 

but growth lies ahead.” Thomas Weir, as Members, I hope will remember, was the Chairman of the 

Board of International Minerals and Chemicals, the largest potash company in Saskatchewan and one of 

the international corporate leaders of the ‘60s. “We’re going to bring prosperity to Saskatchewan in the 

same way as the oil tycoons have brought prosperity to Alberta,” Thatcher, the Premier of the day, at 

that same symposium was quoted. I’ll repeat it again as it shows how far things have moved and how 

quickly. “The only thing wrong with American investment from Saskatchewan’s viewpoint is that in the 

past we haven’t been getting enough of it.” 

 

That was the continentalism which was rampant in the Liberal Party at that juncture and I suggest it is 

probably still rampant as the Members opposite see no danger in the unlicensed freedom they grant the 

large, primarily foreign corporations to come and develop our resources as they see fit. 

 

Potash in that year was selling for over $40 a ton in terms of K20 equivalent but 1965 was the last good 

year. By 1969 potash was selling below $20 a ton. Thomas Weir, the Chairman of the Board of 

International Minerals and Chemicals had been deposed in a management coup in early 1968 because 

his company was on the ropes of bankruptcy. The US Customs Bureau in 1967 had instituted a study of 

alleged dumping of Canadian potash in the United States and in that year, 1969, they had ruled that 

dumping had, in fact, occurred and the United States Tariff Commission proceeded to examine what 

kinds of penalties should be imposed on Saskatchewan potash. In that year we have Mr. Thatcher 

singing a very different tune from what he was saying in 1965. “Seldom in the economic annals of 

Canada have we seen such responsible companies get into such an economic mess.” And I quote this 

from a press conference given by the Premier in October of 1969. But it came from a situation in which 

the Premier said, “All we want is more,” and which Thomas Weir had said, “Nothing but growth lies 

ahead,” To a situation in which Thatcher is giving a Churchillian address about the worst possible 

economic mess that he had ever seen in his lifetime. Obviously, there had been over-investment, nearly 

$700 million had been invested by nine mining companies in ten mines. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2808 

Not at all blame, however, should be put onto the Liberals. At the time of the change of office in 1964 

five mines had been built or the intention to build had been announced. Four mines were announced 

since then. There is one great simple conclusion which I think inevitably must be drawn at this point 

before we proceed any further. It is foolishness that we can think that we can entrust our economic 

development to the experts of multinational corporations and that we can absolve ourselves from the 

great and difficult job of market analysis, of planning and public risk taking. We cannot put all the risks 

on the private corporations because that is never where they stay. 

 

What did happen, Mr. Speaker, given this situation which had developed by 1969? Senator Montoya of 

New Mexico was threatening to impose tariffs on Saskatchewan potash. Washington was threatening all 

kinds of manoeuvres and accordingly Duval and IMC began the process of persuading the Saskatchewan 

Government to enter into a cozy little relationship which has gone under the name of the Potash 

Conversation Board. It might better be known as the Cartel Conservation Board. With negotiations 

among the potash companies, Premier Thatcher and Governor Cargo of New Mexico arrived at the 

formula whereby Saskatchewan potash production was restricted in aggregate for each individual mine 

in which a floor price was established at $33.75 per ton K20 equivalent as opposed to the then ruling 

price which was in the order of $20 a ton. In effect, the customers, the farmers who purchased fertilizer 

were being made to bear the brunt of the foolish and unwise decisions made by the potash companies in 

these mines. The price was set, production controlled so that the companies could earn a rate of return, 

so that their shareholders could earn a rate of return at the expense, of course, of farmers having to pay 

higher prices for fertilizers. 

 

There is a great deal more that should be done in analyzing what has been the impact of the Potash 

Conservations Board which was established. The name is joke in some sense – using reserve figures 

involving solution reserves we have got supplies and current rates of production adequate for the order 

of 20,000 years. The name, of course, was used to try and get around the constitutional problems by 

implying that we were dealing with conservation. The only conservation going on here, Mr. Speaker, 

was the conserving of the shareholders’ equity of these corporations, most of which were foreign. Mr. 

Speaker, the results were, one, the curtailment of Saskatchewan potash production to 50 per cent of mine 

capacity while the world mines have operated at 80 to 90 per cent capacity in the United States and in 

Western Europe. The growth since then has been five per cent annually compared with something in the 

order of 15 per cent annually. We have had the shimmer of the date of equality between supply and 

demand retreat further and further into the distance. With the realization of this problem in 1967 and 

1968 people first prophesied that the problem would be over by 1972 or 1973. You now read industry 

documents and they are predicting that it won’t be over by 1980. There was the first problem. 

Saskatchewan production was curtailed to 50 per cent of capacity while New Mexico mines and those 

mines in Europe continued to operate at full capacity. Because of the price increase it became 

increasingly probably that these New Mexico mines could continue to mine their low grade ore for a 

good deal longer than some of the more optimistic predictions that were earlier stated about their 

demise. 

 

The second result was, of course, a loss of off-shore sales 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2809 

which peaked at 29 per cent of sales in 1968 and fell to 20 per cent in 1970. Since then they have, of 

course, recovered considerably up to 26 per cent of sales in 1972. Sales in aggregate, however, are 

basically stagnating despite some good news such as the record sales as announced by the Minister of 

Mineral Resources for March 1973. Sales for 1972 were exactly equal to the sales for 1971, 4.1 million 

as opposed to 4.0 million tons of K20 equivalent. However, perhaps the most important veil to try and 

pierce is the financial veil. This Cartel Conservation Board was defended on the basis that it was 

necessary to prevent the bankruptcy of companies and according to the Department of Mineral 

Resources the price level only just allows for break even by the companies. However, very serious 

questions must be posed in this respect. It is public knowledge that there has been an increase in sales 

revenue from potash to the companies given the increase in price. In 1969 sales revenue, $69 million; 

1970 sales revenue, $116 million; 1971, $146 million; off marginally in 1972 at $143 million. But is this 

Cartel Conservation Board set up just allowing these companies to survive or perhaps is there some very 

handsome profit-making going on? Who can tell? There is only one company for which we have any 

financial data publicly available and that is International Minerals and Chemicals Corporation which 

under new legislation passed federally has had to report on its profit figures. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, one can’t be particularly optimistic about that situation. The companies, 

according to federal law are supposed to report within six months of the close of their financial year 

which in the case of IMC is June 30. Therefore, we should have had publicly available by now the 

annual report for the year 1971-72. When I checked on this two weeks ago it hadn’t been released, it 

hadn’t been received by the federal department involved. I would challenge IMC as to whether it has 

since then tabled its annual returns for IMC in Ottawa and whether it is willing to come forward with 

what, in fact, were its financial statistics for its operating year 1971-72. For in the year 1970-71 there 

were some very interesting results. IMC business activity is 90 to 95 per cent the potash which it sells 

through its mine in Saskatchewan, that is, 90 to 95 per cent of the business which this company conducts 

in Canada originates at its Esterhazy mine. IMC, of course, is a multinational corporation with its 

facilities in many countries. But in Canada in 1971 it had sales of $44.6 million, its declared earnings 

before income tax and extraordinary items $17.6 million for a profit rate of sales to revenue of 40 per 

cent. It had income taxes that year of $6.3 million of which all but a nominal $1,000 were deferred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe there is a great deal that is not revealed in the report which is tabled, maybe I am 

misrepresenting the financial situation of the potash industry, maybe it is staggering on the verge of 

bankruptcy as Premier Thatcher alluded in 1969 but the one concrete piece of financial data which we 

have available in the form of an actual tabled financial statement in Ottawa would indicate otherwise. 

This data would indicate that the Cartel Conservation regulations have made something very handsome 

in terms of rate of return to the potash industry. I should like to see not only the 1972 results for IMC but 

the results for many of the other potash companies which, because of the lack of corporate reporting 

laws which are in existence both in Saskatchewan and other provinces and in Ottawa, means that these 

companies can keep hidden their financial data. 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2810 

That surely would be something in which the Members opposite would be actively supporting. 

 

The fourth aspect we have examined is what has been the provincial return from the potash industry. 

Before last year’s imposition of the pro-rationing fee, we were only earning two to three per cent even 

with the pro-rationing fee which raises provincial revenues to $7 million. We’ve only got five per cent 

return to the Province from sales of these companies. That, of course, does exclude corporate income 

taxes but given the amount of deferments going on it is highly dubious how much income tax the 

Federal Provincial Governments are garnering from the potash industry. 

 

I think it is a very nice and simple illustration of the points which Kierans has made so powerfully in his 

report recently published by the Manitoba Government. Provincial Governments are being taken to the 

cleaners by resource development companies and we haven’t mustered the expertise or the political 

fortitude to challenge them in any serious way. In fact, the revenues that we have achieved are not net 

revenues. They must be offset by the various subsidies, one of which is the three year federal tax holiday 

to mining companies, another of which is the notoriously low rates for water negotiated by Members 

opposite when they were in power for water to be supplied to the potash companies by the 

Saskatchewan Water Supply Board. Because of these low rates negotiated this is part of the explanation 

for this Crown corporation having run up a $2 million deficit since its initiation in 1968. 

 

In conclusion to this section, Mr. Speaker, another very obvious and simple point must be hammered 

home. If we are to have new development policies, one of the keys to their success is whether the 

provinces thereby can earn large sums of money which we can use as provincial revenues to finance 

other needed kinds of development be it social services or subsidizing farmers to maintain them on the 

land. 

 

We need to have a redistribution of the benefits from resource development industries. It is not good 

enough to have two or three per cent, it is not good enough to have four or five per cent return from 

these industries. We must be prepared to challenge the corporate power of these mining companies so 

that the people of Saskatchewan earn the profits from them and that these profits accrue to the people 

through their Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the time that the Cartel Conservation Board was initiated in 1969, Woodrow Lloyd had 

the following terse comment. 

 

It is not the responsibility of the Saskatchewan Government to make the world safe for potash. 

 

I think Woodrow’s comments very aptly sum up what, in fact, the Members opposite had done by the 

creation of the Potash Conservation Board. IMC, of course, would disagree. In a glossy little pamphlet 

they put out last year they have nothing but glowing praise for the Cartel Conservation Board. 

 

These regulations (referring to the regulations of the Potash Conservation Board) serve as one of 

the world’s outstanding examples of industry-government co-operation. They have made 

possible the orderly exploitation (good word, that) of Canada’s mineral resources to the benefit 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2811 

of everyone assuring the world a stable supply of potash at fair prices. They have provided 

steady employment to those concerned with its production and distribution and have offered the 

prospect of increasing income to the companies and governments concerned. 

 

That, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, is hogwash. 

 

Certain stability of employment in aggregate I suppose has been maintained, although it has been poorly 

distributed throughout the province, given the obvious facts of the collapse of employment at Esterhazy 

itself. 

 

The Liberals have defended the Conservation Board with their honest colonialism as I have referred to 

in talking about the oil industry. 

 

The Liberals’ position is that nothing better can be done, that it is impossible for us to seriously 

challenge the power of these companies, that it is impossible to strike a better deal for the people of 

Saskatchewan, that we should be content that we don’t have financial disaster and all the mines closing, 

we should be grateful to the potash companies for keeping open their mines. 

 

What was the experience, Mr. Speaker, as we lived through the Potash Conservation Board in the last 

several years? There was initially a very complicated A plus B formula in which every company was 

guaranteed sales up to 40 per cent of its capacity with supplementary B quotas dependent in some sense 

on the ability of the companies to gain markets. 

 

Well, there was cheating all around. Never have I heard, in talking to managers of the potash companies, 

more enthusiastic denunciation of private enterprise. Each manager is full of stories about how 

everybody else is cheating, how everybody else is trying to compete by lowering the price. They, of 

course, are dutifully following the letter and the spirit of the regulations but those so and so’s, those 

other mines they were hiding things, giving hidden discounts. They were competing. My goodness 

gracious me. And even the Hon. Premier found that he had to compete. Even the Hon. Premier found 

that he had to cheat in order to save the situation, thus in a fascinating letter in 1970 written to a 

Japanese importer, the Premier offered potash on the basis of 70 per cent of the floor price and 30 per 

cent at $22.95 a ton. We even had cheating by Premier Thatcher who had to violate his own regulations 

which he had established giving a floor price. It wasn’t a very optimistic situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had arrived at the situation in 1972 that the companies which had some access to markets had 

achieved disproportionate capacity. Central Canada in 1971-72 produced at 71 per cent of capacity as 

opposed to Silvite and Kalium down at 47 per cent. Kalium, in particular, protested. Kalium requested 

flat formula based solely on capacity which is what was instituted in the summer of 1972. 

 

However, at this point Central Canada protested. Central Canada which is 51 per cent Noranda and 49 

per cent CF Industries, CF Industries being a conglomerate of mid-western United States co-ops. Central 

Canada had the mining expertise of Noranda, ironically a Canadian company and the market potential of 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2812 

CF Industries in order to garner a very large and healthy market. But under the new regulations Central 

Canada was cut back from 71 per cent to approximately 52 per cent and in an attempt to create the 

maximum embarrassment to the NDP proceeded to lay off over 100 employees during the Federal 

election from their mine at Colonsay. And it resulted in the NDP finding itself in an ironic situation 

because we had failed to develop a potash policy and program of having to go to the courts to defend the 

cartel against an attack on it by Central Canada. 

 

This cartel which had been established by multi-national corporations spearhead by Duval and IMC for 

the benefit primarily of the American potash producers was being attacked not by us but by a Canadian 

mining company outside the cartel. And we found ourselves, because of our failure to develop programs, 

in the unhappy position of defending the cartel. I quote, for example, from the Hon. Minister Thorson at 

the time: 

 

The Provincial Government will strongly oppose attempts to break the prorationing scheme if 

even one company violates the quotas. The result could well be the closure of some mines and 

massive layoffs as chaos and low prices return. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have reached a dead end. We didn’t have potash policies. We had Premier Lloyd’s 

statements in opposition to the cartel. We had the Leader of the Opposition, Lloyd, talking in general 

terms about the desirability of a marketing board. We had an NDP program which in 1971 called for an 

end to the present government collaboration with the potash cartel that restricts Saskatchewan in 

providing jobs. All of that was good, it was opposition to the cartel but it was analogous to the 

opposition to the Meadow Lake Pulp Mill. It was a negative policy. It was calling for an end to 

disastrous policies but never stated what should be the positive alternative and what, in fact should be 

the positive alternative. 

 

One suggestion has been joint ventures, that the Provincial Government buy up the shares presumably 

on a minority basis in some of the mines. There are advantages to such a move as a relatively easy way 

to gain access into the industry and learn more about its financial and operating characteristics. There is 

one very strong argument against joint ventures. If the ventures are negotiated at a price which is 

satisfactory to the private corporate shareholders, the private companies will capitalize what they 

consider to be their returns and the people in paying the high price for these shares will not gain any of 

the benefits which are needed from a new policy. I would repeat, the problem of mushy bargaining 

which has plagued so many joint ventures in the past, not excluding Intercon. 

 

Another option is that of the marketing board. A marketing board which would presumably have the 

power to engage in all transactions and would sell all Saskatchewan potash. It was obviously favored by 

Woodrow Lloyd. There are advantages to it. It is in the tradition of provincial concern about orderly 

marketing, about public agencies taking the responsibility to develop, discover, find and locate markets. 

It too, as with the joint ventures, would allow more direct government participation in the industry in 

order to learn more about its nature. Another advantage, it would deny to Can Potex the contracts which 

they will be developing in the most lucrative markets in the Far East. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2813 

Can Potex, Mr. Speaker, is a private consortium of private companies which is trying to rectify the 

situation of the disastrous off-shore sales and assure to the private companies that they maintain their 

contracts and that they have the access to new developing markets. 

 

I would submit that a prerequisite for a new policy would be that the Provincial Government develop 

these contracts, that the Provincial Government learn about the potential of long run sales to Japan, 

China and other countries which are going to be needing increasing supplies of fertilizer. Certain 

analogies are obvious to the recently announced joint Manitoba-Saskatchewan Hog Marketing 

Company. 

 

There are negative aspects involved in the joint ventures route. It would have increased industry 

opposition and there is also the very interesting entangled constitutional problems of whether we would 

be guilty of interfering in federal jurisdiction in the matters of interprovincial and international trade. 

 

The third basic option, Mr. Speaker, is that implied by the NDP program and that implied by my motion 

which says: 

 

Urging complete public ownership of the potash industry. 

 

The NDP program and I quote: 

 

The NDP Government will consider the feasibility of bringing the potash industry under public 

ownership. 

 

The key problem here, Mr. Speaker, is what kind of market can we guarantee if we challenge the 

multi-national companies? The success will be contingent on access to these markets. Two-thirds of the 

present potash from Saskatchewan is sold in the United States. What would be the reaction from Senator 

Montoya and the boys in Washington? Can we guarantee long run contracts with the Chinese and the 

Japanese in order to supplement and replace United States markets if necessary? These are questions 

which I cannot answer. These are the kind of questions which should be debated and I hope that 

Saskatchewan people do. 

 

It brings me to another question and that is the question of research in the potash industry. Saskatchewan 

and Canada, if we extrapolate as the largest potash industry in terms of capacity, have a pitiful level of 

research into economic matters and into technical matters. Whereas other countries have large potash 

institutes, we have failed to develop anything analogous. What little research has been done has 

primarily been done by officials of the Department of Mineral Resources and the Saskatchewan 

Research Council in Saskatoon. 

 

The Saskatchewan Research Council is dependent upon the good graces of the potash companies 

because it receives a large bulk of its financing from them. Accordingly, the Research Council lacks 

objectivity in its analyses. It has failed to explore with any degree of thoroughness problems which 

might be embarrassing to the company. One of these questions is that of safety. It has been alleged, for 

example, that there are potentially dangerous reefs which could contain gaseous matter near the Silvite 

mine analogous to reefs which caused explosions in mines in Germany. There has been no thorough 

research by the Research Council on this matter. In fact, the Research 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2814 

Council has been guilty of trying to suppress what little research has been done on this subject. 

 

There are many other obvious questions which I think people who have worked in this industry are fully 

familiar with. It has taken a long time and a long hard struggle to unionize the mines and still a number 

of them remain non-unionized. There have been repeated labor conflicts in the mines. And the 

Department of Mineral Resources has failed to perceive itself as the defender of the people’s interest in 

this industry or the miners’ interests but the Department of Mineral Resources officials have, by and 

large, conceived themselves as the representative of the mining companies faced with conflicts on the 

part of the public. There is a long and sordid history, for example, of the Department of Mineral 

Resources resisting labor involvement in mine safety inspection. 

 

There are environmental problems, in particular, I could quote, leaks from the Silvite, dykes into the 

surface and ground water system, other problems. As I said in the beginning, Mr. Speaker, I am trying to 

establish some precedents for this Legislature taking seriously the issues involved. I don’t pretend to 

resolve these marketing problems. But I submit if we are to have the answers, the Members of this 

Legislature and the people of Saskatchewan must take it upon themselves to talk and to discuss and to 

find the answers and we cannot leave the responsibility to any government bureaucrats. 

 

With that I would move that this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to consider the 

feasibility of bringing the potash industry under public ownership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, there has been some speculation on the 

reason for the dropping of this motion on April 10 without the usual courtesy of having it stood to a later 

date. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You can’t reflect on the previous actions of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Well, I have already reflected. I want to make my position clear with respect to this 

particular motion, Mr. Speaker, that I must be a seconder. This requires a seconder or it could not 

properly be considered by the Legislature according to the rules as they now stand. I believe it is fair, 

Mr. Speaker, to speculate upon this particular position and discuss it because we have on several 

occasions, in fact, on many occasions I have been one of those who felt somewhat frustrated by the rules 

as they now stand. I believe that this or any motion, Mr. Speaker, ought properly to have the right to be 

brought before this Legislature, have Members record their position on it without the necessity of having 

at least two Members concur to begin with by having their names stand as mover and seconder. When I 

was elected as a Member for Albert Park I certainly didn’t make it clear to the people, perhaps I didn’t 

properly understand that it was necessary to have some Member from some other constituency concur 

with me before I brought a matter to the Assembly. I am sure that this would be a matter of some 

disappointment not only to Members of the House but to people who 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2815 

elect Members to this House. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Did you have a seconder to your nomination? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Yes, I did. Now, Mr. Speaker, this brings to mind and in particular with respect to 

this motion, another difficulty as to the rules. The Government in each and every case forces all 

Members . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I should like to draw to the Hon. Member’s attention, at this time we are not debating 

the rules of the House, we are debating the resolution of which you have the pleasure to second and I 

wish we could bet to the resolution and not to the rules. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I recognize the anxiety of Mr. Speaker and others to restrict my right to 

speak here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I will ask the Hon. Member to withdraw that. The Speaker is not trying to 

restrict anyone’s right to speak. He is trying to keep the Members in order. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Perhaps, I should rephrase that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am asking the Member to withdraw. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I withdraw that, Mr. Speaker. If Mr. Speaker, would be kind enough to invite the 

Members on the opposite side of the House to contain their enthusiasm I could perhaps make my point 

far better and far more quickly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the point that I wished to make deals with the amendment to this particular 

resolution. Now there is no amendment to it, Mr. Speaker, but I think I have the right to draw the 

attention of the House to the fact that there is an invariable habit in the House to avoid facing up to this 

or other kinds of resolutions by the simple expediency of amending the resolution. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a point I believe ought properly to be dealt with . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I ask the Hon. Member to stay with the resolution. If he wishes to suggest that the 

rules should be changed then there is a way of doing it and I think the Members may co-operate with 

him on changing the rules. But at the present time we must abide by the rules that are the rules of this 

Legislature. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what I should like to know then is, and I hope that other Members 

will speak on this resolution, I propose to make my position fairly clear and directly. I will be voting 

against this motion. I do not intend to vote in favor of it for a number of reasons. The prime reason . . . 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. the Attorney General insists upon interjecting and insinuating into the debate 

without rising. I have 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2816 

no doubt that in a moment he will rise or get someone on his side of the House to rise and adjourn the 

debate thereby preventing effective discussion on the resolution. But I would invite the Hon. Members 

to give us an opportunity to discuss this calmly and reasonably. As the later Lyndon Johnson said, “Let 

us reason together,” it is very difficult in this atmosphere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I have said I intend to vote against the motion. I intend to do so without trying to 

avoid my responsibilities, without attempting to try to amend it and I encourage other Members to do the 

same. But I am opposed to an unproductive activity and Mr. Speaker the prime productive activity of 

this motion at the present time would be the employment of large numbers of planners and studiers and 

committees. Having seen the record of the Government in the past, its use of committees is nothing 

more or less than political activity at the people‘s expense. I am becoming less and less enchanted with 

the prospect of a committee being struck for the purpose of dealing with this particular motion. Mr. 

Speaker, as a result at this stage when potash development and investment has now almost reached a 

conclusion in the province, it is almost like locking the barn door when the horse has disappeared. This 

situation is now fairly static, the time to have moved this motion and to have proceeded with this kind of 

debate properly should have been in the early ‘40s and early ‘50s. Perhaps if the Government of the day 

had been on its toes, which it was not, it might well have made such a study and who knows what the 

result might have been. They may well have decided to leave it exactly as it is or maybe they would 

have decided to go into public ownership. The fact is they didn’t look at the problem at all. 

 

The first and initial failure with respect to this resolution is the failure of the CCF Government between 

1944 and 1964. Now it may well be regrettable that the Hon. Member for Saskatoon University was not 

a Member at that time because obviously the Government of that day needed a little prodding. But in 

any event the time has now long since passed when this assumes anything of priority and there are many 

things that this Legislature could do, many ways that planners could be involving their time, many ways 

that studiers could be working more productively than in this type of resolution. 

 

Now the result, Mr. Speaker, then is that such a resolution could involve meaningless political activity, 

the engagement of additional people without any worthwhile result at this stage. 

 

Now in closing my remarks I should like to compliment the Hon. Member for Saskatoon University 

(Mr. Richards) firstly, on his persistence in bringing this motion. It is a matter that he has obviously high 

in his priorities and I compliment him for insisting that it be brought to the House and I am proud to 

have participated in that democratic action. I also want to compliment him on his obvious research and 

industry and private enterprise shown by him in the work done to bring the facts before the House. I am 

not surprised, of course, because he has won our admiration on previous occasions, particularly his 

courage that he has shown heretofore compared with the military precision of obedience shown by other 

Members on the other side of the House. It makes him stand out in the field of courage, I would say like 

Native Dancer in a pasture of donkeys and I do compliment him. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2817 

I oppose the motion but I defend in every way his right to bring this resolution to this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Speaking to this motion, I should like to . . . 

 

Mr. E. C. Whelan: — (Regina North West) Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He wasn’t on his feet. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member from Shaunavon (Mr. Oliver) and the Member from Regina North West 

(Mr. Whelan) were on their feet at the start of the speech but the Member for Albert Park was on his feet 

and I recognized him as a seconder. It is not the discretion of the Chair. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Second Readings 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Steuart that Bill No. 65 – 

An Act to amend The Motor Dealers Act, 1966 (No. 2) be now read a second time. 

 

Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski: — (Minister of Consumer Affairs) Mr. Speaker, I thought I would say a few 

words on this so that the House is not left with the impression that we are not getting anything done here 

this afternoon. My comments are going to be brief. I believe the Leader of the Opposition, prior to his 

introducing or speaking on this amendment in second reading, knew that I was going to indicate that we 

were prepared to accept this amendment because we felt that it is a good amendment. I should like, 

though, to make a few comments on some of the comments that were made by the Leader of the 

Opposition in his second reading speech. First of all, he suggested by his amendment and I quote: 

 

We are suggesting this is in line with the philosophy of the five or six other Bills that we have 

introduced in the House in this Session. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where he gets that impression and I submit that is rather inaccurate. I 

also submit that certainly one would have to question which philosophy this amendment fits with, the 

philosophy of the Liberal Party in Opposition or the philosophy of the Liberal Party when it was in 

Government. Certainly, they seemed very little concerned at that time about individual rights and 

individual powers as the Leader of the Opposition indicated. But as that does not detract from the 

principle of the amendment I shall not say much more on that. 

 

I found it rather odd to read the comments in the Hansard transcript, Mr. Speaker, by the Leader of the 

Opposition when he spoke on this Bill when he very strongly indicated that it 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2818 

was to provide more power to the individual. I am not so sure whether it provides more power, Mr. 

Speaker, but it certainly does increase or provide certain rights for an individual motor dealer which he 

certainly should have and, in fact, has had, although it was not written in the statute books. If the 

Members opposite are so interested in the rights of the individual to be protected from the actions of 

civil servants, and they certainly should be, it is peculiar that they did not support the legislation which 

established the Ombudsman. There seems to be a lack of consistency in that as well. 

 

Now another comment that I should like to correct, Mr. Speaker, is that the Leader of the Opposition 

said that it didn’t require, and I am referring to The Motor Dealers Act of 1966 which was passed by the 

former Government and certainly was supported by both sides of the House, the Leader of the 

Opposition said it didn’t require that civil servants give them any reason. He just cancelled it and that 

was all. That’s not completely correct, Mr. Speaker, because in the legislation, and I am not so sure 

whether the Member meant it that way, but just for the sake of correcting it for the record, in the 

legislation which established the Act respecting motor dealers on motor vehicles, first of all, in section 

15 it says that the Registrar may suspend or cancel a licence on any grounds on which he may have 

refused to grant the licence or where he is satisfied that the licensee . . . and then there are a number of 

reasons given. Further to that in section 18, Mr. Speaker, it says: 

 

A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Registrar under sections 11, 12, 13, 15, 17 

may within 30 days after the date of the decision apply in writing to the Registrar for a hearing 

and thereupon the Registrar shall fix a date for the hearing not to exceed unless otherwise agreed, 

seven days from the date of the receipt of the application for the hearing. The Registrar shall 

within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing render a decision to the applicant or licensee in 

writing and he shall in his written decision give reasons . . . 

 

And so on, it continues. It also says in the Act under section 21, which the Member opposite referred to 

and I am certain he was correct in it, that there was recourse to the courts under the section, “appeal 

from Registrar’s decision,” it says in section 21. 

 

A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Registrar under section 11, 12, 13, 15 or 18 or 

19 may within 30 days from the date of the decision appeal to the judge of a Court of Queen’s 

Bench who may upon hearing the appeal make such other . . . 

 

And it continues on and I shall not repeat that because it is stated in the Act, Mr. Speaker. So to say 

without qualification that their licence was simply cancelled or the Registrar simply cancelled the 

licence and that was all is not exactly the case. I just wanted to correct that for the benefit of the record 

and this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now as I indicated when I initially began to make my remarks, we are, as a Government, prepared to 

accept Bill 65, an Act to amend The Motor Dealers Act, 1966, because we agree with the principle of it. 

In saying it, I want to make it very 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2819 

clear that all this is doing, and it is important that it does that, is that it established this principle in law. 

The practice has always been in the past that the motor dealer or one who wished to be, who made an 

application for licence, if that application was refused, did receive the reasons from the Registrar who is 

the Deputy Provincial Secretary. This has been the practice in the past I am told and simply what this 

does is put it in law in the statutes and I am certain there is nothing wrong in that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, most of our Acts as I have seen provide for a hearing with written reasons to be 

given by the Registrar just as The Motor Dealers Act does, so there has been some protection, a 

considerable amount of protection to motor dealers. The experiences that I have had, and I did some 

checking into this with the officials in the department, the experiences have generally been very good. I 

am told that there has never been a request for a formal hearing as provided in the Act, for example. So 

it seems to me that the events that have occurred over the years since 1966 when this Act was first 

passed indicate that things have been going well and that the decisions made have been based on very 

good reasons. 

 

In closing I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to support this Act as proposed by the 

Leader of the Opposition because we believe, in principle, that it is a good thing, it puts into law 

something that has already been in practice over the years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Well, Mr. Speaker, I just pointed out to the Member 

who just took his seat, the Hon. Minister, that it was their Government in the last 21 months that has 

taken unto itself the right to close down any business without a by your leave of the Cabinet, or of the 

Government, or of the Legislative Assembly or of the Courts. It is their Government who just finished 

ramming a compulsory Hog Marketing Commission down the throats of the hog producers without so 

much as a vote. Their Government is in the process of dismantling any real rights and privileges the 

University might have and I understand they are backing off that now and I hope they do. It’s their 

Government that brought . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I should like to remind the Hon. Member, the Leader of the Opposition, 

in closing the debate you can only answer what has been said in the debate, you cannot bring in new 

material. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, well, Mr. Speaker, if you listened to what the hon. gentleman said, he got up and 

he accused us when we were the Government and denied the claim that I made that the reason we were 

bringing in this Bill was to protect, to give some small protection to the individual. He said when he was 

talking that their Government had not taken away individual rights and our Government had. So I am 

just pointing out some of the mistaken points that he tried to put here. It is their Government that has 

been taking away the rights of the individual at a record pace in the last 20 months. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2820 

Regardless of that, I might also point out that when he talked about the appeal – they can apply for a 

hearing – and they can. Of course, they can, but there is no need and there is no requirement in the Act 

that the Registrar still can have the hearing. He can give them a decision in writing. He must given them 

a decision in writing about the results of the hearing. He still is not required to give them a decision in 

writing as to why he originally refused to give them the licence or why he originally cancelled their 

licence. So now this will do it. He says they are doing this. Well, I wouldn’t want to depend on the 

tender mercies of this Government too long with their track record so I am pleased they are going to 

support this. I hope that all the Members on both sides will support this particular Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 50 

Messieurs 

 

Blakeney Whelan Lange 

Dyck Kwasnica Feschuk 

Meakes Carlson Kaeding 

Wood Engel Steuart 

Smishek Owens Coupland 

Messer Robbins Loken 

Romanow Tchorzewski Guy 

Snyder Taylor Grant 

Kramer Matsalla Boldt 

Thibault Richards McIsaac 

Larson Faris Gardner 

Baker Cody Weatherald 

Brockelbank Gross MacLeod 

MacMurchy Feduniak McPherson 

Pepper Mostoway MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) 

Byers Comer Wiebe 

Thorson Rolfes  

 

NAYS — NIL 

Messieurs 
 

FIRST REPORT OF THE SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE 

ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND PRINTING 
 

Mr. D. M. McPherson (Regina Lakeview) moved, seconded by Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood), That the 

First Report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing be concurred in. 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I should like to bring this report before the House. 

 

1. Your committee met for organization and appointed Mr. McPherson as its chairman and Mr. 
Meakes as its vice chairman. 

2. Your committee held ten meetings and examined both the Provincial Auditor’s Report and the 
Public Accounts for the year ended March 31, 1972 with the Provincial Auditor (Mr. Lutz), two 

of his officers (Mr. Jacoby and Mr. Bucknall), the 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2821 

Comptroller (Mr. Kerr), and other officials of the Department of Finance. 

 

3. The committee reviewed the matter of sinking funds and recommended that the Provincial Auditor 
report to the Legislature annually as to whether individual sinking funds may be adequate or 

inadequate to retire the debt. 

 

4. Your committee discussed the matter of federal-provincial cost sharing agreements and notes the 
recommendation of the Provincial Auditor for reviewing the status of cost sharing agreements to 

ensure that claims are submitted at the earliest possible date. In addition the federal authorities 

should be pressed to hasten their review of these claims so that final settlement may be made as 

soon as possible. The committee recommends that there be a complete categorization of all such 

programs with an indication given as to the stage of completion of the various claims. Moreover, 

the committee recommends that cost sharing agreements be maintained at a status as nearly 

current as possible. 

 

5. Commencing April 1, 1968 the Provincial Auditor began charging on a fee-for-service basis for 
audit services provided to Crown corporations and certain other boards, agencies and 

commissions. The committee recommends that the Government provide legislative authority for 

the Provincial Auditor to charge such audit fees. 

 

6. Your committee is pleased to note that the revised consolidated Treasury Board Regulations for 
1972 have been issued and wishes to commend the department for their activity in this regard. 

Furthermore, the committee hopes that the department will continue its work in updating the 

Treasury Board Regulations and recommends that the Provincial Auditor report annually to the 

Legislature the status of the Treasury Board Regulations. 

 

7. Your committee recommends developing a uniform system of records and procedures to control 
public property and that Treasury Board issue regulations to Government departments and 

agencies immediately requiring such records and setting out procedures to be followed. In this 

way, the Government will have an up-to-date inventory control in every department and agency. 

 

8. In item 10(iv) of the Provincial Auditor’s Report it was reported that an advance payment of 
$12,000 was made without proper authority on February 3, 972 by the Department of Industry 

and Commerce on account of a printing order for 250,000 “Travel Guides, 1972”. The 

committee notes such action with strong disapproval and recommends adherence by all 

departments of the Government to the controls which are presently defined. 

 

9. The Public Accounts Committee of 1971 recommended that there should be uniformity in the 
reporting of trust and deposit accounts. The Public Accounts Committee of 1973 notes that 

certain trust or special funds have not been reported in Schedule “G” – Trust Funds, Special 

Funds and Suspense Accounts of Public Accounts – and accordingly recommends that such 

funds as the Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Fund (December 31, 1971) of $10,357,503 

be reflected in the aforementioned statement. 

 

10. The committee considered the suggestion that housing 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2822 

grants to individuals not be recorded in Public Accounts. However, your committee feels that the 

purpose of Public Accounts is to report any expenditure of public moneys and also notes that the 

Public Accounts Committee of 1967 recommended the reporting of grants individually when they 

are in the amount of $100 or more. Consequently, your committee recommends that the present 

practice of reporting grants be continued. However, consideration should be given to revising the 

structure of the Public Accounts text. 

 

11. Your committee has considered the matter of sessional printing and recommends as follows: (a) 
that 350 copies of the Journals be printed including therewith the “Questions and Answers” as an 

appendix; (b) that 400 copies of the Debates and Proceedings be multilithed with all convenient 

speed, one copy each to be supplied to Members of the Assembly; and (c) that 100 copies of the 

Minutes and Verbatim Report of the Proceedings of the Public Accounts Committee be 

multilithed with all convenient speed, one copy each to be supplied to Members of the 

Assembly. 

 

12. Your committee advised that copies of the Minutes and Verbatim Report of Proceedings of the 
Public Accounts Committee will be tabled as a Sessional Paper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that the committee worked long and hard and I should like to thank all 

these people, the auditors, our secretarial staff, for the excellent job they performed this year. The 

committee is getting more and more efficient at bringing the finances of the Province up to the way they 

should be with their recommendations. I am very happy to move this report, seconded by Mr. Meakes, 

the Member from Touchwood, that the First Report of the Select Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts and Printing be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw the Legislature’s 

attention to an illegality which was uncovered by the Provincial Auditor and referred to in his report and 

studied by the committee. The chapter mentioned and the clause mentioned by the report hardly does 

justice to the full extent and seriousness of that illegality. 

 

I refer specifically, Mr. Speaker, to an order which was given by the Government through the office of 

the Queen’s Printer, to Service Printing to print a quarter of a million brochures entitled “Travel Guide, 

1972” at a total cost of $28,894.32. Now despite the fact that those goods had not been received and no 

benefit apparent to the Province of Saskatchewan had been obtained, Service Printing typed up and 

printed a bill dated January 28, 1972 in which it requested an advance or interim payment of $12,000 

cash and submitted it to the Queen’s Printer in Regina. And the travels of that particular invoice on that 

particular day are worthy of some study because they are enlightening as well as disturbing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the 28th day of January, 1972, the invoice was prepared by Service Printing Company 

and it was sent to the Queen’s Printer. When it arrived at the office of the Queen’s Printer the Queen’s 

Printer then rerouted it as is the 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2823 

custom, rerouted it to the Tourist Branch for which these brochures had been ordered. The purpose of 

that travel to the Tourist Branch was to obtain the approval of the Tourist Branch for the payment of the 

$12,000. So that is the third step. On the same day, the 28th of January, this bill went, first of all from 

Service Printing Company to Queen’s Printer, then it was processed by the Queen’s Printer and then it 

went down to the Tourist Branch in the Department of Industry and Commerce where it was processed 

at that time by the Department of Industry and Commerce and it received a stamp by the Department of 

Industry and Commerce and a signature of the officer of the Tourist Branch responsible. That wasn’t all. 

It was then sent back down to the Queen’s Printer’s office. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Same day? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Same day. Again, on the 28th day of January, 1972. The Queen’s Printer then did its 

final processing. It said, “Printing Approved.” It received a stamp dated January 28, 1972 saying 

“Printing Approved, For Payment, Queen’s Printer”, and the signature of the proper officer of Queen’s 

Printer approving the payment. This invoice then, somewhat harried with its hustling around the city on 

that particular day, then went on to the Department of Industry and Commerce for the purpose of having 

a voucher on behalf of the Deputy Minister authorizing the actual preparation of a cheque prepared. And 

so on it went and it arrived at the office of Mr. Switzer with instructions that this account be paid. It was 

followed by a telephone call to Mr. Switzer telling him that this was going to be there on his desk and 

that he should authorize the payment. This telephone call was made from the office of the Queen’s 

Printer alerting Mr. Switzer and instructing Mr. Switzer that this account was urgent and should be paid. 

This, again, was on the 28th day of January. 

 

All of these steps occurred on the same date. Now Mr. Switzer was the Director of the Administration 

Branch of the Department of Industry and Commerce. He recognized that this was an illegal payment 

requested by the Queen’s Printer for Service Printing Company and Mr. Switzer refused to pay the 

account. Now there were some additional phone calls, there was a demand that MR. Switzer pay but he 

said he would not pay unless he had further authority and that authority had to come from the deputy 

ministerial level at the very least or the ministerial level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this payment was subsequently found to be illegal but I want to summarize quickly the 

nine steps, all of which occurred on the day which I mentioned – the preparation of the invoice dated 

January 28, the travel and the processing by the Queen’s Printer, the travel to and the processing by the 

tourist Branch, the travelling back to and the final processing by the Queen’s Printer, the travelling to for 

processing by the Department of Industry and Commerce, and the various telephone calls and the 

instructions to the Director of the Administration Branch requiring that he pay this account. But this 

gentleman refused to disobey the law, he refused to take it upon himself to do something which he knew 

was patently wrong and this held up and stalled the account. As a result, of course, the weekend 

intervened. That was Friday, so the weekend intervened until presumably the return of some person who 

was prepared to take upon himself the illegal payment of this account. And that 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2824 

occurred, not when the Deputy Minister was around because the authorization did not come from the 

Deputy Minister, and we are left to speculate on whether he too refused to countenance an illegality in 

the handling of the funds of the Province. 

 

In any event, on the 1st of February, 1972, in response to the requirements of the Director of the 

Administration Branch, Kim Thorson, the Minister of Industry and Commerce prepared and sent a 

memorandum authorizing this payment. This was directed to Mr. Switzer. He then, having had it in 

writing from the man right at the top and having been relieved of the responsibility of this illegal action, 

then processed, undoubtedly with reluctance, a payment which he knew to be wrong. 

 

And so on that day, these events occurred: First of all, the memorandum signed by the Minister of 

Industry and Commerce was rushed over to Mr. Switzer on the same date, February 1, and the 

Department of Industry and Commerce prepared the voucher directed to the Department of Finance 

directing the preparation of the cheque for $12,000. 

 

And this is a very interesting voucher indeed because it leaves no doubt at all about the urgency with 

respect to which this was to be treated. It had these words: 

 

Approved, Priority please, funds requested as soon as possible. 

 

And so that there would be no doubt whatsoever about the urgency with which Service Printing seemed 

to need the money, a rubber stamp appeared upon this particular payment which said, “Priority 

Voucher”. It almost seems that there was a fright upon some person, despite the word or two they had to 

emphasize the urgency – “approved, priority please, funds requested as soon as possible” and “priority 

voucher”. All of these separate notations upon the voucher requesting payment and all on that date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this was then rushed away to the Department of Finance and it was processed, at 

least in part, that day because formal approval was given to it because under the “Audit Approved” part 

it received this stamp, “Passed, February 1, 1972”. So the approval of the Minister, the preparation of 

the document by the Department of Industry and Commerce, the demand for urgent payment in that 

department and the processing of this voucher in the Department of Finance all occurred on that day. 

 

However, it may well be that there was some edge taken off the urgency, perhaps more than one person 

had some uneasy feeling. In any event, it was not paid until the 3rd of February. A matter, I might say, 

which virtually sets even at that something close to a record in the annals of the handling of vouchers in 

government circles. Certainly, people are accustomed to waiting for weeks and weeks for payment from 

government. It seems that despite a demand by an officer that he receive written approval, despite the 

hold-up of a payment because of its illegality, despite that by an officer of the Government, it was still 

paid, despite a weekend intervening, on the 3rd of February. 

 

I am led to quote from Mr. McIsaac’s remarks in the committee as they appear in the report. I quote: 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2825 

It is rather a remarkable example of expeditious treatment of an invoice, mailed from a firm in 

the city on January 28, apparently received in another building, it may have been delivered, then 

it went to a third office, the Department of Industry and back to the Queen’s Printer, four 

different steps and transactions in one period. It is rather remarkable. One would wonder if all 

invoices received that kind of expeditious treatment by Her Majesty’s mail. 

 

Truly, he was, with tongue in cheek, wondering about the tremendous speed with which this invoice was 

handled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious matter. It was, of course, ferreted out by the Provincial Auditor and he 

reported to the committee that this was an illegal payment under section 58 of The Department of 

Finance Act. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Wrong . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I don’t know whether the Member is saying that the Provincial Auditor was wrong. It 

may well be that the Hon. Members have failed to read or are afraid to read the report of the Provincial 

Auditor. But that was reported to the Public Accounts Committee and to the Members of this Legislature 

as being a transaction which was not authorized. It is an illegal transaction under section 58 of The 

Department of Finance Act. 

 

The report of the committee, in very gentle terms, condemns the activity of the Government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what has happened on numerous occasions is that we on this side of the House have 

condemned the Government for its almost thumb-to-nose treatment of the Opposition, for a 

thumb-to-nose treatment of the people of Saskatchewan, for its hand-in-the-pocket of the people of 

Saskatchewan. What this Government has done by this activity is, again, taken unto itself a profit of 

some $5,000 or $6,000 for its political party. It has done so without the least sign of embarrassment. It 

was done in the most open-handed banditry that I have ever seen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this should receive the condemnation of every Member of the House. It should receive the 

condemnation of each and every person in the Province of Saskatchewan because it is a flagrant 

violation of all honest treatment of the moneys of others, the moneys of the Province of Saskatchewan 

under trust handed over to the Government for proper and fair treatment. It is to be handled honestly. 

And what has happened is that this Government is simply and deliberately stealing money from the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This payment we completely illegal. We wonder why the Service Printing got government business in 

the first place. One now wonders if maybe Service Printing was not bailed out of a financial difficulty. 

We wonder if maybe Service Printing did not find itself, having subsidized the printing of many 

Members of the other side of the House during the last election, having found itself short of funds, was 

required to bail itself out at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the very urgency of the cheque on the 28th of January, 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2826 

Mr. Speaker, indicates a shortness of funds on the part of Service Printing. An officer of the Treasury 

stated the obvious when I questioned him on the reason for having such an urgency for money, the 

official said this: 

 

It is fairly obvious that the principal reason for priority is because people want money quickly. 

 

And the reason that Service Printing wanted money quickly, one might well assume, is because it may 

have had some financial obligations, such shortage of money arising out of subsidization of the 

Members opposite during the last provincial election. And since it occurred in the last provincial 

election, it is, no doubt, going to do the same and subsidize the printing of Government Members 

opposite in the coming election. And what is happening here today, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

Government with the people’s money is building up a fund with which to finance the election expenses 

of the Members opposite in the coming provincial election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is part of an overall scheme and we will see the rest of the scheme when we see the 

election expenses Bill shortly to be dealt with in this House. What the Government intends to do is 

blatantly use the people’s money, take this, fatten up its campaign. First of all, it has to fatten up what is 

a skinny treasury in Service Printing, otherwise they would surely not need money so desperately at the 

end of the month. But it is all part of the arrogant attitude of this Government, the determination of them 

to hold on to power at all costs and particularly at the cost of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And from the remarks I have heard in the past, they are definitely afraid of spending any of their own 

money and they have commented to that extent on more than one occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in receiving this report, and I will support the motion of the Hon. Member from Regina 

Lakeview (Mr. McPherson), it is to be noted that the report has slapped the wrist of the Government 

with respect to its illegal handling of this transaction. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this point should be 

emphasized, the Members should recognize that when they vote for the report that they are recognizing 

that it is a condemnation of the Saskatchewan and I think that it is not nearly severe enough. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes: — (Touchwood) Mr. Speaker, my first words in speaking to this motion are to say that 

I appreciate and I want to congratulate the chairman, the Hon. Member from Regina Lakeview. I believe 

he conducted the meetings of the committee in extremely able, and I was going to say, hurried, but I 

don’t mean it that way, I mean that he kept the meetings going and I want to thank him very much for 

his chairmanship of the meetings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I want now to turn to the remarks of the Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. 

MacLeod). I travelled with the Hon. Member last summer and I grew to have some respect for him, but 

after what I listened to today, I must say that I have a 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2827 

harder time to respect him. He, as usual, “MacLeoded” the issue, and if there was ever a tempest in the 

teapot, it was this one. 

 

The first words that I want to argue with is what he said about the illegality of it. I want to say that he 

quoted the auditor wrong and I want to read from the auditor’s report, the last paragraph of page 10: 

 

Therefore, it would appear that the payment of $12,000 was made without proper authority. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not a lawyer but there is a heck of a difference between proper authority and 

illegality and stealing, and these are some of the words that my hon. friend was using. I just think that he 

has downgraded, really downgraded, this House by using this kind of language. 

 

I said that he made a tempest in the teapot and I want to quote and try to prove that he made a tempest in 

the teapot. I shall quote from the verbatim of that day, March 21, page 156. He wondered about the 

speed of this payment and he went on and talked about this terrible urgency and he said, and I don’t 

want to quote him wrongly, that it was nearly a record in terms of getting the payment through. I am 

going to quote now, in part: 

 

Mr. MacLeod: What date was that voucher actually paid? 

 

Mr. Switzer: Well, it would appear from below that it was passed on February 2. It says “Audit 

Approved”. 

 

Mr. Meakes: Mr. Chairman, just on that point. I see these three stamps “Audited By”, “Audit 

Approved” and another one, “Checked Audit Three”. Whose stamps are those? Is that the Audit 

Department? 

 

The Chairman: Mr. Lutz, can you answer that? 

 

Mr. Lutz: No, it is not. 

 

The Chairman: Whose department is this? 

 

Mr. Lutz: I believe the Treasury Pre-Audit. Is that right, Mr. Kerr? 

 

Mr. Kerr: That is correct. 

The Chairman: Treasury Pre-Audit. Go ahead, Mr. MacLeod. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: Do I understand that this voucher, which was typed up and prepared by you on 

February 1, 1972, was sent over to the Industry and Commerce Department and the “Audit Approved, 

Passed February 1, 1972” processing occurred in the Department of the Provincial Treasurer on the 1st 

of February? Is that correct? 

 

Mr. Switzer: They would pay the cheque. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: But that “Audit Approved” stamp at the bottom, that’s the Treasury Department not 

yours. 

 

Mr. Switzer: That is the Treasury Department stamp. 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2828 

Mr. Faris: Mr. Chairman, here is one more stamp, I think, “February 3” in the right hand column. 

Whose stamp is that and what would that relate to? 

 

The Chairman: Mr. Kerr, can you answer that one? 

 

Mr. Kerr: Mr. Chairman, that date was put on on our mail desk. That indicates the date the cheque was 

mailed. 

 

The Chairman: It was mailed on February 3. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: Was the cheque actually mailed or was it delivered by hand. 

 

Mr. Kerr: I would suspect that it was mailed, Mr. Chairman, It could have been picked up but usually 

when they’re picked up there is a signature acknowledging receipt of the cheque and there is no 

signature so I would assume it was mailed. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: What’s the normal time that elapses in Treasury from the receipt of a voucher like this 

from departments before they are audited and a cheque issued? 

 

Mr. Kerr: It is very difficult to generalize on this point, Mr. Chairman, because it varies considerably 

from one period to another and from one season of the year to another, but generally we try to put 

things through within a period of five days but sometimes it can be a bit longer. 

 

Mr. Faris: Mr. Kerr, there must be a pattern. 

 

Mr. Kerr: We have a system of giving priority where priority is required. We have two levels of 

priority, the matter of an hour or two . . . (Inaudible) 

 

And here my friends was talking about what a record time it was, that it was three days. I just want to 

re-emphasize that what Mr. Kerr said way, “We have a system of giving priority where priority is 

required. We have two levels of priority the matter of an hour or two . . . “(Inaudible) . . . the machine 

didn’t pick up here. 

 

Mr. Faris: There must be a category of priority voucher as would be indicated by this stamp. This 

stamp was originated just for this voucher? 

 

Mr. Kerr: No, we use it 100 times every day. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: How many cheques are written in a day? 

Mr. Kerr: About 4, 000 

 

Mr. MacLeod: So if this is used 100 times, I assume that’s a figure of speech. Is that correct? 

 

Mr. Kerr: Yes, it’s used many times every day. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: Would it be normal treatment for a priority voucher to be handled within a number of 

hours? 

 

Mr. Kerr: That’s correct, Mr. Chairman. 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2829 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on an quote much more but I quote this to show that when I said that the Hon. 

Member was creating a tempest in the teapot, when the Comptroller of the Province of Saskatchewan 

says that it is done 100 times a day some days. 

 

I really think that the Hon. Member is playing cheap, cheap politics. If that, Mr. Speaker, had been 

Commercial Printers or some other printing establishment in this province or in this city, nothing would 

have been said, they wouldn’t even ask the question. 

 

Before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am quite prepared to go along with the report and I 

agree with the report and I am satisfied with the report the way it is worded but I do object to a Member 

of this House getting up and saying it was illegal. I am not a lawyer so I am not going to get involved in 

words. But when he gets up and says these accusations of stealing money from the Government and that 

we on this side are going to be feathering our pockets with this money, I must, Mr. Speaker, say that this 

is very, very cheap politics and I object to it. 

 

I am happy to support my hon. friend’s motion but I object to the remarks made by the Hon. Member 

from Albert Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, on this particular report that is before us and the question of 

whether or not the payment that has been referred to was illegal or whether it was not legal, I think there 

has been some argument here. 

 

The Attorney General and many others opposite seem to feel that it is perfectly all right to make an 

illegal payment as was certainly demonstrated very clearly in the committee’s report. I am very 

surprised, Mr. Speaker, that my old friend the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) would get up and 

try and pull a snow job on this particular principle, arguing as to when the cheque was issued. It’s a 

matter of how the cheque came to be issued that’s the case in point. How did this cheque come to be 

issued? That is the illegal aspect of this particular payment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I refer you, Mr. Speaker, and the Attorney General and all Members opposite to page 10 of the 

report of the Provincial Auditor for the year ending March 31, 1972. He quotes section 58 of The 

Treasury Department Act and I shall read from the report for the benefit of the Attorney General: 

 

No payment shall be made for the performance of work or the supply of goods, whether under contract 

or not, in connection with any part of the Public Service unless in addition to any other voucher or 

certificate that is required, the deputy of the appropriate minister or other officer authorized by that 

deputy certifies: (a) that the work has been performed and the material has been supplied or that the 

work has been performed and the material has been supplied and that the price charged is according to 

contract. 

 

Now that’s section 58. It’s been referred to and I’ll refer to it later in a few moments. Further down the 

page, page 10, 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2830 

quoting from the report of the Auditor, he says, and I quote: 

 

There was no provision for any advance payment in the order placed with the supplier. The goods 

ordered had not been received by the Department of Industry and Commerce up to the date of the 

advance payment although they were subsequently received on March 28. 

 

One month later, one month after this request for payment. Mr. Speaker, this is where the fact can be 

stated that this was indeed an illegal payment, one authorized by the Minister of Industry who sits in this 

House today. We haven’t heard him get up in this debate to give any justification as to why he ordered a 

move like that. 

 

I want to quote also from page 140 of the verbatim account of the proceedings of the committee on 

March 21. I’ll begin about the middle of page 140. It’s a question from Mr. Engel and he says: 

 

If Service Printing would have waited until they had the job completed and got their $28,000, there 

would have been no comment or no problem. It was quite in the idea that somebody authorized the 

$12,000 advance. 

 

To which Mr. Lutz, the auditor replied: 

 

Under section 58 of The Treasury Department Act an advance payment is not legal. 

 

Now if it’s not legal, Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) is justified 

in concluding this case was illegal. This is the point, Mr. Speaker, and this is the basis for the remarks 

made by the Hon. Member for Albert Park. And I’d have to say in a general way as far as the work of 

the committee in studying the various departments, it was the only serious misdemeanor, if you like, that 

was uncovered. And I say it was, I say it was more than a serious misdemeanor in that sense because it 

involved this Government and their family-owned printing corporation, hustling in to bail them out at 

the authorization and request of the Minister of Industry. We haven’t had an explanation from the 

Minister as to why he felt it necessary to authorize and rush advance payment when they didn’t get the 

pamphlets for a month later. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, we had contemplated asking the Minister as to 

why he felt it necessary to authorize a rush advance payment when they didn’t get the pamphlets for a 

month later. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, we had contemplated asking the Minister to appear before the 

committee but we felt he would have the opportunity in this debate in the Legislature to get up and tell 

us why he made such a move at that particular time. And I’ll be anxiously awaiting his entry into this 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, I thought we could perhaps hear a word from the Minister 

of Industry but I’m sure now after I make a few comments that he will. You know, it’s serious enough at 

any time or under any circumstances for the Government to act in the way that they did. It was serious 

enough for the Provincial Auditor to see fit to put it in his annual report. And it would, as I say, have 

been serious enough for any expenditure. But it’s doubly serious due to the fact that out of all the 

payments that were made during the year under review, there was only one payment that was made on 

an illegal basis. And that was a 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2831 

payment to the Government’s own printing company. I think the question has been very well raised by 

my two colleagues. It was illegal because the auditor said it was not legal. It was not legal and it’s not 

legal to make an advance payment when goods have not been received and the goods were not received, 

I understand, for another three or four weeks. That’s what makes this such a particularly heinous crime 

because they have, out of all the hundreds of thousands of payments that are made every year, and made 

this year under the previous budget, made only one where the advance payment was made without 

authority and without the receipt of goods and that was a payment to their own printing company. 

 

The Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) said if it had been one of the other printing companies we 

probably wouldn’t have heard about it, if it has been any of the other printing companies nothing would 

have been said. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, if it had been one of the other printing companies it 

wouldn’t have been done. They would have waited the full time. The company wouldn’t have received 

one penny until their absolute commitment of providing the services had been completed. All the 

printing would have had to be on the desks of those who had ordered it. It would have been checked to 

see that every piece was there before any payment was made. But, oh no, not with Service Printing. All 

they have to do is pick up the phone and say, we’re in financial difficulties, I want my cheque today. 

And thank heavens Mr. Switzer was enough of a civil servant to know that this was wrong and he 

refused to do so. So what was the next step? Service Printing gets on the phone and he phones Mr. 

Thorson, the Minister, and he says, “Kim, old baby, we’re going broke, we’re going broke, we need 

money, we have to pay our staff.” So what happens, Kim gets on the blower, phones down and says, “I 

want it stamped top priority,” and it goes through. He says, “Don’t worry whether we got the goods or 

not, that doesn’t matter, Service Printing needs the money. Give them the money, give them an advance. 

I’m the authority. We don’t have to go by what the law says. I’m the law for the Department of Industry 

and particularly, I’m the law for payments to Service Printing.” And so the money goes, $12,000, 

illegally to Service Printing without any of the goods being provided that they had contracted for just 

because the Minister is sympathetic to his own company which he and the Members over there have to 

take full responsibility for. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, for some time we have questioned the propriety of the Government 

giving the taxpayers’ money to its own printing company. $465,000 from 1944 to 1964. Then they 

started it again when they became the Government in 1971 and $92,000 was given to the end of 1972. 

48 orders were given to this printing company and only two of them tendered and 46 are allotted. The 

other companies didn’t even have a chance to tender on them. The taxpayers’ money was taken and 

given to their own printing company deliberately by the Government opposite. Not only was it morally 

wrong, wrong to do it without tendering it, but now they’ve started making payments to the company 

without ever receiving the work . That’s where it’s getting even worse. The taxpayers’ money going to 

their own completely and solely owned printing company and now they don’t even have to provide the 

work. They phone the Minister and say, “Look, we’re short of cash, please get a cheque to us.” The 

Minister picks up the phone, phones the Treasury Board and says, “Get some money down to Service 

Printing. We haven’t received the printing order yet, but don’t worry.” Well, if they can do it once, 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2832 

Mr. Speaker, they can be doing it day after day, week after week, month after month. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And minute after minute. 

 

Mr. Guy: — And maybe minute after minute. You said it, I didn’t. You’re in the know, you’re one of 

the shareholders of this company. Well, they’ve taken $92,000 since they came back in 1971. As I said, 

48 orders, 46 of them handed to them, two of them tendered. And then the Members sit opposite and 

they laugh. I think that the Minister of Industry, as a Minister of the Crown, who took the oath when he 

became the Minister that he would, to the best of his ability, carry out his responsibilities in the best 

interests of this province, must be hanging his head in shame today when he is the first Minister from 

that side to have been condemned by the auditor for giving authority to a company that he is part owner 

of, that his party is part owner of, without receiving any of the goods that had been contracted for. Does 

he call that carrying out his responsibilities that he took the oath for when he became a Minister? I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister should very seriously consider resigning his seat on such a 

serious matter as this. Yes, Members laugh over there, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that if they continue 

to carry out these practices in regard to Service Printing the people of Saskatchewan won’t be laughing 

and the Government will feel the full thrust of their condemnation as soon as they get the courage to call 

another election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat here rather appalled and amazed at these 

charges of an illegal act by this NDP Government. Perhaps all of the Ministers over there, particularly 

the Minister of Industry Commerce who is responsible for this would like a little more time to check into 

the facts. This is certainly a very serious charge and I’m sure that some other Members would like to 

speak on this. I, therefore, ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Mr. H. Owens (Elrose) moved second reading of Bill No. 101 – An Act to amend The Medical 

Profession Act be now read a second time and referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law 

Amendments and Delegated Powers. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains only one amendment. It is concerned with the age at which a 

person may lawfully consent to receiving a medical service. 

 

Prior to 1970 the age of majority of this province governing virtually all matters over which the 

Province had jurisdiction was 21 years. In 1970 this age was reduced to 19 years by The Becoming of 

Age Act, 1970. In 1972 this age was further reduced to 18 years by The Age of Majority Act, 1972. 

 

For the purpose of giving consent for medical treatment as well as for all other matters over which the 

Province of 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2833 

Saskatchewan has legislative jurisdiction the age at which this may legally be done is, therefore, 18 

years of age or over. In recent decades in this country people have become much more mobile than was 

previously the case. Persons working for national business concerns may be quickly transferred from 

one part of the country to another. In addition, the accelerated use of the automobile, together with a 

marked improvement in our highways since the end of the last war has resulted in thousands of persons 

travelling to other parts of the country for vacation purposes. 

 

In addition to the general mobility of our population the younger members of our community have 

tended to become much more mobile and transient than was formerly the case. Persons who are 16 or 17 

years of age will often be employed in positions requiring them to be located away from home. In 

addition, high school students either in groups or individually spend much more time travelling while on 

vacation than was formerly the case. 

 

At the present time a physician does not, except in cases of emergency, have the authority to provide a 

professional service to a person who is 16 or 17 years old and who is for the time being or permanently 

away from home unless the parent or guardian consents. The practical problem is that in many cases it is 

difficult or impossible to contact the parent immediately thereby delaying the provision of a service that 

should be provided. 

 

The proposed amendment will resolve this problem by authorizing a 16 year old to consent to receiving 

a medical service. When the 16 year old does give consent, the consent of the parent or guardian is not 

required. 

 

These provisions are similar to the provisions contained in The Family Law Reform Act which was 

enacted in the United Kingdom in 1969. 

 

It should be noted that the reduction of the age of consent to 16 years of age does not apply to the 

procurement of a miscarriage. In any such case where the patient is under 18 years of age, the consent of 

the parent or guardian for the provision of medical services will continue to be required. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 101 an Act to amend The Medical Profession Act be 

now read a second time and be referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and 

Delegated Powers. 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, I must say that this particular Bill is one 

that causes me more than a little concern, though I have some sympathy with the general outline and the 

remarks of the Hon. Member from Elrose. I do find, however, that the Bill, as I studied it, gives effect to 

what he said. This, of course, is one reason for it to go to the Law Amendments Committee which has 

not, as I understand it, power to amend these Bills. In any event, Mr. Speaker, this is a matter which 

would require, I think, some severe and full debate in this House. There is a particular problem with 

respect to persons 16 years of age and over and for that matter, some persons of 14 and 15 years of age 

who are away from their parents, people who are travelling through the province from other parts of the 

country, people who cannot readily get in touch with their parents but who, 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2834 

nonetheless, require urgent medical services. 

 

There is another problem and that is the fact that many of our young people nowadays have been 

contracting diseases as a result of the more liberal society. Perhaps I should reword that one – the 

problem of the contraction of diseases by many of our young people arising out of their more frequent 

attention to each other on a more definite and intimate scale. The transmission, therefore, of germs of 

this type seems to have reached an all time high. And as the law now stands people cannot, 16 year olds 

and 17 year olds, cannot be treated for social disease without having the consent of their parents. This 

represents a very severe problem because of the emotional and moral difficulties that the parents may 

have. The consequent result that many young people requiring medical attention do not get that attention 

and they do not seek that attention because they do not want this information transmitted to the parents. 

 

Because of that, Mr. Speaker, I recognize the difficulty in the problem raised by the Hon. Member for 

Elrose (Mr. Owens). The Bill, however, as drawn (section 69A) is entirely too broad, and does not solve 

the problem without throwing the gates wide open. There are many, many cases nowadays where 

children are leaving home, they are ignoring parental authority, they are doing what they want and when 

they want. And the laws more and more are destroying parental authority without which eventually the 

very legal and moral fabric of the nation will be destroyed. 

 

And because of the continuous reduction in the age of maturity – the legal age of 21 has in rapid order 

been reduced to 19 and then to 18 and now for a large and very significant matter is proposed to be 

reduced to 16. And that is really what this Act proposes, that people of age 16 for the matters referred to 

in section 69A are to be regarded as full and consenting adults. Mr. Speaker, that is farther than I would 

be prepared to go, at least at this stage. 

 

I have concluded, after some personal struggle with this question, that I would have to oppose this Bill, 

not because I do not want to see some of the changes made as suggested by the Hon. Member for Elrose, 

but because this one goes so far that a child may have a serious operation, a 16 year old girl may well 

desire to be sterilized, and she may give the consent to be sterilized perhaps thinking momentarily and 

foolishly that this was a good thing to happen. She has the legal power under this Act to give that 

consent. I would oppose that. She should not have that power. She should not be able to give that 

consent at the age of 16. 

 

It is unfortunate that people have the power to make decisions which are lasting and permanent in their 

life at a time when they are least able to apply mature judgment to the making of that decision. A 16 

year old is not mentally and emotionally mature enough to make many of the decisions that they would 

be called upon to make under this Bill. Consequently, while I would support a more restricted Bill, a Bill 

which sets out more specifically and carefully those circumstances where her or his consent would be 

effective, I will not support this Bill. Surely, it is not beyond the power of the Department of the 

Attorney General to draft a Bill which would to a considerable extent outline those particular problem 

areas where consent cannot effectively be obtained and bring that Bill 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2835 

to the House and I would support it, because I do realize that there are cases of people 16 and 17 who 

find themselves desperately in need of medical service and the doctors are reluctant to go ahead with it, 

reluctant in many cases wrongfully because they are afraid of a law suit by taking the consent of a 16 

year old without consent of the guardian. It is the reluctance of the medical profession to proceed in 

these cases that has caused part of the problem although I am certainly not blaming them and I support 

their position on this matter. I support the general theory outlined by the Hon. Member for Elrose the the 

examples he gave. 

 

I will oppose this Bill for the reasons that I have outlined. 

 

Mr. D. Boldt: — (Rosthern) Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on it as well. I certainly cannot 

support this Bill. I am surprised that the Member from Elrose (Mr. Owens) having the age that he has he 

might not care. His children are grown up and he has no responsibility in that regard. 

 

But I think parents who have children that are 18 years and younger are certainly concerned about this 

Bill. 

 

Firstly, we have given in to, if this is a concern with the medical profession, we have given in to them 

from the 21 year old down to the 18 year old, and now we are going to go another step to the 16 year 

old. I certainly think that it is a very dangerous Bill to go ahead with. 

 

A 16 year old girl or boy can make many decisions now which the parents are not aware of. And 

certainly a 16 year old is not mature. As the Member from Albert Park stated, a girl can go ahead and be 

sterilized, a boy can be sterilized at age 16 and 17. Then later on at 21 they would regret this very much. 

I think we have the responsibility to tell our parents and our children that they are still children at 16, 17 

and 18 and that their place is at home not scattered all over the country so that parents know where they 

are. 

 

I want to go on record as opposing this Bill. 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, since this an open and free vote and it’s 

a question of everyone’s outlook I am sure that no one will be surprised when we differ as we do differ 

obviously on this side of the House about this particular matter. 

 

There are some possibilities that will be opened up if this Bill is passed that concern me and, I am sure, 

concern everyone in the House. It will concern the medical profession, parents and a great many people 

as well. 

 

However, I think we are tending to look at this always from the point of view of the worst that might 

happen. I think that speaking of the vast majority of doctors, I would say 95 or 98 per cent of the 

doctors, I have confidence would not perform some types of operations on children or on 16 or 17 year 

olds that they know are in their own home or in their own area without seeking the approval of their 

parents to begin with. 

 

In the second place, I think that if there are doctors who 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2836 

may do this, then I think they are the kind of doctors who would do it anyway. This does happen. We 

have had abortions committed when they were illegal, we still have illegal operations done. So I think 

that if they are going to do it in an irresponsible way they are probably doing it now and this will neither 

help or hurt them. 

 

In regard to the children themselves, or the young people themselves, I think if they haven’t by the age 

of 16 or 17 developed a relationship with their parents, an honest relationship with their parents and a 

feeling of mutual confidence, then they can, I am sure and it does happen unfortunately, find 

unscrupulous medical men or sometimes quacks who will perform operations or give them drugs that 

will be harmful to them. Unfortunately, this happens and what we should look at in this Bill is the 

positive viewpoint that right now there are not just people wandering around the country but there are 

young people who need medical attention. Sometimes they can’t find their parents, sometimes they 

come from broken homes and they can’t find their parents and this doesn’t mean they are scattered all 

over the country. We sometimes tend to think always of the irresponsible child or young person, let’s 

start looking at the irresponsible adult and there are lots of them in our society, unfortunately. 

 

I am sure doctors are being put on the spot too often where there should be some medical attention given 

to people who are 16 and 17 year olds and they just can’t find the parents and sometimes because of 

certain reasons they might not be able to get their permission, yet it might be very vital to the health of 

the individual concerned. 

 

While I do have, as I am sure everybody has, some honest misgivings about the side effects that might 

be produced from this Bill, I think that it is worth an experiment and we are never that far away from the 

Legislative Assembly if we find that a result of passing this Bill, if indeed we do pass it, some of the 

things that the Members who are opposed to this genuinely fear might happen, in fact, find that they are 

happening to any great extent. It isn’t inconceivable that we couldn’t at the next sitting or subsequent 

sitting of the Legislature change the Bill and take away that privilege, if it can be called that, it is a 

privilege in some ways. It is a very serious responsibility both to the doctors and to the young people 

concerned and take it away from them, we say I am sorry but the indications are that either group or 

both groups can’t handle this or aren’t handling it properly. What we do, we can undo. So for those 

reasons I intend to support the Bill. 

 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, I should like to take the same position with respect to 

this Bill as the Leader of the Opposition. I will be frank in saying I had some misgivings about this Bill 

partly because of the reasons expressed by the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod), that there is a 

real difficulty in maintaining the family as a social unit, that certainly we ought not to do anything which 

undermines the stability of the family, and that it can be argued that this Bill might have such an 

influence. 

 

I do feel, however, that I should like to see this House pass this Bill in principle, refer it to the Law 

Amendments Committee where the representatives of either the Saskatchewan 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2837 

Medical Association or the College of Physicians and Surgeons will be there and we can at that time put 

to them the questions which are of particular concern to us and receive from them their comments on the 

situations with which they would like to deal. 

 

This Bill is not in any sense a Bill which sets out Government policy. Otherwise, of course, it would 

have been introduced by a Minister of the Crown. This Bill, as I am sure the Minister of Health will 

make clear, was requested by the College of Physicians and Surgeons or the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association. The medical profession wanted this Legislature to deal with genuine problems which they 

encounter in the practice of their profession. I know that they would not be requesting this if they felt 

that it was likely to be abused by an significant number of their profession. I feel that this would be the 

responsible way to deal with this Bill. 

 

I should like to emphasize again one of the points made by the Leader of the Opposition. We sometimes 

feel that when young people are separated from their parents, it is always because the young people are 

away from their home. In fact, the reverse may be the case. 

 

The fact is that young people are travelling a great deal more, and travelling on perfectly legitimate trips, 

perfectly legitimate journeys. My own children have been making a practice during their teens of 

journeying up to northern Saskatchewan in the summer time to take canoe trips and they are very far 

separated from their parents. I am not suggesting that under those circumstances any medical attention 

that they might need might not fall into the category of an emergency. Nonetheless it is difficult to put a 

medical practitioner into the very difficult position of having to decide whether or not this young person 

who stands before him and asserts that he needs some care is in an emergency situation. In such a case, 

the separation is surely not one that is in any way destructive of family life. 

 

I think back on occasions when, perhaps improperly, my wife and I have gone away in the car and left a 

17 year old home to look after the House. I frankly admit I have neglected to leave any certificate 

appointing anyone a temporary guardian to deal with any situations which may arise. Perhaps all of the 

situations would be ones dealt with under the category of an emergency and then again perhaps they 

wouldn’t. Perhaps my wife and I would be able to be reached and then again perhaps we are on the road 

and not easily reached. 

 

It is not only young people who are travelling much more. It is parents who are travelling much more. 

Parents are travelling and leaving their responsible 16 and 17 year old young people at home. I think that 

all of us who have teenagers have probably been guilty of that particular conduct. I doubt whether we 

regard the guilt as very heavy. 

 

I share with the Leader of the Opposition the general view that if I as a parent have not made my mark 

on my sons or daughters by the time they are 16, I am not likely to influence them very effectively by 

any regulations after that time. If I feel that they are responsible and can look after themselves for a day 

or two or even more while my wife and I are away, that is surely not bestowing upon them any 

excessive measure of responsibility. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2838 

So I think that the situations that this Bill seeks to deal with are arising much more frequently. That this 

is the case I think is evidenced by the fact that the medical profession is asking us to cope with it. It may 

be that the choice of language is too wide. A specific effort has been made, as those who have perused 

the Bill will note, to exclude any suggestions of authorizing therapeutic abortions, where other 

considerations may arise. And we are trying to deal with what might be thought of as ordinary medical 

situations. It may be that we haven’t been sufficiently restrictive. But I think that the particular 

circumstances with which we are trying to deal would better come out in the Committee of Law 

Amendments when representatives of the medical profession will be there. I believe that the responsible 

way that we can deal with this Bill is to pass it, reserving the right to reject it on third reading if we don’t 

like the proceedings as they develop in the Committee of Law Amendments, if we feel that the 

explanations of the medical profession are inadequate. 

 

I think that this would be a responsible way to deal with this Bill, to send it on from this House to that 

committee and to reserve our right to differ from it when it comes out of the committee. That will be the 

position I will take, I emphasize that I am speaking as the Member for Regina Centre and not as the 

Leader of the Government. This is a measure on which we on this side of the House, and I gather 

Members on the other side of the House, are taking the view that it is a totally and completely free vote. 

It does not represent the party policy of the party on your left, Mr. Speaker, or on your right. We are 

dealing with a social problem which has been raised with us by the medical profession. We offer this 

solution. We offer to the House the opportunity to question the medical profession on why they have 

suggested this to us. I believe this to be a responsible way to deal with what is apparently a growing 

social problem. I invite the House to follow that course of action. 

 

Mr. D. F. MacDonald: — (Moose Jaw North) Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on this. I 

have taken the liberty of contacting the medical profession and I don’t propose to speak for them but I 

am convinced that they endorse this Bill completely, without reservations, as I understand it. I 

understand that this is unanimous as far as I am able to determine. I have no doubt about the problems 

that physicians have, especially with transient youth. I recognize their problems and I am in sympathy 

with the position that they find themselves in. 

 

I think that we have a problem. I think that if we don’t pass this kind of legislation we are going to have 

such problems as treatment is not going to be given when it is needed. I think that it goes further than 

treatment, I think that it also includes advice. If there is a need for advice, this, again, under present laws 

the physician is not able or should not give advice. I think this leads to treatment of the young people by 

quacks and leads to the taking of poor and substandard medication. So I do feel that there is a need for 

this type of legislation. 

 

I think one of the arguments that we are going to hear, and I think that it is a serious argument, is that 

somehow this legislation erodes some of the rights of the family. I am not really sure that this is a valid 

proposition. I think that parents and families even with the legislation still have the 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2839 

authority and the rights that they do have now. 

 

I don’t think, or I will say this, that it will allow 16 and 17 year olds legally to disregard the parental 

authority, but I think that if they are so inclined to disregard parental authority then do the parents really 

have the authority or do they just think they have? They don’t have the authority or do they just think 

they have? They don’t have the authority in any real sense. I am not sure that it is a valid proposition. 

 

I think that we should also remember that with this Bill, it still leaves moral and medical judgment in the 

hands of the doctor. This doesn’t compel a doctor to do anything. I don’t think that I am willing to 

accept the premise that this Bill will affect the morals of our young people or that it would encourage 

sexual promiscuity as some people will suggest or that it will encourage or stimulate more transients or 

unnecessary youthful transients nor do I think that it will encourage a disrespect for parental authority. 

 

At this point I intend to support the Bill. I am not rigid on this position and I should like to hear further 

debate. I think that it is a very difficult question. I know that my wife is opposed to it and we have had 

serious discussions and she is very opposed to it. It becomes a very difficult question to decide. 

 

I think that I should like to listen to listen to further debate and I should not like to see this legislation 

hurried through the House. I think that some publicity should be given the question so that the public 

have the right to know that it is being dealt with in this House and have a chance to react. It is a social 

and moral question and I think that our constituents should have the right at least to know that this 

debate is going on and to register their feelings with us. 

 

At this point I intend to support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, I might say at the outset that I intend to oppose this 

Bill. I am reluctant to take an extreme position on it. I agree with the arguments of people on both sides 

of the House who feel that young people are more mature. We talked about the number of transients and 

I can’t see that this is that terrific a problem. I believe the percentage would be rather small. 

 

I would have hoped that some arrangements could be made, could be looked at, whereby the Department 

of Social Services could give their consent in these particular cases. Now if this is impossible perhaps 

someone would point this out. But when people are 16 or 17 years of age it is very difficult to make 

decisions of this type. It is a decision that they might regret later. I think at that time they need someone 

whom they can sit down with and discuss the problem with. It is a difficult decision often for people of 

an older age, 20 or older, but certainly at 16 or 17 it is a difficult decision at times. If no parent is 

available I would think that there could be some guidance counsellors from the Department of Social 

Services. This would apply not only to transients but to young people who are living away from home. 

Some type of regulations whereby they could be contacted, they could sit down with the person, 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2840 

the young person, discuss the problem and see if some solution could be worked out. Perhaps they could 

get some guidance in this way. 

 

I am sympathetic to the medical profession. I realize the problem that they face but I really believe that 

there is some other way of handling it rather than insisting that the person at this age, 16 or 17, make the 

decision on his own. I realize certainly that parents aren’t always available because of travelling, broken 

homes or just don’t care for some reason other than that. I would hope that someone could be substituted 

for the parents in this particular case and this is why I would like to suggest that it should be a guidance 

counsellor from the Department of Social Services. Because I feel that perhaps it could be done in a 

better manner, I will be opposing the Bill. 

 

Mr. A. W. Engel: — (Notukeu-Willow Bunch) Mr. Speaker, I should like to enter this debate for 

several reasons. 

 

If for one minute I should think that this piece of legislation is condoning permissiveness I would be 

very strong in my remarks as far as opposing this piece of legislation. 

 

When you look at the problem that exists today and the number of young people who are that involved, 

possibly because of a permissive society, those young people who have contracted possibly venereal 

disease and don’t want to share this problem with their parents, that kind of problem exists today 

without this Bill or without this kind of legislation. 

 

How do we help these young people? How do we develop a society that will have the answers? How do 

we assure that this up-coming generation will have the proper environment where young people can 

grow up? Like the Member for Moosomin just suggested, they should be in a position where they can 

get some advice, some parental advice. This, to me, presents a serious problem. On the other hand when 

I think of the many cases where the putting off of treatment and putting off seeing a doctor, and from 

doctor friends that I have contacted since this Bill was first discussed in our caucus, I have changed my 

view considerably on this matter. 

 

I believe in the value of a family structure. I believe that to maintain a good family relationship and a 

place where I can develop the confidence of my son to communicate with me on problems that he is 

facing, I don’t think this piece of legislation is stepping in the way and breaking down that kind of 

communication. 

 

I agree with the Premier when he says that by the time the young person is a 16 year old he will have 

either found a home where he can communicate, where parents are there and are taking an interest in 

making themselves available or will have a group in our society like we are facing today, that need help 

and yet won’t go for it because there is a breakdown in communications between themselves and their 

parents or their parents have been divorced or separated or gone and they are not available for consent. 

 

My colleague’s comments at the opening, I would really 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2841 

question. I am not so sure how many young people between the ages of 16 and 18 have positions with 

companies that are likely to transfer them away from home. I don’t think the problem really exists on 

that level. 

 

The young people who have a job and are working and have a security are usually young people that 

have had that kind of parental background that have found themselves stable in society. 

 

I feel that there are young people who need help. I feel that this Bill is going to reach that kind of people 

so, therefore, I will support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. E. Smishek: — (Minister of Public Health) Mr. Speaker, I am gong to support the Bill. I am 

pleased to hear the expressions of support from so many Members, at the same time I want to say that I 

respect the opinions expressed by those that have some doubts about this Bill. 

 

I might advise the House that in the last 20 months there have been parents, physicians, hospital 

administrators and people from the family planning associations who have talked to me about bringing 

in legislation of this nature. Doctors and hospital administrators, particularly, from time to time 

experience difficulties in providing urgently needed medical and hospital services to 16 and 17 year 

olds. 

 

At a meeting held on January 22 of this year, representatives of the Saskatchewan Medical Association 

and the College of Physicians and Surgeons expressed to me their concern over this question. I might 

say that they also made the same kind of representation a year ago. I am also aware that they made 

representations to the Hon. Mr. Grant when he was Minister of Health. At that time they assured me that 

they would publicly support measures to lower the age of consent to 16. And you will have noticed in 

our paper, the Leader-Post, last night the medical profession council met on the weekend and gave 

endorsement and support and commendation to this proposal. 

 

In Saskatchewan today a person below the age of majority can be living away from home, can be 

supporting himself, can possess his own social security number, can have a valid and distinct 

Saskatchewan Medical and Hospital card. In short, a person whom his family, community and his 

associates recognize to be managing his own life, because of age restriction, can be barred from giving 

his own consent for medical treatment. For most people the age of majority is not a pressing problem but 

one of increasing concern to physicians and 16 year olds. 

 

In modern society the age of 16 implies a certain landmark. 16 years old may leave school without fear 

of reprisal and seek employment. They can drive automobiles and be held criminally responsible in case 

of accidents. They may marry with consent of parents and guardians and these practices have gained 

increasing acceptance by the society. 

 

In recent decades people have become much more mobile than was previously the case. Young people 

in particular have tended to travel more widely and for longer periods of time. 16 and 17 year olds will 

often be employed in positions 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2842 

requiring them to be located away from home. In addition, high school students, either in groups or as 

individuals, spend much more time travelling away from home while on vacation. 

 

At the present time a physician does not, except in case of emergency, have the authority to provide 

professional services to a person who is 16 or 17 years old unless the parent or guardian consents. 

 

Because of practical problems of delivering medical treatment to adolescents and the real needs of some 

teenagers for special medical treatment, the legal restrictions of age of consent may stand as a barrier to 

good health and care. 

 

In many cases it is difficult or impossible to contact the parents immediately thereby delaying needed 

treatment. A special treatment problem arises where the juvenile is experiencing an overdose of drugs, a 

young woman asks for contraceptive devices, or a single moth-to-be requires prenatal care. 

 

Let me give you some examples. Among adolescent drug users, it is increasingly prevalent for juveniles 

to refuse to supply the name of the parents or the guardians. A doctor is caught in a legal squeeze. 

Attempts are made to determine the whereabouts of parents and failing that medical care must be given. 

 

Let us look at the case of a married teenager. When teenagers under the age of 18 get married does the 

authority for medical consent pass to the underage married couple or does it remain with the parents. 

Legal opinion on this particular question is divided. 

 

Let us look at the case of the single mother who has left home. A single mother has permission to leave 

the protective care of her parents and to assume custody of her child, but can the single mother give 

legal consent for her own and her child’s medical treatment before she has reached the age of 18? As I 

said legal opinion on this is divided. The legal opinion would suggest that the underage mother cannot 

consent to medical treatment for herself and there is some question as to whether or not she can legally 

consent to treatment for her child until she has reached the age of 18. 

 

The fact is that the legal barrier of parental consent may stand in the way of the provision of medical and 

hospital services to young adults when they need it most. 

 

I cannot give the House any statistics on the cases of drug overdoses because this information is not 

available. I can tell you as far as pregnancies in the 16 and 17 year old groups are concerned, there were 

a total of 751 reported in 1971 of whom 426, approximately 60 per cent, were illegitimate. I have no 

reason to believe that these figures have improved since 1971. 

 

However, the proposed amendment does not allow for therapeutic abortions to be carried out on 16 and 

17 year olds without parental consent. I want to make that particular point quite clear and I think that is 

pretty well understood. Section 3 of the proposed amendment specifically excludes this kind of 

procedure. 

 

In this day and age many youngsters by the time they reach the age of 16 are in some ways more mature 

and sophisticated 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2843 

than our generation was at 18 or even 21. I don’t know whether this is a desirable situation or not. But 

the hastening of maturity has been recognized to some extent in the reduction of the age of majority in 

this province. What is being asked for now is authority fro 16 or 17 year olds to give consent to his or 

her own medical and hospital treatment without necessarily having first to obtain the consent of the 

parents. 

 

In this regard I draw your attention to the fact that we have already gone some way in the province in 

dealing with the problem since our Venereal Disease Prevention Act authorizes the necessary treatment 

can be provided to 16 and 17 year olds without parental consent. This was a point which was raised by 

the Hon. Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) of whether the Act will provide for this. Well, the 

truth is that The Venereal Disease Prevention Act does provide for treatment of 16 and 17 year olds 

without requiring consent of the parents. This same situation exists in other provinces. 

 

The Child Welfare Act in our province also sets 16 years as the age limit for neglected children. In other 

words, this is the maximum age for which the provincial authority or authorities may assume 

responsibility for ensuring care including medical and hospital services of a child when a family is 

unable or unwilling to do so. It also means that according to our Child Welfare Act the 16 and 17 year 

old can exercise the legal right to leave his parents or the parents can legally abandon responsibility to 

provide for the children. If there is no legal provision for them to consent to medical and hospital care 

themselves this somehow does not make sense and it seems to me that this is an undesirable kind of 

situation. Prevention, early care, treatment and knowledge of special medical problems of adolescents is 

sometimes hampered by the law that says the 16 and 17 year old cannot receive attention without 

parental consent. There are over 40,000 young people in Saskatchewan between the ages of 16 and 17 

years of age. Last year 750 of these young people received marriage licences, just for the information of 

the House. Are these young people to be denied the right to give their consent or to their children for 

medical treatment? 

 

As I mentioned before hospitals and physicians are regularly faced with persons between the age of 16 

and 18 requiring emergency care in the absence of parents or unwillingness of the adolescents to have 

parents notified. Let us make it possible for our physicians and hospitals to give them this needed help 

without the patients feeling harassed about the parental consent and the doctors and hospitals feeling 

guilty that they are breaking the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment has been discussed with representatives of the medical profession, the 

College and the SMA. It has the support of these groups. I know it has the support of others. The 

proposal is to have a free vote on this Bill and to have it referred to the Law Amendments Committee. 

There are several questions that have been raised by Members in debate, perhaps these can be reviewed 

by the Law Amendments Committee. 

 

With these few remarks I do urge you to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2844 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, just a few brief words on this Bill. I was interested more 

so than on most occasions when the Minister of Public Health speaks in a debate. I think he did clear up 

a number of points here that should help set out the issue that we are really debating here. I was pleased 

to hear him say, I wasn’t completely aware before, that the question insofar as treatment of venereal 

diseases to 16 and 17 year olds not in any way to be affected by this Act because that is now provided in 

other legislation. Also, of course, it is clearly set out in the Bill the question of abortions in any way, 

shape or form is not included so that certainly does, in essence, narrow the field about which we are 

talking when we speak of reducing the age of consent from 18 to 16. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I personally support the Bill as it stands and I think there have been a number of good 

points made on both sides this afternoon with respect to the debate. It could be when we get into the 

Law Amendments Committee there may be other facts and other angles and other aspects that I haven’t 

thought of. I am sure there will be. Perhaps that will be true for all of us, other aspects might develop but 

at the moment we are really debating whether or not we shall refer this Bill to the Law Amendments 

Committee for some further study. On that basis I certainly support it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think some Member mentioned and it’s a good point, Mr. Speaker, to remember that as parents I 

suppose you could say we are delegating parental authority in this case to the medical many which 

certainly is a very respected profession and one that has had a pretty dominant tie-in or relationship with 

families throughout history. So that while we are delegating we are delegating in a pretty good direction. 

I think the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) did make a point when he said perhaps we could 

consider some other mediation group or individual or the Department of Social Services, I believe he 

mentioned, as being a part to the decision here and perhaps that point is worthy of further study and 

consideration. 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that Hon. Members would support it and get it into Law Amendments 

Committee where it could be discussed more fully that it is here. 

 

Mr. H. H. Rolfes: — (Saskatoon Nutana South) Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF VISITORS 
 

Mr. E. C. Whelan: — (Regina North West) Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might interrupt the proceedings 

for a moment to introduce some visitors to the gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to you and all of the Members of the House, 15 parents from 

North Regina who are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are a parent group who are here under the 

leadership of Mrs. Rita Preuche. All Members of the Legislature are glad that you took the time to visit 

us here and see the Legislature in action. On behalf of the MLAs a sincere welcome to you and may 

your visit to this Assembly be pleasant and informative. 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2845 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Bill No. 101 —An Act to amend The Medical 

Profession Act. 

 

Mr. H. H. Rolfes: — (Saskatoon Nutana South) Mr. Speaker, from the congratulator notes that I 

received before supper, I felt it necessary to say a few well chosen words on the amendment to The 

Medical Profession Act. I want to say from the outset that I will oppose the amendments to The Medical 

Profession Act and I do so, Mr. Speaker, for several reasons. Whether they are right or wrong in my 

judgment or in some else’s judgment, I believe that it will be an invasion of the parental responsibility 

and also that it will deteriorate the family unit which I think needs support in this day and age. 

 

One of the arguments that has been given by Members of this House for supporting the amendments is 

that the medical profession would like to have these amendments. Number one, let me say that I am not 

concerned whether they want it or not. I have had some discussions with medical people who have tried 

to persuade me to support the amendments. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I have also had discussions 

with the legal profession and at one time I had a member of the legal profession and a member of the 

medical profession together at the same time. A comment that a Saskatchewan judge made to a member 

of the medical profession was simply this, “Look, you know as well as I do that no court would ever sue 

you for actions taken on behalf of a patient.” I should like to repeat that, “No court would ever sue you 

on actions you would take on behalf of a patient. So the argument that doctors are sometimes afraid to 

go ahead with action on their patient because they do not have parental consent really, in my opinion, 

does not hold any water. 

 

The other argument, however, I have some sympathy with and that is the argument of the transient 

youth. I can well understand that a youth who might have a problem as far as drugs are concerned and 

needs help. It is very difficult to contact the parent but he would need medical assistance. I am in full 

agreement with this. But again, if the judge that I referred to was right, then doctors have nothing to fear 

and could certainly go about their practice of giving the assistance that they can to that individual. 

 

I am, however, concerned that many of the members of the medical profession want this particular 

amendment because they would like to use it in the area of family planning. There are many people who 

are opposed to the use of contraceptives or artificial means of family planning. I think we need to 

respect those beliefs of parents and I would not want to support amendments to The Medical Profession 

Act which would go against the wishes of the parents. I think if the parents are opposed to artificial 

means of birth control and they would like to have their children seek their consent first before they 

receive counselling from a doctor who might not believe or have the same standard of morals, I think 

that we must respect that right of the parent. Therefore, I would oppose the amendment. 

 

I am glad the Member from Wilkie is back because I don’t share with him the same high regard for the 

medical profession that obviously he does. I say this, Mr. Speaker, for this 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2846 

reason. I read in the Star-Phoenix the other day that 100 per cent of all applications made for therapeutic 

abortions were approved at the City Hospital in Saskatoon. I find it very, very difficult to believe that all 

of these therapeutic abortions were within the Criminal Code. Therefore, I am simply saying that I don’t 

place that same trust in some of the members of the medical profession that possibly the Member from 

Wilkie does. For this reason I would much sooner have the trust go back to the parents rather than place 

that faith in the medical profession. I will oppose the amendment because I believe it interferes with or 

deteriorates the family unit and secondly because I believe it will add to the permissive attitude that we 

have in our society today. I think that we must tighten up on the moral issues and the moral problems 

that beset our society and this Act, in my opinion, will not do that. 

 

Thirdly, I should like to ask a question. Why do we limit it to age 16. The Minister of Health has 

indicated to us that there were many illegitimate births with those of 15, 14 and 13 years of age. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I did not say that. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — All right, the Minister of Health says he did not say that. I will say that there are because 

I know that there are many illegitimate births in the age range of 14, 15 and 16 and even 13. If one of the 

reasons we have the Act before us today is to prevent some of these illegitimate births, doesn’t it make 

sense then that we should have no age limit. Maybe there should be no age limit. How many of us would 

support this Act if there were no age limit. How many of us would support this Act if there were no age 

limit. We must bear in mind that what this Act asks us to do is to accept the principle for all ages and 

therefore it should, in my opinion, refer to all people of all ages. Otherwise we should oppose the 

amendment in its entirety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I should like to make two brief 

comments with respect to Bill 101, The Medical Profession Act. I, like the speaker who just sat down 

am opposed to this Bill. I base my thinking on it related to the fact that I do not believe that any 

chronological age indicates maturity. I have said that before in this House and I repeat it. I have heard 

arguments, people saying that a 16 year old can be just as mature as a 50 year old. The same argument 

can be held that a 14 year old can be more mature perhaps than some 50 year olds. Therefore, I do not 

believe that simply setting an age level is very meaningful. In addition we have been informed that 

under another Act venereal disease has been covered and 16 and 17 year olds can secure treatment in 

this regard. Therefore, that diminishes to a considerable degree the necessity for a Bill such as this one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize the merits of the argument presented by the Hon. Member for Prince Albert West 

(Mr. Steuart), the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, by the Hon. Member for Regina Centre, the Hon. 

Premier (Mr. Blakeney) and other Members in the 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2847 

debate but nevertheless I cannot come to the conclusion that this is a proper procedure and a proper step. 

One other reason I take this stand is I do feel and I must conclude that it is a foot in the door leading to 

the probability of new pressures to again lower the age of maturity. I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that I 

find myself in rather strange company with the Hon. Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) and the 

Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) and even in opposition to my seatmate, the Hon. 

Member from Elrose (Mr. Owens) and incidentally I get along pretty well with him. But, as I said 

before, I think I was saved to some degree by the last speaker and I do find myself back in good 

company with the Hon. Member from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes). 

 

Mr. Speaker, people sometimes say to Members, at least I think this is implied, that you should find out 

what your constituents think and then present their view. I don’t hold that view, Mr. Speaker. I disagree 

with it although I realize you must have some sensitivity in relation to the people you represent, that you 

should be aware of their viewpoint. I think particularly in terms of moral questions you stand for what 

you believe to be correct, you have that conviction and irrespective of the consequences you follow it 

through. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, when I entered this House, when asked by someone what I would do and I said I 

would do what was right in my own view, I would please my friends if I had any and I would astonish 

the rest. I intend to follow that rule. I will oppose the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — (Morse) Mr. Speaker, my remarks were going to be rather brief tonight. However, 

after the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) spoke they are going to be briefer as many of the 

points which I intended raising tonight have been made by him. He uses many of the same reasons as I 

do in opposing this particular Bill. I feel very strongly that it is an invasion on family responsibilities. As 

well it is an invasion on parental duty and erosion as well on the family, as we like to consider it, as a 

unit. 

 

He mentioned the concepts of birth control and the value that different parents may place on this in 

terms of their daughters and, of course, because of this reason I have the same doubts in this regard. 

 

Basically, the Act is not needed so much for children, for young people who are living with their 

parents, who stay with their parents. It might be, for some of the reasons given today, needed for the 

young people who do not live with their parents. But here again, why is it necessary to pass a law to 

correct a problem or a mistake that has been made somewhere in the past. Why don’t we instead direct 

our energies and our efforts to find solutions so that a problem such as this would not have happened in 

the first place. 

 

Just to sum up, Mr. Speaker, in my own mind, I am not convinced that this Bill is the correct approach 

and for this reason I am not going to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2848 

Mr. L. Larson: — (Pelly) Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words with regard to the amendments to 

The Medical Profession Act. I want to say at the outset that I will not be supporting the amendments. I 

think basically some of my concerns have been expressed by my colleague and some of the Members on 

the other side of the House. I think the principle is wrong. I have some sympathy for the intentions of he 

Bill, I have some sympathy for the problems that exist in society today. But I fail to see where passing 

this kind of amendment to The Medical Profession Act will do anything to correct the situation. 

 

Much has been said about the family unit both for and against, both pro and con. Say what you will, Mr. 

Speaker, the family unit and its purpose is still the best we have in society today. Whether it is weak or 

whether it is strong, whether you agree with it or disagree, it stands as the corner stone of the present 

social structure. It is rather easy to get biased about some of the so-called modern concepts of society 

and it is rather easy to say that we ought to open the door even wider. It is equally easy, Mr. Speaker, to 

quote and to live in the old fashioned time tried clichés and habits. It is easy to live by the lessons of the 

past as they are proven either wrong or right to some extent. But I suggest that this approach to society’s 

problems today is neither modern nor is it of the old school. I suggest that society today, if we are to 

meet the challenges of tomorrow, must seek different solutions. I am reminded of my young daughter 

who has two young children. She was brought up in the society of the 50s and the roaring 60s, no 

problem insofar as her mother and I were concerned. Today she is a mother in her own right. Some of 

her concerns, some of the expressed concern with regard to the directions that governments today tend 

to go by loosening legislation, some of her concerns with regard to the control of society are expressed 

to me and she is really very concerned about them. She says, “Dad, for goodness sake don’t loosen the 

flood gates any further,” This, to me, Mr. Speaker, is an indication that the so-called permissive modern 

society today is quickly outliving its usefulness and that we must move and think in a different direction. 

 

By passing this kind of legislation I suggest that we are merely accommodating, merely sanctioning a 

society that has pretty well worn itself out. If we are to keep abreast and do our duty and responsibility 

we have to look at much deeper, must better thought out concepts than this amendment will do. It is for 

these reasons and many others that have been expressed that I will not be supporting the amendments to 

The Medical Profession Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Gross: — (Gravelbourg) I should like to add support to this Bill. I feel it is a Bill going in a 

positive direction. I feel it is high time that governments started concerning themselves with some of 

these problems. I know that we cannot legislate social needs and social requirements but perhaps this 

Bill could be a step in the right direction in that it provides young people an opportunity to be able to use 

health services as they see fit and at their own discretion. I believe the old Neanderthal argument saying 

that children at 16, 17 and 18 years of age are not responsible and cannot make decisions in the right 

direction is 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

 

2849 

completely archaic. I don’t believe that Members on this side of the House or on the opposite side can 

realistically say that young people at age 16 and 17 are not responsible. In regard to the family unit, a 

subject that has been brought up, consideration has been given to the family unit saying that it is going 

to be the beginning of the end of the family unit, that we are perpetually eroding the family unit. I feel 

that this is absolutely incorrect. I don’t think that we are destroying any part of the family unit. If by 16 

years of age the family unit is not in a tight position in terms of relationships, it never will. A Bill of this 

nature will not destroy in any way, manner or form the family unit. 

 

I should like to tell the Members of this Assembly about an incident that just recently happened in my 

constituency, in fact, in our immediate area. It was in regard to a young fellow, 17 years of age whose 

parents had taken off to Hawaii for a vacation. He was left to stay with another neighbor. It happened 

during the winter time. While they were out skidooing one day he managed to fall off his skidoo and got 

his leg tangled in the skidoo and as a result he was seriously injured. They immediately took him to 

Gravelbourg where he had some preventative treatment and a decision was made to send him to Regina. 

In the interim, between Gravelbourg and Regina, Dr. LeBlanc of Gravelbourg, had some very serious 

deliberations to make. He had to figure out what he would recommend to the doctor in Regina. The fact 

that they tried to reach his parents in every desperate way and there were no relatives in the immediate 

area that they could get to consult with. As a result somebody had to make a decision. The decision was 

made by the local doctor for the area. He advised the doctor in Regina that he should proceed to do 

whatever possible to save the leg. As a result the young man still has his leg, but it was questionable at 

the time whether they could save it or take it off. 

 

There are many serious things that come up in terms of what can happen and what cannot happen. I feel 

that it is about time we had this type of legislation that would make it fairly clear to the medical 

profession what they can do and what they cannot do and who has decision making power and who has 

not. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would urge Members of this Assembly to support an progressive piece of 

legislation like this one and give our younger generation a chance to make their own decisions. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division. (Referred to 

Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers.) 

 

YEAS — 33 

Messieurs 

 

Dyck Thorson Feduniak 

Meakes Whelan Mostoway 

Wood Carlson Oliver 

Smishek Engel Kaeding 

Romanow Owens Flasch 

Messer Cowley Steuart 

Kramer Taylor Grant 

Kowalchuk Richards McIsaac 

MacMurchy Faris Weatherald 

Pepper Cody MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) 

Michayluk Gross Byers 

 



 

April 17, 1973 

 

 

2850 

NAYS — 14 

Messieurs 

 

Thibault Rolfes Gardner 

Larson Coupland MacLeod 

Robbins Loken McPherson 

Matsalla Guy Wiebe 

Comer Boldt  

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:40 o’clock p.m. 


