



















































Hansard: February 26, 1973


1096 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

23rd Day 

 

Monday, February 26, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the 

Members of the Legislature a group of 21 grade eight students from M.J. Coldwell School located in my 

constituency. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Fred Short. I extend a warm welcome to the 

students in coming to the Legislature this afternoon. I express the hope that their stay with us will be a 

pleasant one and one that they will be able to remember. I also wish to draw to the attention of the 

Members of the Legislature that the M.J. Coldwell School is named after an outstanding citizen, an 

outstanding parliamentarian, he used to be a citizen of this city. Mr. M.J. Coldwell is now residing in 

Ottawa. My latest information is that while he is in his 80s, his health is good. I do hope the students 

will have a good visit with us this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to welcome a group of students in the west 

gallery, 58 in number, all grade eight students from St. Andrews School, located in one of our fine 

residential districts known as Douglas Park. They are accompanied by Mr. Phil. Halter, their principal 

and Mr. John Stockmall, also one of the teachers at the school. I am very pleased to greet them and may 

their stay here be a great inspiration to them this afternoon and that their experience in seeing this 

democratic institution in action be most fruitful. We welcome them sincerely. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to all Hon. 

Members of this House, 28 adult students in the Speaker’s Gallery from the Division of Saskatchewan 

Applied Arts and Science, St. Pat’s Annex, located in Regina North West. Their teachers Peter Geleta 

and Terry Graham are with them. On behalf of all Members I say “a warm welcome to each of you”. We 

hope that your visit will be informative, and that you will gain from your visit a practical introduction to 

the democratic process. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 
 

Fire – Roselyn Apartment Block 
 

Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1097 

Day — I know that the Premier is absent. In his absence, I am sure that all Members in this House will 

join with me in expressing our deep shock and regret and sympathy to the families of all of those that 

were killed in the terrible fire that took place here in Regina in the Roselyn Apartment building. I urge 

the Government, and I am sure they will, to give consideration to offering any assistance to those 

survivors or their families if they, in fact, do need any. This was a terrible tragedy, one of the worst in 

the history of this province. I am sure all Members and I am sure everyone in this province and in the 

country were very saddened to hear of this awful fire, this terrible accident. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — We simply join the Leader of the Opposition in expressing 

the shock of this side of the House to this unfortunate happening. Certainly, the Government is looking 

at this matter, both through SGIO and through other aspects of it and whatever can be done, that can be 

reasonably done by Government. We will certainly look at it, I undertake to say so. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Delegation to Roumania 
 

Hon. Mr. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, Members of the Assembly 

may remember on the 2nd of February when I spoke during the debate on the Speech from the Throne, I 

gave an account of the present status of the agreement between the Government of Saskatchewan and 

our partners in the Roumanian Tractor project for Saskatoon. I understand that last week, while I was 

away, one of the Members raised the question of the present status of that project. I thought it 

appropriate now to make a short report. 

 

I have already indicated the terms of the agreement between our partners in this project when I spoke in 

the debate earlier this month. I just say that agreement was arrived at in negotiations last summer and on 

the Roumanian side the negotiators were some 10 in number including Mr. C. Pinzaru, Deputy Minister 

of the Department of Foreign Trade in the Ministry of Machines and Buildings in the Government of 

Roumania located in Bucharest. With him were Mr. C. Munteanu who is an economic counsellor in the 

Roumanian Embassy in Montreal, Mr. Ted Budu who is a Canadian representative of the tractor 

company located in Canada and Mr. V. Foroga who is another representative of the company, a service 

manager located in Provost, Alberta. From Roumania with those people were the following: Mr. Vasile 

Sechel, the general director of the tractor works in Brasov, Roumania; Mr. D. Nicholescu who is the 

deputy director of the tractor works in Brasov; Mr. C. Florescu who is a legal counsellor for the Ministry 

of Machines and Buildings at Bucharest; and three economists from the tractor works in Brasov, Mr. M. 

Cheroiu, Mr. N. Schiopu, and Mr. M. Savu. 

 

In those negotiations last summer, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan was represented by 

five people. The leader of our negotiating team was Mr. David Dombowsky, the Deputy Minister of 

Industry and Commerce. He was assisted in those negotiations by Mr. George Hatton who is the General 

Manager of SEDCO, by Mr. Bart Drope who is an industrial consultant in the Department of Industry 

and Commerce, 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1098 

by Dr. John Beke who is a practising lawyer with the firm of Griffin, Beke and Gilbert in Regina and 

Mr. Ralph Henderson who is a chartered accountant with the firm of Peat, Marwick and Mitchell located 

here in Regina. 

 

I wish to inform the Assembly that as forecast in my speech on the 2nd of February of this year in this 

Chamber this negotiating team of ours on behalf of the Government is going to Roumania in order to 

conclude some outstanding matters with respect to our agreement and the project. The team led by Mr. 

Dombowsky including the four other people I mentioned who negotiated for us last summer will be 

leaving on Friday of this week for Roumania. They will also be making some other calls but their main 

mission is to negotiate with their Roumanian counterparts the last terms of the agreement as I set out in 

my report to the Legislature during the Throne Speech Debate. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I am glad the Minister has brought this to the attention of 

the House. He indicated that a partnership agreement has been signed. If that is the case, I wonder if the 

Minister would mind tabling that partnership agreement so that all the Members of the House could have 

an opportunity to peruse it. 

 

I am glad to hear that Dr. Beke is going on this trip. It is certainly a very nice enjoyable trip for him as 

well as government officials. But I was wondering now after almost two years of negotiation if the 

Minister could indicate if the negotiations are still concerning a large manufacturing plant whereby there 

would be a highly intensified labor element involved in the proposed amendment or just what is the state 

of negotiations, what is the type of enterprise that is now being discussed at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the Member’s memory is faulty. His statement of 

what I said is inaccurate and I want to set the record straight. 

 

First of all, I did not say that the stage of the agreement which we had reached as I reported it on the 2nd 

of February was a signed document. I said that was the stage of our agreement, an understanding at that 

point. Let us not confuse the issue by suggesting that there was some agreement I referred to as having 

been signed, because I did not. I regret that the Member’s hearing is so faulty. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the project is the one which I outlined in my report to this Assembly on the 2nd 

of February. Just because I know how much difficulty the Member has in remembering what I said, I 

indicated at that time that because DREE blows hot and cold about this project and because they are now 

blowing in the direction of getting a marketing organization under way before we start any assembly 

plant (whether it is intensified labor or not) we are now proceeding with that suggestion to set up the 

marketing organization and in particular to hire a general manager for the project. I indicated on the 2nd 

of February that to negotiate all of the terms revolving around the sales organization and the terms of 

reference for the general manager will require a meeting of the negotiating teams on both sides. That is 

what is going to take place. 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1099 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — One brief question to clarify. Is the Minister suggesting that what they 

are now setting up is a marketing agency and it will not be an assembly plant but a marketing agency 

with a parts and distribution warehouse? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I am saying that DREE has said there will be no tractor assembly 

plant of Roumanian origin for Saskatchewan. There will be no grant from the DREE people at all unless 

we can convince them that the partnership has the capacity to sell the tractors. They have suggested 

quite definitely that we must have a marketing organization and that we must have a general manager 

working on this marketing organization before they will look favorably upon making a grant for the 

assembly plant in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan School Boys Championship 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that most, if not all of the 

Members of the House, are aware that this past weekend the Saskatchewan School Boys Curling 

Championship Playdowns were held and I am pleased at this time to bring to the attention of this House 

that a rink from Humboldt won the provincial championship. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the rink consists of Allen Becker, who is the skip; Harvey 

Niebrugge, who is the third; Kevin Kalthoff and Terry Lovterkamp. I know that all Members of this 

House wish the boys every success in their Canadian Championship Playdowns which are going to be 

held in New Brunswick very early in the month of March. 

 

Girls High School Curling Playoffs 
 

Hon. Mr. Byers (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report to all Members of the 

House that the High School girls curling playoffs for District 2 were held in Foam Lake over the 

weekend. The high schools participating in these playoffs were Esterhazy, representing Qu’Appelle 

Valley district; Oxbow, representing the Southeast district; Wynyard and Foam Lake, representing the 

East Central district. I am pleased to report that the girls’ rink from Foam Lake Composite High School 

composed of skip, Susan Madill and her twin sister, Angie Madill, as well as Gloria Springer and Sonia 

Scutchings emerged victorious from this two-day competition. This is one of the rinks that will now 

proceed to the provincial finals to be held on March 2 and 3. I hope that all Members will join in 

congratulating all the members of these curling rinks for their participation in this annual provincial 

competition. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1100 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Unemployment 
 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the Minister 

of Finance (Mr. Cowley). In light of the Party opposite’s acceptance of a four per cent unemployment 

rate as an acceptable figure and in light of the unemployment tragedy in Saskatchewan where we have a 

seven per cent unemployment rate, what does the Minister of Finance estimate the unemployment rate 

will be in Saskatchewan this coming summer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cowley (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t follow the first part of the Member’s 

remarks. With respect to his question, considerably less than it is now. If the Member would like some 

further information I will attempt to provide him with whatever projections and statistics we have. 

 

Mr. Lane: — A supplementary for information. I refer to David Lewis’ comments in the House of 

Commons. I hope that is not the answer that the Minister intends to stick with. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of Culture and Youth) moved second reading of Bill No. 29 – An Act 

to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 1968. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I hope in fact I am quite confident, that the Leader of the Opposition 

will readily agree with this Bill, as he agreed with some of the others the other day. Now that he is 

freshly returned from his little holiday down East at the Empire Club I know he will be in good spirits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill, An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act will entitle a farmer to claim 

indemnity from the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance Association with a loss or the damaged or 

the hailed area of five per cent or more. At present, Mr. Speaker, farmers are not entitled to indemnity 

unless the loss or damage exceeds 10 per cent. The motivation for the change of this provision comes 

from the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Association which is owned and operated by the rural 

municipalities of this province, which is in effect by the farmers themselves through their rural 

municipality. Each municipality is represented at annual meetings by one delegate and from this number 

elects a board of directors. This organization, Mr. Speaker, has been operating since 1917 under The 

Municipal Hail Insurance Act which comes under the Provincial Secretary. The reason for the 

establishment of the association was because the producer of the day was not satisfied with the manner 

in which privately owned insurance companies operated. In response to this dissatisfaction the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance Association was established whereby a farmer could obtain his 

insurance automatically by completing and filing with the municipal secretary a crop report. 

 

The directors fixed annually the rate or rates per acre 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1101 

to be levied on all land of an owner under crop. The municipal secretary enters these levies in the tax 

roll and the hail assessment is collected and handled in the same way as school, telephone or any other 

tax. 

 

There are those, Mr. Speaker, who would be philosophically against farmers establishing their own 

insurance program instead of a private non-agricultural firm to service the farm community. Mr. 

Speaker, despite a myth about the lack of expertise when people decide to provide service to themselves 

through co-operation, the Association has operated successfully and has reserves in excess of $11 

million. 

 

For the year 1971 the Association insured a total of over nine million acres which is approximately 36 

per cent of the figure of 25,923,500 acres sown in cereals, flax, mustard, rapeseed and sunflower seed in 

Saskatchewan as shown in reports of estimates for the year by Statistics Canada. The percentage of 

crops insured by this Association has been from 36 per cent to 38 per cent since 1963, the year when all 

municipalities were offered insurance on a continuous basis under the revised Municipal Hail Insurance 

Act. As well, the Association has a subsidiary called Additional Municipal Hail Limited. This company 

is licenced under The Saskatchewan Insurance Act and as of December 1971 had assets in the amount of 

over $700,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak to this amendment because it provides still more coverage to the 

47,000 farmers of this province who subscribe to Municipal Hail Insurance. As well, Mr. Speaker, by 

amending this Act to provide coverage for over five per cent damage or loss rather than the 10 per cent, 

we are enabling this farmer controlled and operated hail insurance program to be established on the 

same basis as other insurance which pay on losses of five per cent or more. Mr. Speaker, this 

amendment will further enable producers to protect themselves against partial losses which until now 

have not been allowed under 10 per cent damage or loss. By supporting this motion this House is 

similarly supporting the farmers of this province in realizing a greater return for their investment which 

continues to remain at the whim and the mercy of the unpredictable elements of nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments on this particular Bill. Someone 

mentioned the other day that the new Minister of Culture was batting a four for four record but he fouled 

it up today by leading the House to believe that the CCF invented the Municipal Hail Insurance 

Company. The Municipal Hail Insurance record is well known, they have been here since 1917, long 

before the NDP were invented and I regret that he took the occasion to make a political speech as to 

Municipal Hail and the Government. He doesn’t really need to tell us and I am sure the farmers of the 

province know that the history of Municipal Hail has an excellent record. Their record, as I say, is well 

known to everyone in this province. 

 

There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that we will be supporting this motion. It is a Government motion but 

the principles contained herein, according to the Minister, were presented to him 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1102 

by the municipal people themselves and so it is not Government policy that we are deciding on here, it is 

municipal policy that certainly does enjoy the support of this side as well. 

 

I wonder if in closing the debate if the Minister could indicate to us, is this the same percentage of loss 

that will be handled under the new crop insurance regulations dealing with hail – the five per cent aspect 

and the five per cent aspect insofar as payment of claims is concerned? There is no question this is an 

improvement in municipal hail coverage, in additional hail insurance and as I say, it is one we will 

support. I hope he will make some mention of that, if not now, at least in Committee. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I rather regret that the Member opposite has misconstrued my 

comments in attempting to say that I was attempting to insinuate that the Municipal Hail Insurance was 

started by the CCF. I don’t know where he got that from but I know from comments coming from 

Members opposite from time to time that they seem to get their things from sources unknown and turn 

them around to make them other than what they are meant to be. I never said that the CCF invented it. I 

did say that it started in 1917 but, no doubt, it was probably originated by people who were of the same 

frame of thought and philosophy as what developed into the CCF a few years later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am glad that the Members opposite will support this good amendment to The 

Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance Act. At this present time I can’t say to the Member whether the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance will be taking in the five per cent but I am sure in Committee of the 

Whole I will be able to provide that answer. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 31 – An Act to Regulate 

and Control the Use, Distribution and Handling of Pesticides. 
 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, The Pest Control Products Act, Bill No. 31, will enable this 

Government to regulate pesticide use to ensure the people of Saskatchewan and, in fact, our customers 

throughout the world that there will be no pesticide residue on or in our agricultural marketable 

products. This Act will enable us to assure the neighbors of those farmers using chemical pesticides that 

the pesticide will be used in a responsible manner and that legislation will provide authority to bring to a 

stop the careless use of pesticides by custom applicators. Mr. Speaker, this legislation will provide the 

Government of Saskatchewan with much needed authority to assure protection of the environment so 

that chemical pesticides, a new essential tool in Saskatchewan agriculture, may continue to be used to 

the advantage of our farmers and our communities. The passage of this Act will testify to the people of 

this province that the need for careful, for controlled, rational and judicious use of pesticides is clearly 

recognized by this Government. In putting this legislation forward, Mr. Speaker, this Government 

recognizes the extensive inputs and protection accruing from the Federal programs of pesticide 

regulation and this proposed new Saskatchewan legislation will authorize the special additional 

provisions required for the same use of pesticides under 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1103 

Saskatchewan conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan is strongly dependent upon world markets for the 

disposal of its agricultural products. The increasing demand in those markets for products with 

acceptable residual tolerances of agricultural pesticides makes it essential that pesticides in 

Saskatchewan are utilized in a manner which will meet with those tolerances. Mr. Speaker, I wish to 

emphasize that approval of the provision of this legislation is most essential to the future of 

Saskatchewan agriculture. The maintenance of rural family life is dependent upon the viable and 

profitable agricultural industry. This industry will not be viable and profitable if our farmers are not 

permitted to utilize new techniques which provide for maximum production at a minimum cost. 

Essential new technique of agriculture include the use of pest control products. We believe that the 

passage of this Bill will assure judicious and controlled use of pest control products and will convey to 

society at large a confidence in the manner in which our farmers are using these products to the mutual 

benefits of themselves and society. 

 

The use of pesticides for crop protection has proven to be essential if the agricultural industry in 

Saskatchewan is to maintain its competitive position in world markets. Mr. Speaker, I must add that we 

are becoming increasingly dependent upon world markets for almost all of our produce. Controlled and 

careful use of agricultural chemicals which are proven to be safe under approved conditions for use for 

control of weeds, insect pests and disease of crops and livestock is essential to our competitive position 

in international markets For example, Mr. Speaker, the rapid and continued growth of the rapeseed 

industry in this province is dependent upon our ability to maintain our output of a high quality product. 

Any drop in production would seriously jeopardize Saskatchewan’s position in expanding the edible oil 

market. At the same time the production of this crop has been seriously threatened by potential 

devastating outbreaks of Bertha Army Worms during each of the past two crop seasons. Extensive use 

of a new chemical called Lannate was required to save the rapeseed crop in 1971 and again in 1972. The 

present demand for additional protection of wheat and feed grains has placed the Saskatchewan farmer 

in a most favorable position to strive for maximum production in 1973. However, we face the threat of a 

severe outbreak of grasshoppers this year, which, if not controlled, could seriously reduce our ability to 

take advantage of existing market demands. Without the means by which satisfactory and economic 

control of such pests can be achieved, the net income of the producer as well as the economy of 

Saskatchewan will be seriously affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the staff of my department has studied the possibility of infestations of Bertha Army 

Worms in rapeseed crops and grasshoppers for the coming year. While the extent of the infestation of 

these insect pests is dependent upon weather being favorable to their development we are not reasonably 

sure that intensive control campaigns will be required in 1973 to combat both of these crop pests. The 

Department of Agriculture will be purchasing large supplies of the safest chemical pesticides known and 

authorized for use under federal legislation in order to make these products available to all farmers at the 

lowest possible cost. It is intended, Mr. Speaker, that we have authority to ensure that only the pest 

control products registered for use in controlling these pests will be 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1104 

used. The Pest Control Products Act will provide authority to prosecute dealers who sell unauthorized 

products to farmers for the control of agricultural pests and also, if necessary, to prosecute farmers for 

using unregistered pest control products not registered for their use. At the same time, it is essential that 

this Government continue to maintain the concern which is shown for the quality of the environment and 

for the health and welfare of society as a whole. 

 

We believe that this legislation will serve to demonstrate that we have a sense of responsibility towards 

society and consequently we expect that society at large will respond in a co-operative manner and that 

the likelihood of emotional and unfounded campaigns unnecessarily to ban the use of pesticides will be 

significantly reduced. It is the intention of my Department, Mr. Speaker, to place a great deal of 

emphasis on the training of custom applicators in the proper use of and safe methods of the application 

of the pesticides. We believe this is essential to the protection of farmers against unscrupulous operators 

and as I have mentioned, to protect our markets in the international area. 

 

I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that legislation similar to the Bill now before us has been passed in 

Manitoba, has been passed in Alberta and somewhat similar legislative controls are in use under The 

Pharmacy Act in British Columbia and The Environmental Protection Act in the Province of Ontario. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I wish to emphasize that concentrated research and investigation is now 

being undertaken to ensure that pesticides registered for use in Canada will, if used correctly, provide 

benefits to the farmers and to society without undue detrimental effects on the environment. These 

measures also protect the reputation of our agricultural products in world markets. It is necessary, 

however, to ensure that pest control products are being used in a manner which will achieve these ends. 

The Pest Control Products Act has been introduced to provide legislation through which the safe 

application, handling and storage of agricultural pesticides can be assured. 

 

Having made these brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments. I am sure that all 

Members on both sides of the House agree that they need to control the application of pesticides in 

Saskatchewan, particularly in an agricultural province this is a very important thing. I am concerned that 

certain products are taken off the market without an adequate substitute being found to replace them. I 

should like to refer to my own area where there was a heavy infestation of grasshoppers a year ago and 

the effectiveness and the cost of a substitute pesticide which was a contact chemical was completely 

inadequate. The cost of the new pesticide was way beyond the range of the farmers. For example, 

dieldrin, the grasshopper control spray used to cost approximately 16 cents an acre. The application 

would last two or three or four weeks and one application was usually sufficient to control the 

grasshopper infestation and control its spread. In most cases it could be done by spraying the 

circumference of the field. This was taken off the market by the new federal and provincial regulations 

and it was replaced by a contact spray. The contact spray went up as high as 90 cents for an acre. On 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1105 

some occasions four and even five applications of this particular spray were required with little 

effectiveness at all because it only had an effect upon those grasshoppers that it came in contact with. A 

new hatch or a fly in from the weeds or from the roadside or from the hills or from the neighboring farm 

which perhaps did not apply the spray meant that 90 cents per acre was completely wasted and there was 

another infestation that came in maybe three or four days later. I certainly hope that the Minister will 

take very seriously the problem of grasshopper infestation this coming spring because the lack of snow, 

the number of eggs that have been laid, there is a real potential danger in southern Saskatchewan for a 

very, heavy grasshopper infestation in 1973. The contact pesticide that is now being used is not adequate 

to control the infestation or the danger to the farmers’ crops. I hope that in the case of an emergency, 

until such time as research is able to develop a cheap and effective spray to replace dieldrin that there 

could be some reconsideration if there is an emergency and a real heavy infestation, that dieldrin would 

be accepted on an emergency basis and that the farmers then could use it and apply it to the infested 

areas. In the past there has been very little proven danger from this particular spray, and until such time 

as the Federal and Provincial Governments — I think it is all well and good for Government to make 

new regulations and controls but until such time as the research is successful in finding a cheap 

substitute they should refrain from cancelling and thereby threatening the crops and the livelihood of 

hundreds and perhaps even thousands of farmers in Saskatchewan, then I think that kind of legislation 

should be reconsidered. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few more words on this Bill and I think some of my colleagues 

would also like to study it. So with that I should like to beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend The Hospital Revenue Act, 1966. 
 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, while the amendments before us seem relatively minor, they do 

contain an important provision for financing in part a new and exciting development in the health field. I 

refer to the new Community Health and Social Centres now being developed in eight communities in 

this province. All but one of these were deprived of hospital services by the previous Government 

during those seven lean and hungry years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all Members of this House will remember the sorry times when 11 hospitals were closed in 

just a matter of a few months. We will recall that the Liberals started this “close the door on the 

hospitals” in April of 1968 when they first closed the Prelate hospital. In March of ’69 they closed the 

doors of the Qu’Appelle hospital. In June of ’69 they closed the doors of the Willowbunch hospital. 

They got carried away with that steam, Mr. Speaker, and in July of ’69 they closed four hospitals in one 

month — in Frontier, in Hodgeville, in LeRoy, in Neudorf. In August of that same year they closed the 

Maryfield hospital. In November of ’69 they closed another three, Lashburn hospital, Mossbank hospital 

and the Quill Lake hospital. 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1106 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberals decided to close these hospitals without first giving serious attention to the 

local district hospital needs. Without examining alternative methods of delivering health care to those 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a typical Liberal approach to the problems of our rural people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Hospital after hospital was closed in Saskatchewan by the Liberal Government. 

While at the same time numerous rural railway stations and post offices were being closed by their 

colleagues, the Ottawa Liberals. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if something doesn’t work properly, the Liberal answer is to close it down. Whether 

you’re talking about hospitals or railway stations or post offices and now the rail lines. If a community 

hospital doesn’t meet the problems of the ‘60s the Liberal solution was to tell the community to lock the 

door. Then move up the track and find your health services somewhere else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t pretend we understand all the problems that face all the communities. But we do 

know this that closing the hospital doors was no solution to the problems the communities experienced 

during those years. 

 

During the election campaign in 1971 our Party made a public commitment. We said that we would 

re-examine all proposals to close small hospitals. To undertake any closures only after full consultation 

with the communities concerned. And to provide for satisfactory alternatives to handle emergencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within three months of taking office we established a special committee to look into the 

health service needs of those communities where hospitals had been closed under the Liberal regime. 

The committee drew up a health services profile of each of these communities taking into consideration 

the population composition, medical service utilization and access to health facilities. The group then sat 

down with the individual communities to listen to their health problems and their proposals for 

developing with them. In virtually every case, Mr. Speaker, in the towns and villages visited, senior 

citizens made up over 10 per cent of the residents. And in three communities senior citizens made up 

more than 20 per cent of the local population. After the health needs were determined a report was 

prepared for government consideration. 

 

It recommended that a package of health and social services be offered to the communities in question. 

It was proposed that a community health and social centre would consist of all or most of the following 

services: One, an outpatient clinic with a regular visiting physician, part-time nursing services and basic 

x-ray and laboratory services. Secondly, an on-call nurse to provide 24-hour emergency services. 

Thirdly, a home care program. Fourthly, a social program providing social and therapeutic activities for 

elderly people three afternoons a week. 

 

These proposals were realistic because the services were immediately available and they met the health 

needs which the 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1107 

community had themselves identified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last June the Cabinet gave its approval for seven pilot programs to be introduced in seven 

small communities where hospitals had been closed. The project, Mr. Speaker, whatever its 

shortcomings, is clearly a more reasonable alternative than simply boarding up the doors and windows 

as the Members opposite did during their term of office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — The alternative presented by this Government is attractive enough that Delisle 

Union Hospital decided last year to replace its hospital with a Community Health and Social Centre. Mr. 

Speaker, I just received a letter the other day from the Delisle people and they are very happy and very 

pleased with the way their Community Health and Social Centre is functioning. 

 

The hospital closure policy of the former Liberal Government was consistent with their attitude toward 

small communities. As far back as 1965 when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) was Minister 

of Health small hospitals were being harassed by the Liberal Government. In that year the Hon. Leader 

of the Opposition decided that 17 small hospitals had operating costs which were, in his opinion, too 

high. So he cooked up another Liberal policy designed to make life more miserable for these small 

communities involved. The policy he introduced was simple enough. Certain union hospital districts 

were required to contribute funds up to an equivalent of a two mill levy towards the operating cost of 

their hospital. There was no claim that the hospitals concerned were extravagant or that they were poorly 

run. In most cases low rates of occupancy led to higher than normal cost per patient day. This was not 

something that the local hospital could control immediately. But the Liberal two mill policy penalized 

these 17 union hospital districts just as if they had been judged and proven guilty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I should point out that the Liberal two mill levy was applied to only eight hospitals after 1969. That is 

only because the Liberals closed the other nine hospitals. 

 

Our Government rescinded that discriminatory policy effective January 1, 1972. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — The funds formerly raised by the two mill levy are now provided by the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. This enabled the eight union hospital districts to lower their tax 

levies for hospital purposes. Again, Mr. Speaker, one can easily see the difference between the NDP and 

a Liberal solution to problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the amendments we are proposing to The Hospital Revenue Act 

will authorize the diversion of one mill to a union hospital board operating an approved Community 

Health 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1108 

and Social Centre. The amendments are necessary because the present legislation makes no provision 

for a union hospital district which no longer has a hospital to opt out of the hospital revenue levy. We 

propose that municipalities within a local union hospital district be enabled to divert funds to Health and 

Social Centres where appropriate. This will give the Health and Social Centre project a sound financial 

base within the community. The proposed Health and Social Centres will cost perhaps a minimum of 

$25,000 per year to operate if they include all the components that I have already mentioned and have 

visiting physician services to hold regular clinics either once a week or twice or three times a week, 

whichever is appropriate for the community. 

 

The proposal is that the Provincial Government will pay for 60 per cent of the capital cost of any 

approved renovations up to a total of $18,000. It is not expected that there will be any requirement for 

extensive renovations since in most cases the existing structures are readily adaptable to the new service. 

The operating costs of the health component will be taken care of by the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan and in case of the social services that the community organizes, that is providing they 

want them, they will be asked to pay 60 per cent of the operating costs and the Government will pick up 

40 per cent of the operating costs. 

 

The amendments to The Hospital Revenue Act will provide the union hospital board in these districts 

with the funds to pay for the latter costs, that is the social services needs that they want to organize for 

themselves, not for the health component. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the Members of this Assembly will recognize the merit of the Health 

and Social Centre projects. Even the Members opposite will, I am sure, see the wisdom of providing 

alternative health services to these communities where hospitals have been closed. For this reason, I am 

hopeful that we can count on them to support the amendments that I am proposing. 

 

We now have eight Community Health and Social Centres in various stages of development. Programs 

are in operation in the communities of Delisle, Hodgeville, Mossbank, Quill Lake and Willowbunch. We 

anticipate similar programs beginning operation in the very near future at LeRoy, Maryfield and at 

Neudorf. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — I hope that when these centres become fully operational many Members of this 

House will visit them. The Members opposite particularly might benefit from this experience. These 

Health and Social Centres are not only alternatives to hospital closure but are also serious experiments in 

finding new methods of health care delivery. 

 

The Health and Social Centre program embodies three important factors, Mr. Speaker. First, emphasis 

on the maintenance of health as opposed to simply treating illness. Secondly, local consumer 

participation in the planning of health services. Thirdly, an integration of health and social services. 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1109 

We have decided to leave the administrative operation of these centres in the hands of the hospital 

boards that formerly operated the old in-patient hospital. These union hospital boards are still legally 

constituted bodies. They have taxing powers and they own the former hospital building and their assets. 

The board has experience dealing with practising physicians for medical services. They are familiar with 

the Hospital Services Plan financial procedures. It has also maintained liaison with regional health 

nurses who I know will be helping to supervise the home care programs and other functions of the 

Health and Social Centres. 

 

The emphasis in the Health and Social Centre is on the provision of good level co-ordinated health and 

social service to our smaller rural communities. The centres lay emphasis on a need for a healthy activity 

centre for our senior citizens. The home care program lays emphasis on patient oriented health care. The 

provision of an out-patient clinic with a regular visiting physician ensures communities a continuity of 

medical care for their needs. Finally, Mr. Speaker, are the services of an on-call nurse guaranteeing the 

community access to professional health care on an emergency basis. The Health and Social Centre 

program is an evidence of the effective program that this Government is introducing to meet the 

changing health needs of our people in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I have discussed this particular Bill with the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Association and they endorse the legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — May I also say that the development of the Health and Social Centres equally 

has the support of the Saskatchewan medical profession. Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34 — An 

Act to amend The Hospital Revenue Act be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I was rather amused when the Minister of Health 

(Mr. Smishek) talked about harassment of hospitals by the former Government. Certainly, there has 

been no greater harassment of hospitals than what he is giving to the hospitals right today. It is rather 

odd that when he was asked a question in the House last Friday he completely ignored the question, 

refused to answer it. I don’t know what technical foot he thought he was standing on but it certainly 

doesn’t support him. There are clippings and reports from all over the province about the financial 

harassment of the hospitals. I asked the Minister the other day about the cuts in staff to the Regina 

General Hospital and he refused to answer it. The number of the staff for the base line for global 

budgeting at the General Hospital has been cut by 25 people from the allocation of staff from the 1972 

budget. This cut in staff includes seven dietary positions, nine housekeeping positions, one welder and 

some other positions. And he indicated to this House that he didn’t cut back the other day. 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1110 

I just refer to a clipping from The StarPhoenix, February 15, with regard to the City Hospital in 

Saskatoon: 

 

We have been informed that the number of staff for the base line for global budgeting is to be cut by 

15 from our allocation of staff in the ’72 budget. And 28 from our 1970 base line. The proposed 

reductions in staff in the 1972 budget are 14 in the nursing department, two in housekeeping, one in 

dietary . . . 

 

And so on. Then he tells us he is not harassing. Every hospital in this province is being harassed by the 

Minister. 

 

These amendments that we are dealing with are rather minor. The Minister has said this and has gone 

through them. But I want to say that this is the first time that we in the House have had the opportunity 

formally to discuss the Community Health and Social Centres. There are a number of very serious 

questions that should be answered before this Legislature is called upon to vote on this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — It’s only been . . . 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — This is the first time the Minister has said anything in this House about the 

Community Health and Social Centres. We heard a few things through the press and one thing and 

another but this is the first time he has talked about them formally. 

 

First, this may or may not be an innovation in the delivery of health care. This still has to be determined. 

A manual has been prepared by the Department of Public Health to give some idea of how these centres 

are to be operated. In one of the statements made in that manual is that the introduction of Health and 

Social Centres in selective communities is being undertaken as an experimental program. Two centres 

were established originally. I think that this could qualify as an experiment. However, I understand from 

the Minister that there are now three more operating and three more about to be operating. I wonder at 

what stage an experimental program becomes an established program and a recognized program? I think 

we have got past the stage of an experimental program when we talk about eight. What we have now is 

apparently an experiment in health care that is the established practice of the Department of Health. The 

great problem with this is that the established program of Community Health and Social Centres have 

been instituted under the guise of an experiment and there are not provided the necessary guidelines for 

the implementation of a program that concerns the matter of public safety. In the manual it says that 

Social Centres are designed to emphasize health and not sickness. Experience to date in the Centres has 

shown that the Centres are sickness oriented. They are not health oriented. So far, existing Centres are 

no more than a reception or a collecting area for illness. This has been the experience of the two 

establishments. If this is the case, we may find that rather than finding a more economical delivery of 

health in the small community, we may just be adding a new service onto the old health care delivery 

system and that this will result in higher costs in our province and no increase in the quality of health 

care. 

 

The most serious deficiency of this experimental program is that the Medical Association and Nursing 

Association were 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1111 

not consulted before implementing this program. This experimental program of the Minister of Health 

(Mr. Smishek) has resulted without consulting the professions and he would not accept input from the 

professions. And it is very obvious that the nurses find themselves in a very difficult position with these 

new Community Health and Social Centres. Both the nursing profession and the medical profession are 

willing and they are anxious to supply their expertise and experience in the health field. The 

professionals recognize that the existing centres are inadequate to fill a need that exists in communities. 

These centres are not giving the care that the communities deserve. I think that an input by the medical 

professions would add a great deal to the experiment that is being undertaken. 

 

At present the Community Health and Social Centres Program may have no more than a psychological 

effect on a community. It actually appears that the program falls far short of what was recommended in 

the Hastings Report. I have no doubt as to the possibility that this or some other program like it can 

perform a useful function in small communities. However, I am informed that so far there has been less 

than a happy experience in the communities where these centres are working now. I do not doubt that 

this province needs an improvement in the type of health care and that the type of health care we need 

may be similar to what the Minister of Health has implemented with the Health and Social Centres. 

However, the effects on the communities must be more than a simple psychological effect and any 

program must be given proper guidance and responsibility. 

 

The Minister of Health said that closing the hospital doors in small communities is not the solution. 

Well, opening the doors of Community Health and Social Centres is not necessarily the solution either. 

I’m not ready to accept that these centres will provide any meaningful service to the community as 

presently instituted by the Minister of Health. 

 

I think that other Members of my party would like time to consider the remarks of the Minister of 

Health, certainly I would, and I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 52 — An Act to 

amend The Tuberculosis Sanatoria and Hospitals Act. 
 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t expect that this Bill will be controversial in nature. 

Basically what I want to do is place on record this afternoon an acknowledgement of the excellent work 

that has been done by the Anti-Tuberculosis League of this province. 

 

The purpose of the amendment in the Bill is to provide the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League 

with the authority to become involved with programs to prevent the development and spread of 

respiratory diseases in addition to tuberculosis. The amendment was requested by the Saskatchewan 

Anti-Tuberculosis League. The main program of the League will continue to be treatment and control of 

tuberculosis. However, in order to remain a viable organization and maintain a staff that is equipped to 

carry out its objective, the League feels that it must broaden its program to include the prevention and 

spread of other 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1112 

respiratory diseases. 

 

It isn’t too long ago, Mr. Speaker, that the most serious and prevalent chest disease was pulmonary 

tuberculosis. TB doesn’t affect only the lungs. It can also cause serious disease in any other organs in the 

body. The challenge of this disease attracted many young graduates to this province. A tuberculosis 

specialist was also recognized as a chest specialist within the medical profession. In the past 20 years as 

the incidence of tuberculosis declined, other pulmonary diseases have assumed a much more important 

position. The medical profession is developing chest specialists who are primarily interested in other 

chest conditions. Tuberculosis is no longer the major chest disease. 

 

This has serious consequences for the future control of tuberculosis in Saskatchewan. The likelihood of 

recruiting competent medical staff for tuberculosis work becomes more and more difficult and more and 

more remote each year. The present medical staff of the League will all reach retirement age of 65 by 

1988. Five of them will reach retirement by 1980. It therefore becomes obvious that some forward 

planning must be done if the League is to continue its responsibility and be responsible for the control of 

tuberculosis. 

 

The steady progress and the fight against TB has, to a large extent, been due to the outstanding 

leadership provided by the League’s medical directors and their ability to attract capable and dedicated 

physicians to this field. To obtain competent medical staff in the future the League must encourage 

qualified chest specialists to become associated with its work. In addition, the League wants to develop a 

public education program aimed at the prevention of respiratory diseases. The League doesn’t intend to 

become actively involved in the treatment of respiratory diseases. But it feels it has a role to play in 

improving the treatment of such other diseases as bronchitis, emphysema and asthma. To this end the 

League will be offering bursaries to nurses, physiotherapists and other paramedical personnel to update 

their knowledge in the treatment of these other respiratory diseases. They will then be able to act as 

resource people to other centres in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to assure this House that the finances for this extended program will come from the 

prevention fund and not from the municipal levies. 

 

I am pleased that the League has had the initiative to lay the ground work to ensure that its program will 

have sound medical direction in the future. While significant advances have been made in the fight 

against tuberculosis, there is really no room for complacency even though we consider the disease is 

pretty well under control in Saskatchewan. I am told that there were 170 new active cases discovered in 

our province in 1972. There are other countries where this disease is still one of the main killers. It is 

estimated that two million persons die each year from tuberculosis in Asia and Africa. And we are only 

a one day plane ride away from each of these places. Mr. Speaker, the fact is that we have done such an 

effective job of eradicating the disease that I am told that our population’s resistance is so low that we 

can have people from other countries bringing this disease in and it could spread like wild fire because 

of the lack of resistance on the part of our population. 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1113 

I should also like to say a word about the importance of the fight against diseases of the respiratory 

system. In 1971 the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan reported that diseases of the respiratory 

system ranked second among the users of in-patient hospital services in the province. During 1971 there 

were over 40,000 separations and 288,000 days of hospital care associated with these diseases. At an 

average cost of $40 per day the cost of the hospital care for these respiratory conditions in Saskatchewan 

amounted to about $11.5 million. Add to this the cost of 858,000 doctors services items that were 

provided to treat people with respiratory conditions and we can easily see the need for a program of 

prevention of respiratory diseases in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League much success in the new prevention 

program they are undertaking. Earlier I said that we cannot afford to be complacent about the fight 

against tuberculosis. On the other hand, I think we can take a great deal of pride in the advances that 

have been made against this disease in this province since the early 1900s. These advances have been 

significant. In 1930 there were 686 new cases of tuberculosis discovered in Saskatchewan among the 

non-Indian population. The comparable figure for 1972 is 100. I am using the non-Indian figures as the 

figures for the Indian population in the 1930s are not available. In 1946 there were 803 non-Indian 

patients accommodated in three tuberculosis sanatoria located at Fort San, Prince Albert and Saskatoon. 

Today there are only 74 patients, both Indian and non-Indian, and they are all under treatment at the 

Sanatorium in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the last 10 years the average length of stay for in-patient sanatorium treatment has 

dropped from an average of seven months. With the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League entering 

into a new area I think we should take time to reflect on some of the events that have taken place which 

led Saskatchewan so far in advance in treating and curing ourselves of this disease. I should like to point 

out and want to pay tribute to the many thousands of dedicated people who have devoted so much time 

and sacrifice in this struggle. Here I speak of pioneers in this program like Dr. Seymour, Commissioner 

for Health and later Deputy Minister of Public Health, who spearheaded a meeting of 18 men in 

February of 1911 out of which grew the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League; Mr. Peter McAra who 

was the first President of the League and who spent almost a lifetime involved with the affairs of the 

League. I would be remiss if I did not mention Dr. Ferguson whose achievements in the tuberculosis 

fight earned him the gratitude of the citizens of Saskatchewan and also won him world-wide acclaim and 

recognition. Under his guidance as general superintendent of the League Saskatchewan led the way in 

many tuberculosis studies and programs. There are many more people to be mentioned including Mr. 

Bill Howes, the current president of the League; Dr. Dudley Burnet, the director of medical services and 

general superintendent of the League. Both of these men have given many years of unselfish service to 

the tuberculosis program. The study of the tuberculosis program in Saskatchewan demonstrates vividly 

that there is almost no limit to what can be done when people work together for a common objective. 

 

The tuberculosis story in Saskatchewan began 62 years ago when 18 men met in the Kings Hotel in 

Regina on February 11, 1911 to see what could be done about the problem of tuberculosis in 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1114 

Saskatchewan. Out of this meeting grew the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League which eventually 

brought together the three levels of government, of service clubs and a variety of organizations and 

individuals in a concerted attack on this particular problem. There is no doubt that this is one of the great 

success stories of this province. 

 

I should like to take just a few more minutes to review some of the highlights of this story with you, Mr. 

Speaker. On March 23, 1911 the League was incorporated by an Act of this Legislature. At that time the 

Government included $25,000 in its Supplementary Estimates as a conditional grant to aid in erecting a 

sanatorium. The grant was to be made when the League had raised a similar amount of money. The 

interesting point here, Mr. Speaker, is that the League undertook to raise its share through two provincial 

tag days. The two tag days and the drive for voluntary funds raised $97,000 and educated the public 

regarding the symptoms and treatment of tuberculosis. The 60 bed sanatorium at Fort Qu’Appelle was 

started in 1913 but due to the war construction was suspended and was not completed until 1917. 

Additional grants were provided by the Provincial and Federal Governments. The segregation of patients 

with tuberculosis was regarded as the first step in preventing the spread of infection. This became the 

foundation on which the prevention program was based. To accommodate the need for more in-patient 

beds the Provincial Government constructed the Saskatoon Sanatorium in 1925 and the Prince Albert 

Sanatorium in 1930. In 1929 legislation was enacted which made Saskatchewan the first province in 

Canada to provide free tuberculosis treatment to its residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have already mentioned the unique partnership that existed between the three levels of 

government, of the various service clubs and of the general public in the fight against tuberculosis. 

 

The tuberculosis program in this province owes a great debt to the Associated Canadian Travellers. 

During the depths of the depression in 1934 a few travellers got together and decided if their 

organization was to succeed, it should join hands with some humanitarian association and not only think 

of itself. The travellers chose the Anti-TB League and it has been a happy association ever since. I am 

sure that many Members here will remember the radio amateur hour programs staged by the ACT 

(Associated Canadian Travellers) in support of the Christmas Seal Fund. This support continues today 

and I am informed that the travellers have now contributed in excess of $1 million to support the 

tuberculosis prevention program in this province. They have also contributed at least an equal amount in 

publicity for the program. 

 

I also want to pay tribute to the thousands of persons who have worked so diligently in the Christmas 

Seal and the community survey programs. In this day when people are inclined to adopt a ‘let the 

Government do it’ attitude it is refreshing to see that these programs continue to make an important 

contribution to the tuberculosis prevention program in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, through the efforts of the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League, 

TB has been brought under control in 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1115 

this province. However, we know that tuberculosis can and will continue to strike unless a close 

surveillance is maintained. We expect the League to continue to find and treat infectious cases. To do so 

they feel that they must expand their program to include respiratory diseases if they are to attract doctors 

in the field of tuberculosis medicine. I agree with their proposal, Mr. Speaker, and I am happy to now 

move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the Minister of Health that this 

side of the House is against tuberculosis so we will support this Bill. 

 

When he was mentioning the ACT I thought possibly the Minister had heard about the contribution that 

they would sing in an amateur hour and I thought that he might bring it to the attention of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I concur in his comments about the excellent work done by the 

Anti-Tuberculosis League and I should like to associate the Members on this side of the House with the 

remarks that the Minister made about the League. 

 

The Anti-Tuberculosis League is now expanding the program into the other field of respiratory diseases 

and I think this is a credit to the League. Although the incidence of TB in Saskatchewan has become 

almost negligible compared to 20 and 25 years ago, we must be mindful that any relaxation in our 

efforts could lead again to a high incidence We must be prepared to maintain our expertise and facilities 

to ensure that TB never again attains the terrible threat that it has held. 

 

Mr. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, this is a closure of one type of institution that both 

sides of the House seem to be able to agree on. I want to add my word of agreement to those of the 

Minister on the good work that the Anti-TB League has done over the years. 

 

I am sure that it was an oversight on his part, when he was naming some of the individuals who have 

made such a contribution to the League. A good Conservative was missed, Mr. Ken Moore who spent 

many years in the work of the League and contributed greatly to its success. 

 

A sort of hidden advantage of the closure of the sanatorium in the Fort Qu’Appelle area benefits the 

cottage owners in the area, and I am sure that the Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers) will be very 

pleased to hear that the ill-treated and practically non-treated sewage from the sanatorium that has been 

flowing into that lake for years, now has largely been discontinued. This is one case where I can’t help 

think about the shortcomings of provincial governments when we do so much talking about what other 

people should do to reclaim and preserve our environment and this is a pretty bad example that was 

allowed to continue throughout the years in the Qu’Appelle Valley. The Qu’Appelle Valley Basin 

Authority, I am sure, are aware of this and this is one closure that I am sure both sides 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1116 

of the House are glad to see. 

 

If that building is going to be used for any purpose whatsoever I would hope that the shortcoming would 

be remedied. 

 

I think one of the bright lights of the Anti-TB work was the fact that here was a voluntary group in the 

province who saw a need and pitched in and helped. This is one of the shortcomings we seem to be 

encountering in this day and age that everyone seems to be so ready to look to the government to do 

these things that in previous days groups and individuals volunteered to do. I would hope that this 

feeling of community responsibility can be rekindled and extended because, believe me, I am sure the 

Minister of Health will agree that a department or government can not do all things for all people. 

 

The Minister is recounting the details of the Bill and giving us the background that is necessary, made 

mention of the financing of the expanded program and I wasn’t just too sure of how it was to be handled 

and I would hope that in his closing remarks he would clarify this point. Also, he might touch on the 

question of whether the League will be financed in any different manner in the future to what it has been 

in the past. 

 

It seems to me that the different role that they are playing, possibly would call for a review of their 

financial structure. I would hope that he could comment on it. 

 

On other point, I should like to have his comments as to whether the League proposes changing its name 

in any way to incorporate these services or whether they are still going to go under the well known title 

of the Anti-TB League. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, in closing debate and in trying to answer a couple of the questions 

that were raised by the Hon. Member. 

 

The League advises me at this stage they do not intend to change their name, they want to carry on as 

they have. It is possible that in the future they might consider changing the name. 

 

In regard to the other programs that they might enter into respecting other respiratory diseases, it is not 

their intention to be involved in the treatment of other chest diseases. Their main interest is to do 

research work in the field as well as to provide bursaries and scholarships for nurses, psychotherapists 

and paramedical personnel to develop a staff for other diseases. They do not, at this stage, propose to be 

directly involved in treatment of other diseases. They feel that these can best be taken care of in existing 

health facilities. 

 

The other thing that they are concerned about is the recruitment of medical staff to not only treat 

tuberculosis but also other respiratory diseases. 

 

I trust that answers the questions of the Hon. Member. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister did not comment 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1117 

on the question of the financial structure of whether there is any plan to review that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — I am sorry. In case of the financial structure, the money that will be used for 

these bursaries that I have mentioned will be used from their existing funds and the funds that they 

raised through the ACT. It will not come from the municipal levy. The municipal levies will go towards 

the operation of the current Sanatorium at Saskatoon. So the moneys that they will be raising through the 

ACT, the Christmas Seal program, that will be the money that they will use for the bursaries as well as 

for research. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Byers (Minister of the Environment) moved second reading of Bill No. 57 — An Act to 

amend The Air Pollution Control Act. 
 

Hon. Mr. Byers: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments about the Bill to amend The 

Air Pollution Control Act. 

 

The Province of Saskatchewan is in the fortunate position of not having a widespread air pollution 

problem. We are in the position of being able to develop our air pollution control program in an orderly 

and reasoned manner. We are able to focus on preventative action rather than on more costly air quality 

restoration programs. 

 

The general objective of The Air Pollution Control Act is to control and prevent the contamination of 

the provincial air resources. With expanding industrial activity, the increased use of fuels for heating and 

transportation, it is important that the existing program be strengthened to prevent degradation of our air 

quality. 

 

The Air Pollution Control Act was passed by this Assembly in 1965. Prior to the establishment of the 

Department of the Environment this Act was administered by the Occupational Health Branch of the 

Department of Public Health. Since May 1972 the Department of the Environment has administered the 

Air Pollution Control Branch. The Director of this branch was appointed last week. 

 

As I told this Assembly during the Budget Debate, the Air Pollution Control Program in the province is 

active in several areas. In co-operation with the Federal Government, air quality monitoring stations are 

being operated in five cities. This long-term air quality surveillance program will be supplemented by a 

program to monitor smoke concentrations and suspended matter in cities throughout the province. 

 

We are actively engaged in monitoring potash dust in the vicinity of each of the ten potash mines in the 

province. The addition of a mobile air quality laboratory unit presently on order will make it possible to 

monitor air quality in industrial areas. It will also allow for a more thorough evaluation of complaints 

and it will enable the Department of the Environment to respond rapidly and effectively to suspected 

problem areas. 

 

The Bill to amend The Air Pollution Control Act provides 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1118 

for several amendments to the existing Act. The major change will be to provide the basis for 

establishing a licence system for controlling air pollution emissions. I am advised that presently the 

provinces of Alberta and Manitoba have a permit system. The Clean Environment Commission in 

Manitoba issues a licence to industries to discharge contaminants and this licence provides that the level 

of discharge cannot exceed a certain level. 

 

It is intended with these amendments to bring the legislation roughly up to par with those in operation in 

other provinces. Secondly, other changes will allow for an increase in penalties for violations of the Act 

and its regulations. The increases will bring the penalties in line with those now provided for in The 

Department of the Environment Act. A third change is that the present Air Pollution Control Act 

provides for the establishment of an air pollution advisory committee under The Department of the 

Environment Act on a less structured basis than is presently the case. The Environment Act provides for 

the formation of such committees and we think that these committees can be structured instead under 

that Act. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the most basic use of our air resources is, of course, to sustain life. All other 

uses must yield to the maintenance of air quality, an air quality which will not degrade the health or the 

well-being of man and the environment. These amendments proposed to The Air Pollution Control Act 

will put the Province of Saskatchewan one step closer to ensuring the continued quality of our air 

resources. There may be other questions which Members would like to raise when the Bill is in 

Committee. 

 

I would move send reading of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe there are any particularly great changes 

in regard to this Bill. We have had various Acts before the Legislature before that have dealt with air 

pollution, however, I think that some of the questions that we should like to be asking the Minister are 

under the new licence system. I think one of the most pertinent points that we should want to know 

when he closes debate is if there are any current operating plants in Saskatchewan that would not qualify 

for a licence as he envisages the licence system working. I think that this would be critical if some could 

not currently qualify for licence once the system of issuing licences exists. If so, what length of time, 

etc. will they be given and what arrangements will be given to those companies or individual factories or 

people who are polluting the air? I think this will have a substantial effect on them. 

 

The other point that we shall be asking more about in Committee of the Whole is on the advisory 

committee that he intends to set up. But I do believe, Mr. Speaker, because this is still a very 

complicated and lengthy Act that I should like a little more time to study the Act. I beg leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The 

Exemptions Act. 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 44 is 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1119 

an amendment to The Exemptions Act. 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly will know that The Exemptions Act is a statute which does 

happily what the short title of the Bill implies. It sets out a series of exemptions which protect the 

ordinary person with respect to any judgments obtained against him or her. 

 

The Bill is set out in Section 97 of the Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan and says in particular in section 

2 that the following real and personal property of an execution debtor and his family is hereby declared 

free from seizure by virtue of writs of execution. And then there are set out in this Bill 12 items of 

exemption in this regard. 

 

Now what we seek to do is to amend three of those, Mr. Speaker, which will raise the ceiling with 

respect to the exemption level. The first one in paragraph 2, furniture and household furnishing and 

household appliances presently are exempt to the extent of $1,000. If, in fact, a writ of execution is 

issued the first $1,000 with respect to furniture and household furnishings and household appliances 

would be exempt. We propose in this amendment to raise that from $1,000 to $2,000. 

 

Similarly with respect to item 7 — the tools, implements and office furniture with respect to a debtor in 

the course of his trade, calling or profession, raising that exemption up from $1,000 to $2,000 in the 

proposed Bill. 

 

On the item, paragraph 11 with respect to the house and buildings occupied by the execution debtor and 

the lots upon which they are situated, the present level of exemption is $8,000. We seek to raise that 

level of exemption from $8,000 to $16,000. 

 

Now basically, Mr. Speaker, this amendment reflects what I think is a fact in today’s life, namely, the 

value of goods and has increased so much by virtue of inflation and other factors that the old figures, we 

feel, are unrealistic. They’re too low. A $16,000 house and a lot is truly not very much of an exemption 

and if the purpose of the Bill is to provide that any execution debtor should be at least given the basic 

courtesy of living in his own house and free of any worry of seizure, then we’ve got to raise the 

exemption level so as to take into account that situation. That’s what we are proposing to do with respect 

to paragraph 11 raising it from $8,000 to $16,000. 

 

Roughly speaking, Mr. Speaker, the value of these exemptions set out in paragraphs 2, 7 and 11 have 

been increased by 100 per cent. This recognizes the increase in valuation resulting largely from 

inflation. 

 

Now the other day, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks when I introduced similar legislation I said that this was 

minor but important legislation. Now I’m not going to describe this as minor legislation. The 

amendments are not complicated, they’re not lengthy, but it is important legislation because again it is a 

form of consumer protection legislation and I would commend to the Members of the House the 

approval of this Bill in principle. The principle of raising the exemption level should be receiving the 

support, in my judgment, of all Members and therefore it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move 

second reading of An Act to amend The Exemptions Act, Bill No. 44. 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1120 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, we in the Opposition will support the amendment to The 

Exemptions Act but we have several concerns. 

 

First of all, the Attorney General has gone on record this afternoon by stating that the increase in the 

exemption, the monetary exemption, is a result, purely a result of inflation. We don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker, whether or not the 100 per cent increase is the increase in the cost of living that has arisen since 

the Bill was prepared in 1965 or even earlier. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it would be an ideal time to urge the 

Government opposite to increase the amount of money that is available to the Leader of the Opposition’s 

office so that we would get more money to do such research. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, there’s another concern of Members . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Have you got them quietened down yet? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s very bad over there. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, there’s another concern to this legislation that I’m sure the Attorney General 

has thought about and I really question whether this piecemeal amendment that is presented today is the 

correct procedure. For example, Mr. Speaker, the amendment only applies to monetary limits which are 

set out in the Bill; The Exemptions Act, as the Attorney General has stated applied to other exemptions 

that arise to give protection to the debtor. I don’t know whether or not monetary levels can be given to 

these particular items. Perhaps, subclause 8 of the Act as it now reads, the person has the exemption in 

the amount of seed grain sufficient to sow all his land under cultivation at the rate of two bushels per 

acre, he shall have the choice of seed and 14 bushels of potatoes for planting. Now obviously one of two 

things has happened. Mr. Speaker. Either the Bill itself is completely out of date, which is an excellent 

possibility, or we have to ask the Attorney General why weren’t these other provisions amended? If we 

are talking about inflation as being the sole justification for the amendment we then have the question, 

Mr. Speaker, why wasn’t subclause 10, which sets out the homestead quarter, amended. The amendment 

proposed to increase the exemption on the house to an amount of $16,000 from $8,000 and perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, a reconsideration of the value of the homestead quarter should have been in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s another consideration. As I said, we think perhaps a review of the whole Act is in 

order rather than the piecemeal approach that is chosen by the House Leader. We are not in a position, 

Mr. Speaker, as I say, to quarrel with the amounts which are purely inflation which are his figures but 

there are other considerations, Mr. Speaker. One effect of a lot of this legislation with respect, Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to refer to some other so-called protection legislation, for example, The Limitations 

of Civil Rights Act, has been to increase the cost to the consumer who is supposed to be protected 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1121 

by the legislation. We think this is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — We think this is wrong, Mr. Speaker. The Limitations of Civil Rights Act has increased 

the cost of goods which come under the protection. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Government 

opposite has not considered these aspects in its rush to get these minor amendments before the House. 

Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill will do one of two things. It will increase the cost of credit to those 

people who fall into this category, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that the Attorney General has thought out 

the ramifications of the Act. The other possible alternative, Mr. Speaker, it will rule out from sources of 

credit many, many who would fall within the range where this Act applies to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we in the Opposition, although we have no reason to criticize the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

urge the Attorney General and urge the Government to take a look at this whole question and the area of 

consumer protection because, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing with these piecemeal approaches is 

adding a cost to that level of society which can least afford it. We urge the Government to rethink the 

direction that it is trying to take in this legislation and urge the Attorney General to give more reflection 

to this approach in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I just very briefly in rebuttal will say that much of what the 

Member from Lumsden says, I think has a degree of validity. This piece of legislation, like many pieces 

of legislation, was conceived in another time and a thorough review and updating of the law has to be 

considered. 

 

As Members will know, when we introduced second reading of The Law Reform Commission Bill, we 

certainly hope that this is something that the Law Reform Commission can look at and the officials in 

my department are looking at. Nevertheless, we felt that it was important that the exemption levels be 

increased on those items which could be readily increased so that some form of relief could be given to 

them pending what could turn out to be a fairly long study or review of the relevancy of the Act and a 

continual updating of the Bill. 

 

With respect to increasing the cost of credit that may well happen. I don’t know if it will or won’t by 

virtue of these exemptions being raised. I suppose that argument that an improvement or a consumer 

protection piece of legislation will raise the cost of doing business can be levelled at any piece of 

legislation that is advanced by any government anywhere but I don’t think that should be an argument 

against this Government proceeding to giving some form of relief to those who require the relief. I am 

not sure that the cost of credit, the cost of doing business, will increase by virtue of these exemptions 

any more than would be the case if, for example, we introduced another piece of consumer protection 

legislation. So I take into account what the Member from Lumsden has to say with respect to this matter 

but after due consideration I, with respect, say that I don’t think it’s much to get concerned about and 

therefore I am pleased to note that he supports the second reading and to 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1122 

move second ready of Bill 44. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 13 – An Act to amend The 

Bills of Sale Act. 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker and Members of the Assembly, Bill No. 13 is an amendment to 

The Bills of Sale Act and the amendment relates to section 12 (i) of The Bills of Sale Act and section 12 

(i) presently reads: 

 

A duly registered bill of sale that evidences a mortgage of chattels, ceases to be valid after the 

expiration of three years from its registration as against the creditor and as against a subsequent 

purchaser or mortgagee claiming from or under the grant, or in good faith, for valuable consideration 

without notice; whose conveyance or mortgage has been registered or is valid without registration, 

unless before the expiration of that period a renewal statement, accompanied by the affidavit, 

hereinafter mentioned, is registered in accordance with subsections 2 and 3. 

 

Now we propose to amend subsection (i) of section 12 (the section which I have just read) by striking 

out the words “that evidences a mortgage of chattels” in the first line of that Bill and the second line of 

the Bill. Now what is the effect of this? 

 

At the present time a Bill of Sale that evidences a mortgage of chattels, a chattel mortgage, ceases to be 

valid after the expiration of three years from its registration as against a creditor and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as against a subsequent purchaser or mortgagee claiming from or under that grant or in good 

faith for valuable consideration and without notice. That’s the situation with respect to the chattel 

mortgage. On the other hand, an absolute Bill of Sale, that is, one given to the purchaser as evidence of 

ownership when registered with the registration clerk, does not terminate but remains on the records 

virtually forever. 

 

Now it’s considered by the department officials desirable as an administrative practice and in other ways 

as well that the registration of absolute Bills of Sale should also be removed from the records of the 

registration clerk after the expiration of three years from the date of registration. The proposed 

amendment will do this by deleting those words. So that in effect now the law will be such that a Bill of 

Sale that evidences a chattel mortgage and an absolute Bill of Sale will be treated the same and after 

three years if they are not registered they expire and they are dropped from the registration records. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am told that the proposed change will affect only less than an estimated one per 

cent of all the Bills of Sale that are registered as the remaining 99 per cent plus are Bills of Sale that 

evidence a mortgage of chattels and they cease to be valid after the expiration of three years from the 

date of registration. Registration of an absolute Bill of Sale is only required by law when the purchaser 

leaves that article in the possession of the vendor on a temporary basis and as a matter of convenience to 

him. Under the proposal the 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1123 

registration of the proposed Bill of Sale would have a life of three years during which period, in most 

cases, the purchaser would have take possession of the article, thus removing the need for registration as 

notice to a potential purchaser. If the purchaser did not, in fact, remove the article from the possession of 

the vendor within a three-year period, he could renew the registration for a further three-year period 

thereby continuing to have the protection of the Act. So basically we don’t see any real inconvenience 

resulting here from placing the absolute Bill of Sale on the same footing as the chattel mortgage 

evidencing the Bill of Sale. We make the law the same for either and we think this is an improvement, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me pleasure to move second reading to Bill 13, An Act to amend The Bills 

of Sale Act. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we have some concern in the Opposition and I’m going to beg leave to 

adjourn debate on this matter. Mr. Speaker, our concern stems from the fact that this is an area of 

commercial law, the law of commerce, which has a great historical development. It’s an extremely 

accurate field of law, Mr. Speaker. We have some concerns what happens to existing Bills of Sale that 

are evidencing a mortgage of chattels and the effect on those that are already registered and whether or 

not there will be confusion in the registration system and for that reason, while we are getting further 

information, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce) moved second reading of Bill No. 49 – An Act 

respecting the Gathering and Disposal of Derelict Vehicles. 
 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to move second reading to an Act to provide 

for the gathering and disposal of derelict vehicles. The program to be operated under the authority of this 

statute, Mr. Speaker, is not new since it was announced about a year ago that it was the intention of the 

Government of Saskatchewan to provide a service to municipalities and to people in the province which 

will make it possible to pick up scrapped motor vehicles of all kinds all over the province, remove them 

from the landscape and make good use of them in our steel mill in the IPSCO plant in Regina. This 

program has become known as Operation Recycle and the Bill which is now before the Assembly is 

here, not because the program is new, but because there was some doubt in the minds of the Provincial 

Auditor’s office and the legal advisors to the Government as to whether or not the Government really 

had the authority it needed to enter into the kinds of contracts which are an essential part of Operation 

Recycle. That is the reason the Bill is here, that is the reason the Bill is so short; simply to make it clear 

and to remove all doubt about the authority of the Government to enter into the contracts to carry out 

this program. 

 

Let me just, Mr. Speaker, take a few minutes of the time of the Members to say something about 

Operation Recycle. It has three objectives. One I have mentioned already, to remove these scrap vehicles 

which are eyesores in all kinds of places around the province. Secondly, we had in mind that we could 

provide some additional employment in this program and 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1124 

particularly make this employment available wherever possible for people of native origin in 

Saskatchewan. The third objective of the program, of course, is to recycle a limited resource, that is, the 

iron and steel that is in each one of these derelict vehicles around the province. After all, when we 

consider the rate at which we are consuming our natural resources and particularly our non-renewable 

resources, it becomes increasingly important to find ways to recycle materials such as steel. 

 

Let me also give a little report on what programs we have made to date. With the advice of a consultant 

and the work done by officials in the Department of Industry and Commerce in 1972, we decided last 

summer that we should call for tenders to pick up and gather the vehicles. The area of the province 

which we were looking at is the southern part of the province which is north of the line drawn through 

Dorintosh and Chemong. It was our hope that many contractors would have an opportunity to make bids 

and so we broke the area of the province down into eight different regions and tenders were called for 

each separate region and on a province-wide basis. Now because of the necessity of fairly large 

investments in equipment we did not get as many contractors bidding as we had hoped to. Only two 

firms bid on a province-wide basis and another firm bid on a couple of the sections or regions out of the 

eight that we had divided the province into. 

 

The contract was awarded to the lowest bidder, Curtis Construction Limited, Lumsden and his average 

price for each vehicle to be picked up is $15.06 and under the terms of the contract to be entered into 

with him he will pick up the vehicles wherever they may be found in the southern part of the province. 

He will flatten them so they can be more easily transported and he will deliver them to Regina adjacent 

to the IPSCO plant. 

 

We estimate that there are 80,000 to 100,000 vehicles to be picked up at this time. It will take initially 

about three years in a sweep across the whole province to pick up the vehicles that are presently 

abandoned and scrapped throughout southern Saskatchewan. 

 

The contractor began his work in the Regina area on November 27, 1972. And since that time he has 

gathered up more than 1,200 vehicles in the Regina district. He was most recently operating in the 

Moose Jaw area continuing with the gathering, the flattening and delivering of vehicles to the IPSCO 

plant in Regina. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are making arrangements, and here we have had the co-operation of personnel of 

the Department of Public Health, to provide for gathering sites throughout the province. The Public 

Health inspectors have been working with local governments and they have so far designated some 76 

sites throughout the province where vehicles can be brought to a gathering place and in future years the 

contractors will go to these sites and there flatten and pick up the vehicles for delivery to Regina. 

 

We will also be asking the public to co-operate in this program of Operation Recycle by depositing their 

scrapped vehicles at these gathering sites throughout the province. 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1125 

The municipal governments are also co-operating with us in this program to the extent that they are 

making it known within their area where the gathering sites will be located. And they are actually 

providing land without charge to use in these gathering sites. Normally these sites are located in disposal 

grounds, what used to be called nuisance grounds, or sanitary land fill sites where some of the land is set 

aside to be used as a gathering site for the vehicles. 

 

Up to the present time out of the 76 sites that have been designated we have reached agreement with 

municipal governments on 56 of the actual locations. Those sites are available and will be used for the 

public and for the municipal government to deposit these abandoned and scrapped vehicles in the future. 

 

We are also, Mr. Speaker, working with Indian reserves. We are trying to work out a program where we 

can have permission to have gathering sites on Indian reserves, again, where the contractor can come 

and pick up vehicles that are abandoned there. To date, working with the Band Councils and the Federal 

Department of Indian Affairs, we have worked out tentative arrangements with some 18 of the Band 

Councils. In this work the Band Council officers will function much the same way as municipal 

governments in the other parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

As I said there are some 80,000 to 100,000 vehicles estimated already scrapped and lying around the 

Province of Saskatchewan. The estimate is that each year there are something like 25,000 vehicles 

abandoned in Saskatchewan. So it will be readily apparent that when we have finished the initial clean 

up there will be a continuing program to carry out under Operation Recycle. 

 

As I said, the objective is to dispose of these vehicles so far as the ferrous metals are concerned to the 

IPSCO steel mill at Regina. We are now in the process of working out the arrangements to establish a 

company which will take care of the vehicles that are now being stacked on site by processing them 

further to the extent of putting them through a shredding machine where the ferrous metals will be 

separated from other metals, where the upholstery and the rubber components of the vehicles will be 

further shredded as furnace feed available for sale to IPSCO. I may say, Mr. Speaker, in that regard we 

have received tentative approval for this new company to receive a grant from the federal Department of 

Regional Economic Expansion so we feel confident that we can establish this industry as a viable 

operation, getting its source of supply from these derelict vehicles and having a market for the shredded 

ferrous metal at the steel plant. It is our intention that all of the employment in the shredding phase of 

this Operation Recycle to be carried on by the new company will be available for people only of native 

origin in Saskatchewan. We are fairly hopeful that by late in the summer of this year 1973 the shredding 

operation will be underway beside the IPSCO plant. 

 

Members will be aware that we are financing this program by collecting one dollar on each licence 

purchased each year for a vehicle in Saskatchewan. And depending upon economic conditions and the 

number of vehicles being registered each year, we expect that will produce revenues of something in the 

order of $500,000 annually. Initially at least, we expect that all of that money will be used to finance the 

establishment of the various components of Operation Recycle and to carry it on for at least a 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1126 

three year period. After that it may be possible to make some adjustments in the method of financing or 

to go on using the funds in other ways rather than just simply cleaning up these motor vehicles which 

have been abandoned in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the course of getting underway with this program in the past year a number of 

questions have been received by myself and by people who have been working on this and I want just to 

try to deal with a few of them before I sit down. One of them is that people are wondering if we are 

prepared to pay somebody to take his vehicle away. And the answer to that question is, No. We take the 

view in Operation Recycle that if anyone attaches any value to a vehicle then it is not available as a 

derelict or a scrapped vehicle to be hauled away by the people who are working in Operation Recycle. 

So we are not prepared to pay anyone to remove his vehicle from his yard nor are we prepared to pay 

any municipality to remove vehicles from their disposal grounds or junk yards. Because, as I say, we 

look upon these as scrapped, abandoned vehicles, as junk to be removed. We look upon it as the 

responsibility of the Provincial Government under Operation Recycle to provide the service for the 

removal of this junk and to make use of it, as I say, at the recycle program. It is entirely voluntary with 

everyone whether or not any particular vehicle in their possession is released to the people in Operation 

Recycle. There are no penalties, of course, to be applied to anyone who refuses to release a vehicle. 

 

Now I may say that, of course, the local governments have for many years in Saskatchewan had various 

bylaws dealing with problems of this kind. And they will continue with their programs and indeed I 

expect that many urban municipal governments will pass further provisions to make sure that junk, 

especially abandoned vehicles, does not become a nuisance and a litter problem within the confines of 

urban municipalities. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, Operation Recycle is in many ways a response to representations made by urban 

municipal governments, to resolutions passed by the SUMA Convention in Saskatchewan asking that 

the Provincial Government provide the kind of service that is now available under Operation Recycle. 

 

I also want to say a word or two to reassure those people in Saskatchewan who are either members of or 

are interested in the work of the Antique Automobile Association and these people who belong to 

automobile clubs of various kinds. We are trying to work out a program with them and with the 

contractor that will ensure that we do not inadvertently pick up and destroy any automobile that has 

historic value or is part of the worthwhile automotive history of the Province of Saskatchewan. It is not 

our intention to do that and I may say that the Hon. Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Hanson) 

who I think has some particular interest in this direction has impressed upon me ever since this program 

was announced the importance of making sure that we do not, as I say, through accident rather than 

design destroy a vehicle which has historic worth and value. 

 

I should also mention, Mr. Speaker, that while the contractor is making his way around the province 

picking up scrapped vehicles he will also be able to pick up other metal goods which have been 

discarded and which need to be removed. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me just say that this Operation 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1127 

Recycle, while it now deals entirely with scrapped vehicles and that was the impetus which led us to 

establish the program and that is the reason for the Bill being here today, I may say that looking at what 

is going on in Alberta in the way of recycling glass and bottles and looking at the need for providing 

services to keep the landscape clear and unlittered from other disposable objects, particularly paper, 

aluminium objects, it may well be that this is only the forerunner of other programs which can be 

launched in Saskatchewan which have these desirable objectives, keeping the landscape clear and 

recycling valuable resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all of those reasons I am happy to move second reading to this Bill to provide for the 

gathering and disposal of derelict vehicles. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I must say when I first took a look at this Bill I was a bit 

concerned but the Minister reassured me a bit. Under the definition of scrapped vehicle, this pretty well 

describes about 20 vehicles that I have in my back yard shed which I place a fair value on as antiques 

and I was afraid that he might have his eye on them. However, his words did reassure me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Out to socialize it. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — I think so. I should like to say there are some things to be improved in the present 

collecting arrangements. I have been watching them rather closely. We want to see them work and we 

won’t be critical of the operation, certainly, at this stage. We’re watching it very closely for two main 

reasons. We want to see the scrapped vehicles cleaned up around the country and we want to see that the 

money is spent properly. Because, as the Minister has said, it is some $.5 million that has already been 

collected from the people of this province to do this job. And approximately this much will be collected 

annually. We want to make sure that the $500,000 that is being taken from the people on their licences is 

used properly. We will be wanting to know if the recycling is actually viable. We want to know if the 

native people are actually going to benefit and are going to be able to make this type of an operation 

work. 

 

I raise the question of the price for old vehicles but again we will have to wait and see about this. I 

would be surprised if they are able to obtain the vehicles that they want without some compensation. I 

realize the compensation might have to be very small because it just isn’t economical to pay any 

considerable sum for a junked car. But on the other hand, many people that have these derelicts place at 

least some small value on them. The Minister mentioned there were, I believe, 80,000 to 100,000 in the 

province. I know one person who has just about 1,000 of these vehicles and I doubt if they will be turned 

over for nothing. 

 

He mentioned the Indian reserves. I know on one Indian reserve, one individual has about 200 of these 

cars. And again I feel that perhaps some small compensation for vehicles may be necessary if they are 

going to do the job that they want to 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1128 

do, and that is to get these vehicles gathered up. This is a question that perhaps the Minister could 

answer in closing the debate. 

 

I should also like to know if the contractor receives any additional compensation in the way of parts 

from these vehicles. Or if the vehicle is automatically the property of the Government as he picks it up. 

In other words, does the contractor get his $16 plus some odd parts that he wants to remove before he 

flattens them or before he brings them in, or is the $16 the total that he gets? 

 

We noted, too, the very small number of bidders when the contract came up last summer. I am not sure 

of the reason for this. I don’t really believe that it was because of the amount of money involved for 

equipment. I don’t believe the equipment is really that expensive. I rather feel that the people just 

weren’t sure what was involved in the picking up of these vehicles and perhaps the Department will be 

doing some sort of a study to see if the figure was really an accurate figure, accurate cost as to what it 

should be to gather these up. Because with only two bidders on a province-wide basis, I am sure that the 

tender amount may or may not be the correct amount. We are pleased to note also that this will be a 

continuing program. It would appear that it may get a little expensive as far as the taxpayer is concerned 

if the dollar per licence per year is continued for any length of time when the number of vehicles to be 

collected drops to 20,000 at the maximum. Perhaps quite substantially less than this in the future. 

 

We have no general objection to the powers that are given in the Bill. We realize that they must make 

certain regulations and do certain things to get this program underway. And we will be supporting the 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make a few comments with 

regard to this Bill. I think one important thing that we have to keep in mind is the fact that some people, 

who may or may not be antique car enthusiasts, may wish to visit the collection yards and either 

purchase back a complete automobile before it is crushed or purchase some parts on it. I think that the 

Minister (Hon. Mr. Thorson) might do well to devise a formula at this time before the actual collections 

take place so that people could indeed purchase these vehicles at a standard rate, we should not leave it 

negotiable to any extent to the collection agency because I feel that some of these people or the 

companies which will be collecting the vehicles may find that they have acquired a car that is very much 

in demand while being subsidized by the Government. Therefore, I feel that if they put a very high value 

on this car, it would be a hindrance to the people wanting to purchase it. And really it is through their 

good luck that they acquired this car. It was simply through the program of subsidization of the 

Government that they did acquire this particular vehicle. Therefore, I think it should be a priority right 

now that we devise a formula or fee of say $20, or $25 as a purchase price on these vehicles that have 

been collected. 

 

Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I just want so say one or two words on the 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1129 

Bill. I should like to say that I discussed this with the Minister last year during Estimates about the dollar 

licence fee and we were certainly in favor of the program and we were certainly in favor of it in 1970 

when the study was done by the former Minister of Municipal Affairs when Native Metal and IPSCO 

were working on this project to develop it. It’s a good project and I think every Member in this House is 

interested in seeing the whole province cleaned up of derelict vehicles. 

 

I should like to mention one or two things in regard to the Bill because in Regina, Mr. Speaker, I feel 

there are organizations that would like to get into a project such as this, and I am speaking of the service 

clubs, probably the Boy Scouts and Girl Guides and different organizations, and I hope the Bill isn’t too 

narrow when we deal with 3(d), and the Minister can answer this in closing the debate, “any 

municipality or other person”, and the definition of “person” is outlined. I wouldn’t wish to see this too 

narrow, Mr. Speaker, because there are people that are interested in cleaning up our Saskatchewan. I 

think the service clubs in the past have done a good job and I wouldn’t like to see them out of this and I 

would hope that the Minister would not be too narrow in the definition of “person” and “or 

organization”. 

 

We are certainly, on this side of the House, in support of the Bill and we will vote for it. With that I’ll 

ask the Minister to answer those one or two problems that we have. It certainly is a good Bill. We started 

this in 1970 with the idea of helping the native people and this Bill is certainly going to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t take time now to repeat what I said in introducing the Bill 

and speaking in second reading, but when we get to the Committee stage with the Bill I should like to 

have some of the officials here who have had some actual experience in working with the program up to 

this time and no doubt we can deal with any particular questions. But I do want to say this and I will 

repeat this so that there will not be any doubt about it in the minds of anyone. This program is to gather 

up junk which has no value, which is an eyesore, which is part of the litter on the landscape that people 

want cleaned up. It is certainly not our desire or our intention to take away any vehicle or any other item 

to which anyone attaches any monetary value at all. I don’t contemplate a situation where we will pay 

people compensation, as the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) suggests, in order to release 

possession of a piece of junk. So I don’t want the House to be misled in any way about what the purpose 

of this program is. It is not our desire, as I say, to enter a situation where we are actually paying people 

to haul away their junk. We are prepared to finance the cost of hauling it away and that is the reason 

why we have hired a contractor and we have agreed to pay his bid price for providing that service. 

 

Now I also want to say that when it comes to letting other groups or individuals enter into contracts to 

provide that service it does require some equipment to do the job, the flattening equipment, the trucks to 

make the haul into Regina, are all necessary to provide the service which Operation Recycle intends to 

provide. 

 

On this question of the legal ownership of the vehicle and especially where it happens to be a vehicle 

which somebody thinks has an antique value, again, I want to say that it is not 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1130 

our intention or our desire to enter into any controversy of that kind between the people who have 

possession or people who claim any legal right or title to any of these vehicles. And indeed our position 

in Operation Recycle will be to simply withdraw entirely and to have nothing to do with such a vehicle 

that someone attaches a value to and not try to arbitrate between the people who claim ownership or 

claim rights of possession at all because that is not the purpose of this program. And frankly, I would be 

reluctant to see it become more complicated that it needs to be in getting on with its essential job of 

providing a disposal service and providing a means of recycling ferrous products in the province. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 22 – An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, as outlined by my colleague on this side of the House, 

this is a Bill which arises out of The Land Bank Act which the Government produced for us last winter. 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that despite the fact that I am sure the Government will say that when the 

Liberal Party was the Government of Saskatchewan, the Government will say that no provision was 

made for payment of these back taxes. I still think that there are very serious objections to the manner in 

which the Government is bringing in this type of legislation and the manner in which this legislation will 

operate. 

 

I want to make clear, Mr. Speaker, two particular points regarding the change in the provision for paying 

taxes to municipalities. This Act allows for the municipality to collect the arrears of two years’ back 

taxes only if they give notice to the Provincial Government or to the Land Bank Commission. Upon 

receipt of the notice, the Commission or the Government will accept this as bona fide notice that the 

municipality is giving to them and within 30 days, therefore, will have the right to terminate that 

person’s lease regarding the land. To my way of thinking, Mr. Speaker, and to the Members on this side 

of the House, this is a very serious matter and the Government is not facing its responsibilities but is 

simply putting back many of its responsibilities on to the backs of our municipal councillors. Our 

municipal councillors, Mr. Speaker, are going to find themselves in the position of being under 

substantial pressure very frequently. Now the Land Bank Commission is obviously going to have great 

amounts of land in the very near future, the manner in which they are buying land in the province with 

$10 million spent last year, $20 million more this year. Let us take a hypothetical case, that our 

province’s agricultural fortunes are not that great. The arrears on taxes start to pile up. The only manner 

in which the municipalities can collect this money is to give notice to the province. It’s very obvious that 

as soon as they give notice the Government then accepts this as an opportunity for them to terminate and 

in fact the legislation says, ‘shall terminate the lease’, on that particular piece of property. What we are 

really doing is putting the municipal councillor in the position of being the evictor for by 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1131 

the very manner in giving notice to the province he is becoming the evictor of the person or giving the 

eviction notice to the person that has leased that land for those particular two years. And if we take some 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker, this case could happen many, many times over, particularly under the Land 

Bank when the Province gets into land ownership on such a massive scale as the Government opposite 

contemplates. Obviously, the municipal council will be coming under substantial pressure, Mr. Speaker, 

because it could well turn out that the councillor himself is a neighbor or a good friend of the person 

who is renting this property. I think, to my way of thinking, this is an absolutely intolerable situation. It 

is a situation that the Government themselves are unwilling, totally unwilling, to face up to the 

responsibilities of administering the Land Bank program that has been brought in. 

 

If the Government of Saskatchewan wishes, Mr. Speaker, to get into the land ownership business, as 

they have indicated to us in the last two sessions, in such a grand scale, then the Government themselves 

should accept the responsibility of being the evictor of that person who fails to pay his taxes over a 

two-year period. This is the least the Government of Saskatchewan can do. Instead of trying to hide in 

the wings and making the poor municipal councillor — the councillor being the person who arbitrates 

whether a person shall lose his property or his lease or not. The Government of Saskatchewan, in our 

opinion fails in its responsibility under the Land Bank system. We have outlined on many occasions that 

we have great numbers of reasons why we are opposed to their massive intervention of obtaining land in 

the Government ownership of farm land. Mr. Speaker, I think it will become obvious to all people in 

Saskatchewan that they are unwilling to accept what should be their responsibility as the giant landlord 

of the Province of Saskatchewan but instead want to make our municipal councillors the people who 

will take the wrath when the eviction time comes about. 

 

Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, in many cases under the Land Bank program it will come about. In 

which case it won’t be the Provincial Government that hands out the eviction, it will be the municipal 

councillor who is forced into that situation if the council wished to collect any of the back taxes. I think 

it is for this reason that this Bill should be rejected and I think that if many of the Members opposite 

consult with their municipal council they will find out that the councillors agree that it should be 

rejected. The justification as I suspect that will be put forward by the Members opposite or by the 

Minister when he closes debate will be that under the previous administration some of the councils had 

no opportunity of collecting all of the back taxes either. But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 

amount of back taxes involved in that particular time for the amount of land that the prospect of back 

taxes could accumulate on is indeed very small. Now with the new Land Bank Commission the amount 

of property that the Government can accumulate back taxes on is very, very great, Mr. Speaker. You 

may well recall last winter we suggested that if the Government wanted to get into the land business 

they should make back taxes available and therefore can take the property over if they wish. 

Unfortunately, by a back door method they have decided not to do this, Mr. Speaker. It is for this reason 

that I will personally very much oppose this particular Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1132 

Mr. Comer (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat surprised at the antics of the Opposition on this 

as I am on many things. I am very pleased to be able to rise in this House and support this Bill. This has 

been an issue, an item, that has been raised time and time again by the municipal councils in my area 

where there is a large amount of agricultural lease land. 

 

I should like to deal for a few moments with the comments of the Member from Moosomin (Mr. 

Gardner) who spoke the other day. In substance, they were practically the same as the comments from 

the Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald). He says that they want the Government to cancel the 

lease, they don’t want the R.M. Council to write in to the Lands Branch and ask them to cancel the lease. 

For seven years they were the Government and for those seven years it was up to the R.M. Council to 

recommend cancellation and when we were the Government before that it was up to the R.M. Council 

and I think this is the principle that should remain. Who knows better whether that man is likely 

sometime in the future to be able to pay back those taxes, a man sitting over there in the Administration 

Building or the R.M. Councillor. I think it is very important that the R.M. Council be given that 

responsibility. We have heard Members of the Opposition get up time and time again and claim that we 

are eroding local control and then here they are getting up in this House and recommending that we take 

away responsibility from the R.M. Council and give it to the Provincial Government. There are times 

when R.M. Council in the past have recommended cancellation. They have done it because they feel that 

man is not likely in the future to be able to pay up his taxes. There are also times when men have had 

rather large accumulation of taxes and they have not recommended cancellation because they feel that 

given a good crop or some other circumstances which were arising that man should continue to farm the 

lease land. I think we should continue to give the R.M. Council this responsibility. 

 

Again, they say that they want the Government to pay all the taxes. They didn’t pay any taxes when they 

were in Government. The Hon. Member from Cannington got up today and he said when we were in 

Government we didn’t pay any taxes but there wasn’t much. I want to give you one example, the R.M. 

of Torch River. In 1967 it had to write off $75,000 in taxes. Now that may not be much to the Member 

from Cannington but I assure you, to many RMs in this province that is very substantial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to re-emphasize, I think that this Bill is good. It gives the RMs the 

responsibility. It gives the local people the chance to determine whether a man’s lease should be 

cancelled for taxes and it also makes it now possible for the first time for the RMs to recover moneys 

which formerly they had to write off. In the north east corner of this province where there is a lot of 

agricultural lease land, hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxes have had to be written off and it is the 

rest of the farmers in those RMs that have to pay it. I welcome this Bill, I congratulate the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) for introducing it, and I can’t understand the Opposition for opposing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few comments to make. What 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1133 

they are saying is that they want the RM to evict a man and his family and set him right out on the road 

allowance. That is literally what the Member who has just sat down has said. Now what is the real issue 

here? The Land Bank Commission is now going to get into the massive ownership of agricultural land in 

Saskatchewan but with a proviso and that proviso is this, that the Land Bank will only accept a cash 

rental basis and that they demand the cash first and the taxes second. Regardless of whether there is a 

drought, whether there is hail or crop failure, a man who leases land will have no security because after 

two years he can be evicted. He can be well established on that land. This is a very, very bad piece of 

legislation, for two reasons. Number one, because of the cash rental arrangement of the Land Bank; 

because of massive accumulation by the Government of the agricultural land of Saskatchewan it is 

placing the individual farmer in an impossible position because he only has a two-year basis with which 

to recover from a crop failure. Number two, the fact that the Government will only repay two years of 

taxes. The Government owns this land. It is their responsibility. He talks about $75,000, it may well be 

that the Land Bank Commission may own 80 per cent or 90 per cent of the land in some municipalities 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. Who knows, if you continue to spend $20 million a year you are going 

to own that much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many Members on this side of the House who would like to say a few more 

words about this Bill and I should like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that 

Bill No. 47 – An Act to amend The Larger School Units Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly glad to know that the Member for 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) has already spoken to this Bill so he won’t be able to adjourn this one, but 

some others probably will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that the Opposition has already stated that they are in favor of this 

particular Bill. It is certainly not controversial but I do believe that it is a step in the right direction, 

giving our native people a lot more say in determining their own destiny and making their own decisions 

especially in the field of education. 

 

I couldn’t help but notice again this morning comments in the Leader-Post by one Indian and one Métis 

person. I think it describes very vividly the situation that we are in in Saskatchewan and in Canada in 

regard to the white man’s policy toward native people. I think all governments are at fault. Not only 

governments but individuals and, certainly, I think educators are at fault. 

 

I should like to at this time read a few of the remarks made by the former Chief of the National Indian 

Council, William Wuttunee. This is what he had to say on the weekend at Swift Current. He was trying 

to make a defence for the white man showing that he was not prejudiced against the Indian. He said: 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1134 

People do not tear us down because we are Indians. People have a habit of being harsh with each other. 

They are always tearing each other down. 

 

Adding that there is also fault on the part of the Indians because their anti-social behavior will not help 

them to be accepted by society. Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that he goes on to say: 

 

Native people can be destroyed by bitterness to the point where it will be impossible for them to 

participate in society and plan for a better future for their people. 

 

The of words of Mr. Wuttunee indicate that there is hope that we can work out a co-operative method. 

But I must also admit that in the same article, we can quote from Dr. Howard Adams who doesn’t have 

the same optimistic feeling that Mr. Wuttunee has. He says this in regard to the situation in Canada: 

 

Apartheid exists just as oppressively in Canada as it does in South Africa. Indians were moved into 

compounds and dehumanized in every way. 

 

I think that we probably have to agree with him on the second statement that Indians were moved into 

compounds and dehumanized by the white man. 

 

This treatment fossilized the Indian people so that it has been impossible to advance under these 

conditions. Indians are still a colonized people dependent on government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my purpose in speaking to this Bill is that I should like to put my position on the record. I 

am sure all Members of this House want us to look at Indians and white men here in Canada as 

Canadians not as Indians versus Canadians, but as Canadians, as one group. These people are different 

and they must be treated differently. These people have a different culture, a different history and our 

educational system must take this into consideration. 

 

I was very pleased that the Minister indicated that there was a training program for our native people. 

This will allow them to have some of their own people in the school system to educate and teach their 

own children. 

 

I know that many white people in the past were sincere in assisting native people. Many of the 

missionaries who came were sincere in bringing the gospel to the people. But in doing so they 

disregarded the high value that the Indians placed on their own culture. I want later on in my speech to 

show how our history books establish in the minds of many young white people the idea that the Indians 

really weren’t a humanized nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I go any further in my debate I would like to quote from Harold Cardinal. I think his 

words really state the essence of the Bill that we have before us. We might disagree with much of what 

Harold Cardinal has said and has done or what he has tried to do. But I think these words do fit this 

particular Bill. And this is what he said at the 1967 Annual Meeting of the Indian and Eskimo 

Association of 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1135 

Canada. 

 

I think at this point the challenge and questions which face the Indian people are not really the 

questions of poverty, are not really the question of becoming a brown-white man, but rather the 

availability of freedom for Indian people to decide the course of their own destiny. I think this is the 

central issue. No matter how many analyses are made and how many billions of dollars the 

Government pours in to relieve Indian people, as long as they do not give us the freedom to be master 

of our own house, we shall never be equal citizens. That is what we are seeking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to repeat: 

 

As long as they do not give us the freedom to be masters of our own house, we shall never be equal 

citizens. 

 

Certainly, this Bill doesn’t give them the freedom to be masters of their own house, but it is a step in the 

right direction. Indian people now will have the right under this Bill to sit on unit boards, to try and work 

out a co-operative approach with their white men brothers and make absolutely certain that the school 

program and curriculum does recognize the difference between the Indian child and the white child as 

far as history is concerned. 

 

I think that most Indian people and Métis people believe in an integrated society. They want an 

integrated society but they do not want an integrated society whereby the culture and the history of the 

Indian people is destroyed. I think we will all recognize the present objectives of our educational system 

are geared for the white man’s society. We want to build a great white man’s society. Many of these are 

certainly in contradiction to what the Indian believes or wants. 

 

I would hope that this particular Bill is the first step in giving not only the Indians a percentage 

representation but eventually will give them equal representation on school boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it must also be recognized that the Indians had a beautiful educational process before the 

coming of the white man. Sure there were many faults in that educational process. But in the Indian 

family, the father took his boy out hunting, taught him the ways of his manhood, taught him how he was 

to live and how he was to treat the wild animals, and how he was to treat his environment. The coming 

of the white man changed all this. We destroyed his environment, we destroyed his way of life. 

 

I would hope that this is another step of the Government’s intention to carry out its election platform. 

Many of us went before the Indian and Métis people and said that we would give them a much greater 

voice in determining their own way of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said before that I was going to use some quotations from history books to show that the 

white man consciously or unconsciously is biased against the Indian. And how can any white child help 

but form a certain adverse mentality towards the Indians when he reads statements like this. In the book 

“Canada Then and Now” we read this: 



 
February 26, 1973 

 

 

1136 

They can with truth be called savages as there are no people poorer than those in the world. 

 

We must have a lot of savages in Canada if we accept that statement at face value. Here is another one: 

 

By reason of his historical background, the Indian was wholly unfit to cope with the more civilized, 

more intelligent white man. 

 

By implication this says that the Indian wasn’t intelligent. From “Canada Story”, on page 12, we read 

the following: 

 

The Algonquins celebrated the victory in time honored fashion by torturing and eating the prisoners. 

 

I think history showed, at least the history that I learned that the Algonquins never ate their prisoners. 

On page 77 we read the following: 

 

They were unreasonable savages and were quite ready to blame the white man for any misfortune that 

came to them. 

 

From the book “Canada A Nation”, page 47, we read the following: 

 

The Jesuits struggled valiantly among the Hurons only to have their hopes dashed on rocks of Iroquois 

animosity and savagery. They, the missionaries, had to share the indescribable filth of the villages and 

the loathsome food. And how, for instance, could they express the idea of a loving father to natives 

whose concept of the supernatural was that of cruel and evil spirits. 

 

From “Canada Story”, page 84: 

 

They discovered the Indians seldom descended on a fort in large numbers or fought a real battle, but 

their favorite method was to go out in small bands, surprise and surround some person, or house, or 

small village, and thus win an easy victory. With all their boasted courage, they never dared to face 

almost certain death as white soldiers frequently do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on with quotes to show that our history books and our educational 

system, maybe not consciously, but by the materials that we ask our students to read, they form what I 

have said before, a mentality that is biased against the Indians and downgrades the Indian and Métis 

society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that more people will speak to this Bill. I hope we all realize that the white man’s 

paternalism of the past must stop and the white man’s paternalism of the present must change. I, at this 

time, want to say that I congratulate the Minister for taking this first step. And with these words, Mr. 

Speaker, I support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, last summer I had the pleasure of visiting certain points 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Playing bingo. 



 

February 26, 1973 

 

 

1137 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway: — Well, we did a few other things, we did a little investigating and I don’t think 

you would be too happy if I divulged everything that we found out. But at any rate most of the 

communities that I had the pleasure of visiting last summer were communities where most of the people 

were Indian or Métis. 

 

One thing that they told me, and other members in the group that I was associated with, was that they 

wanted the chance to participate in many things, particularly in education. I see this Bill which allows 

for participation as the first in a series of steps that may eventually end up with our native people 

determining the kind of education that their boys and girls are going to have. 

 

I think that is good. I know that it is being done in certain states in the United States with good results. 

White people and Indians agree, particularly in the south western states that where they determine the 

educational set up for themselves, it has had a beneficial effect on everybody. 

 

I also want to say that when the Minister spoke the other day, he mentioned the name of Rodney Soonias 

and I want to commend him on mentioning him. If he is used in any way by the Department of 

Education or any educational body he will certainly be an asset. I happen to know him personally and he 

will certainly add much insofar as the education of our native people are concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fully support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:20 o’clock p.m. 


