



















































Hansard: February 12, 1973


558 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Monday, February 12, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to introduce to 

you and to the House 90 Grade Eight students from Empire School from the constituency of Moose Jaw 

South. They are seated in the west gallery and I had the opportunity to speak with them for a few brief 

moments before they entered the Chambers. I had the opportunity to meet a young chap who is 

representative of the Progressive Conservative Party at Empire School having been successful in one of 

their student elections and while we don’t have the opportunity to offer a counterpart for him here I trust 

that he and all of his companions will have the opportunity to share a portion of the debate with us 

today. 

 

I trust they will have a pleasant afternoon and an informative one and trust that they will also have a safe 

trip back home to Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

FIFTY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES GIVEN NOTICE 
 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Premier. I wonder to begin with if he is aware that last Friday an official of the 

Department of Agriculture gave over 50 Provincial Government employees at Outlook verbal notice that 

they, all of them or most of them, will be out of work March 31. I am told these men have been in 

government service, some of them for 20 years, some of them for 10, some are permanent employees, 

some are temporary. Some of the temporary men have been employed for seven or ten years by the 

Government. I am told that they have had little or no consultation, that they have been told to seek 

employment elsewhere, that they will be given I suppose the normal consideration. But I think in a 

situation as serious as this, they should be given extra consideration. Forty families will be uprooted 

possibly, the towns are very upset, they say they haven’t had any consultation. This will be an awful 

blow to Outlook, for example. I wonder would the Premier give the House assurance that he will put a 

stop on this, so they can look at the whole situation thoroughly on behalf of these people? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I have asked the Members to make their questions clear but not to elaborate too 

much. We get too much in debate rather than questions. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

559 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask Mr. Messer to reply. 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, if I may. It is true that we did have a 

meeting with the employees who were involved with the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project at 

Outlook last Friday, as we did have a meeting here in Regina which would affect the employees who 

were involved in the project on the west side. It is not the intention of the Government to terminate those 

jobs at the end of this fiscal year. We have provided moneys to carry on so that we will be able to phase, 

hopefully, all of those jobs into other positions in the Government or other positions that may be open to 

them in other areas in the province. If the Legislature would wish me to, I could relate to the Legislature 

a statement in regard to the Government’s decision and I think that it is of merit if we do do that, 

because the decision to discontinue the construction on the irrigation works and thereby defer the 

irrigation development on the west side was made after much deliberation and consultation. The 

decision was not an easy one for the Government to make. The Government is well aware that some 

may in fact criticize this decision. The decision was particularly difficult because of the need to project 

into the future from five to fifteen years or more. Several years of construction are required before water 

is available for irrigation. Even after initial irrigation starts, up to 20 years or more depending upon 

returns realized by the farmers is required before 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It is reasonable we should keep our questions without too much debate so I’ll restate 

the question, he hasn’t answered yet whether he has given those men assurance they will have jobs. 

They don’t think he has. Please answer the question. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, he said . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I should like to comment. I think the questions are of such a nature that both the 

question and the answers become too lengthy for this period of time. I’ll permit the Minister to finish 

this answer, but we can’t continue with questions and answers of this length each day. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll attempt to answer the question and also make a statement to the House 

before the Orders of the Day as to why the Government made that decision. That’s what I am in the 

process of doing now. 

 

As I have already stated, Mr. Speaker, before the 1971 election some construction was under way on the 

west side of the river and further tenders had been let or advertised to bring the total commitment up to 

almost $3 million. Because of disappointing results on the East side, the lack of prospects for major 

processing plants and the very high capital outlay required in relation to the amount of activity 

generated, this Government was forced to reconsider the whole question whether to proceed quickly, or 

slowly or in fact suspend the operation temporarily. 

 

The program was seriously considered of constructing works 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

560 

to service 17,000 acres over a five-year period. The system could be extended later without wasteful 

changes. The cost of the works was estimated at $6.8 million, in addition to the $3 million already spent. 

This amounts to approximately $400 per irrigated acre. Assuming 400 acres per farm, the total cost of 

works averaged $230,000 per farm, in addition, on farm irrigation development costs will average in the 

order of another $40,000 per farm, over and above the value of the land, making the total development 

cost about $270,000 per farm, of which the province would have to pay $243,000 under present grant 

policies. 

 

There are also other costs, annual operation and maintenance costs in the order of $5 per acre which will 

have to be borne by the province for a number of years. The age of farmers in the area is such that most 

of the land will have to be purchased. Some subsidy, because of disruption or because of lack of willing 

buyers for the land is inevitable. Experience gained on the east side shows that irrigation farming is 

costly and difficult. Farmers are having difficulty finding crops that can be grown profitably. Payments 

in the form of grants have had to be paid to the irrigation farmers to offset losses incurred. All operation 

and maintenance grants have so far been absorbed by the province and it looks as if the cost may 

continue to be borne by the province for several years more. Investments have been made and additional 

investments will be required to bring specialized production with a margin of profitability to the area. 

The Government believes this has an immediate priority and a priority over expanding irrigation 

development on the west side. Although the east side has the disadvantage of pioneering in irrigation, it 

also has an advantage of being in first position to meet the limited markets for special crops, such as 

potatoes, carrots, onions and the like. 

 

Funds for agriculture development purposes are limited and we feel that they should be made available 

to all farmers across the Province of Saskatchewan and we have enunciated programs in where we 

intend to do this. 

 

As I have said, Mr. Speaker, the decision to discontinue west side construction was not an easy one. In 

the final analysis it was made on the basis that limited funds available could be used to greater 

advantage in other ways for the overall agricultural economy of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, the Minister made a statement and I presume I shall be allowed to comment on 

his statement. I must complain that he did not answer the question. Again I will say that I hope that there 

is meaningful consultation with the employees, because I have talked to them and they don’t think there 

has been. One official going to Outlook, verbally telling them that their time is limited and that they 

should start looking around is not consultation. In fact, the town of Outlook is having a meeting tonight, 

and they are very concerned about the loss or possible loss of 40 families. 

 

In regard to the statement, I must express our keen disappointment in the negative attitude that the 

Government is taking toward that great project. I am surprised when the Minister says he finds that 

irrigation is costly. It was the old CCF 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

561 

 

Government, and they boasted about this I think with some justification, that signed the original deal for 

the whole South Saskatchewan Project. They waved the possibilities of diversifying our agricultural 

industry and the great benefits that would flow from irrigation to this province and to the farmers in that 

area and to this province. They talked about setting up a sugar beet plant, they talked about setting up 

cannery operations, they talked about a whole variety of crops that could be developed in that area, 

really put a great new source of wealth at the disposal of Saskatchewan farmers, creating new 

employment. Where is all that great dream gone? What happened to the optimism? Well, it is now sour 

and it is bitter and it is negative. They are turning their backs on one of the greatest possibilities that this 

province has ever seen. The dream of the South Saskatchewan Dam should not be cut short. The great 

possibilities of the South Saskatchewan Dam should not be terminated because of a timid government 

willing to gamble some money in some very peculiar circumstances, willing to spend the taxpayers’ 

money hiring hundred and hundreds of their friends on the payroll, but unwilling to risk a few million 

dollars to really do something to diversify agriculture an give us an industry based on agriculture like 

they have in the Province of Alberta and that was what we were talking about when this first came out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, again I say, go over the head of the Minister of Agriculture, to the 

Premier, to please reconsider this, reconsider the treatment of these employees, reconsider the lack of 

consideration for the towns and take another and a positive optimistic look at the great possibilities of 

the South Saskatchewan Dam and don’t turn your back on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, he . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he was asking where has the optimism gone. If I may just . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think we can extend this. We’ve gone too long now for a question and answer 

period. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Cowley (Minister 

of Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, when I closed the debate and adjourned it on 

Friday, I was optimistic that I might have some nice things to find in the Budget. I do wish to 

congratulate the Minister for his fine presentation of the Budget and I thank him for 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

562 

delivering copies of the Budget to me, just prior to coming into the House on Friday. I think that it is 

unfortunate that the custom of this House requires that the Budget should be kept a secret until delivery 

in the House, but that happens to be the history in this House and of course history in other Houses and 

Parliaments of the world. It makes it a little bit difficult though for the Opposition to get a good look at 

the Budget that operates with three quarters of a billion dollars this year, particularly because the 

Government facilities, including the Government Library are closed over the weekend. 

 

The last Budget was referred to in the opening remarks of the Hon. Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) 

who said that the Budget which was presented in this House a year ago included a number of major 

steps to present their program. At that time I reminded the House that the Budget in fact had turned its 

back on development in Saskatchewan. In fact, they had cancelled the Pulp Mill, they had no program of 

any kind to harvest the huge resources of timber in the northern part of the country. I reminded them that 

they had stalled or stopped the Choiceland Iron Mine project and in fact had virtually no program of any 

kind to develop this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — They had in fact developed a huge spending kind of habit and a spending program 

without at any time having arranged for the moneys with which to pay it. I reminded the House last year 

that only by the fortuitous event, namely $140 million from the Federal Treasury, was this Government 

able to carryon the program which it initiated last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government in 1973 has produced for this current fiscal year a Las Vegas kind of 

Budget. The Government now proposes to spend three quarters of a billion dollars, $723 million to be 

exact and they have fallen into a bucket of money from the Federal Treasury. They are going through 

that money in the most massive spending spree that has ever been witnessed in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The people who are enjoying that particular spree are the Government and the 

Members of the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The New Democratic Party members are lined up all over Saskatchewan to get at the 

pork barrel of this Provincial Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Party politicians are crowding around to get in on the spending spree, a Las Vegas 

trip doesn’t come every day and they don’t want to miss it because it could be over in 1975. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

563 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the Government has turned the assets of the Province of Saskatchewan 

to support the New Democratic political party, they have turned it to the support of a spending spree 

never before seen. I wish to demonstrate to this House how this occurred. There are simply five ways in 

which the Government has accomplished this purpose. 

 

Firstly, there has been a tremendous increase in government employees, including people skilled and 

experienced in politics, whose prime duties on the public payroll are entirely political. 

 

Secondly, there has been a tremendous transfer of government funds to the New Democratic Party 

through Service Printing. 

 

Thirdly, this Government has created a network of political party workers involved in the work of 

government and paid for by the people of Saskatchewan on a part time and sometimes full time basis by 

the Government. 

 

Fourthly, this Government has created committees of the Legislature, and has expended huge amounts 

of money to give publicity to Members of the Legislature and they have created as many full time 

politicians here as possible. 

 

Fifthly, they have imposed or intend to impose limitations on the Opposition, particularly with respect to 

expenses over which they now presently have no control. Mr. Speaker, I propose to demonstrate 

precisely with a few examples how this has actually occurred. 

 

The Premier’s office, under W. Ross Thatcher involved seven people. Twenty-one new people were 

added last year. To eliminate the appearance of growth in the Premier’s office, the Purchasing Agency 

with its 25 people was transferred to another department. I might add incidentally that this Purchasing 

Agency when it arrived in the new department had 31 members, T.C. Douglas’ campaign manager and 

five additional people having been picked up along the way. 

 

The Premier’s office has continued to grow. The shuffling is almost beyond comprehension. To simplify 

the count, let me tell you that in the Premier’s office for Administration, Information Services, Planning 

and Research there were a total of 18 people in 1971. By this time the present Budget is to bring this up 

to 52 people, a three-fold increase, an increase of 34 people, involved to a considerable extent in 

political activity for the party. Another seven people by the way have been transferred out to another 

department, the Department of Industry and Commerce to make way for some of the new people and to 

keep down the illusion that so many people are coming. This does not include a large number of people, 

Mr. Speaker, who are similarly engaged in every other department of government. Defeated and aspiring 

candidates have been hired. John Burton, NDP candidate for Regina East, defeated in the last Federal 

election was receiving $18,000 in salary and $8,000 as a Member of Parliament. He now receives 

$20,000 a year plus expenses from the Provincial Government. Frank Buck, defeated candidate in 

Qu’Appelle-Moose Mountain — that’s our famous map maker — was hired at a salary of $13,764 per 

year. You will recall that Mr. Buck doesn’t think there is enough rail line abandonment in 

Qu’Appelle-Moose Mountain, so on his own he draws in a few more rail lines to be abandoned so that 

he can have something to be properly upset about. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

564 

Mr. Ned Shillington, defeated candidate in Moosomin engaged at a salary of $18,000 per year. Murray 

Koskie, defeated candidate in Regina 1967, a salary of $19,000. Mr. Speaker, these are only a few 

examples. These experienced people employed full time at government expense give a big lift to the 

NDP political machine. They have continued their political activities without interruption. A large part 

of their time and effort is devoted to constituency organization and political work for the party. The 

hiring of political people is not new or unusual. Politicians are interested in the processes of government 

but when they go to work for government they should leave active politics behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — New Democratic candidates on the other hand normally enter the civil service for the 

purpose of continuing their political careers. 

 

The Information Services Branch has been greatly expanded, and is used almost entirely now for the 

political purposes of the NDP. When the Agriculture Committee travelled around the province, it was 

accompanied by an information officer, whose sole purpose was to convey the Government’s message 

to radio stations and newspapers throughout the province. The three lonely Liberal Members didn’t even 

know who he was until near the end of the meetings. He was subject to and at the beck and call of the 

chairman, Mr. Kowalchuk from Melville. Every other Minister, every other department branch or 

committee has people performing a similar function. If the trend continues in the Department of 

Agriculture, in all probability the English majors and graduates of the School of Journalism will 

outnumber the farmer and the agriculture graduates. 

 

The second method by which the Premier has turned the people’s assets to the benefit of the party is the 

granting of Government printing contracts to Service Printers, owned entirely by the NDP. Profits 

generated by Service Printers from Government business will help reduce the expense of printing 

election material in the next election for the New Democratic Party. The answers we have received in 

this House tell us whether we like it or not, there is nothing we can do about it. The Government intends 

to fatten the printing branch of its party with Government business. The NDP wants the money and it 

intends to take the money. When the Las Vegas spending spree is on Service Printers and the NDP 

doesn’t want to be left out. 

 

The third method which I mentioned is the creation and appointment of dozens of committees, 

composed entirely of faithful party workers, in almost every branch of the Government. In the Land 

Bank alone, it is proposed that in addition to the Land Bank Commission the Department of Agriculture 

must appoint an advisory council of not less than seven members who are paid an honorarium from the 

people of Saskatchewan. The province is then divided into a number of areas, each area has a Land Bank 

Committee of five persons and they each receive an honorarium. There is an Appeal Board and they 

each receive an honorarium. It’s no wonder that the Land Bank Commission expenses were budgeted 

last year at $640,000 and this year at more than $1 million. We have Las Vegas in the Land Bank. The 

thought of getting something done never occurs to the Government. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

565 

 

Mr. Byers, for example, instead of getting to work on the Qu’Appelle Basin study, promptly appointed a 

12-man committee to advise him on the public reaction to the work of his Department. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Another committee. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Just another committee. You don’t have to look past the first two appointments to 

discover that this committee is dominated by militant New Democrats. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who are they? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Somebody said who are they? Well, the first name that comes to my mind is Mrs. 

Taylor who is famous for an article in the last Macleans Magazine, that she was admittedly a militant 

New Democrat. 

 

I need hardly mention the changes which have been made in the various boards in SPC, SaskTel and the 

Crown corporations, nor the dozens of other committees appointed by Government. The prime purpose 

of these committees is to maintain a network of party people at Government expense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I predict that you will see these people come out of the starting gate like Native 

Dancer when the next election bell rings. These people don’t want to lose out, the Las Vegas trip is over 

if the Government doesn’t win. 

 

Fourthly, Government efforts to publicize the Premier, Cabinet Ministers and New Democratic Party 

Members of the Legislature and the creation of a number of full-time politicians, consumes a 

tremendous effort by this Government. 

 

Last year, the salaries and expenses of all MLAs were increased. In addition to allowable telephone 

expenses amounting to $600 a year, and a daily sessional expense, the salaries and expenses of MLAs 

amounted, in addition to these other items, to $12,500 per year. These, of course are paid to the 

Opposition as well, but remembering the proportion of 45 Government and 15 Opposition Members, the 

major benefit is clearly with the Government. In addition to the 15 Cabinet Ministers, there are five 

Cabinet Secretaries, all Government secretaries. Each of these NDP members get another $3,000 per 

year, making for them $15,500, not a bad amount by any means. 

 

Added to this there are payments for committee meetings. To take an example, the Member for Arm 

River (Mr. Faris) would have received the Government indemnity, annual remuneration, committee fees, 

expenses, telephone credit card and other benefits totalling in the neighborhood of $18,000 this past year 

from the Government of Saskatchewan and he isn’t even in the Cabinet. Yet no more than half of the 

time of the Member for Arm River is involved in his work as a legislator. The rest of his time is given to 

the party — freed of any financial worries whatsoever. Thanks to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Committees of the Legislature give added publicity to the 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

566 

Government. Trips to Denver, California, Wyoming, Nebraska and so on are just pleasant diversions. 

These committees were never intended to supply answers. These are usually supplied or approved by the 

Premier’s office. The Premier knows what he wants to do, he doesn’t need the committees to tell him. 

Committees of the Legislature have been very successful in the purpose for which they were created, 

and that is because they were formed and they have performed for political purposes — to give publicity 

to the Government. 

 

Let me take one example. I have before me the Welfare Committee Interim Report. It has received 11 

information studies, 29 reports and 157 briefs. It has held seven meetings in northwestern Saskatchewan, 

seven meetings in northeastern Saskatchewan, 22 meetings in southern Saskatchewan and a meeting in 

Uranium City. It held a total of 37 hearings in Saskatchewan. It has presented a 16-page, nicely printed 

interim report which says exactly nothing. 

 

On page ten, the committee commends the Government for the series of news releases directed to the 

public for information. It may be just coincidence that the committee arrived with its train of 

Government employees, NDP assistants and others in Uranium City, all at Government expense, just at 

the time of the Athabasca by-election. The Welfare Committee is on such a good political wicket that it 

desires to continue its travels around the province. The Government won’t let that one quit before a 

couple of more dances at public expense. The Cabinet has met in a number of towns and villages in the 

constituency of Athabasca, again just before by-election time, excellent party publicity at high cost to 

the public. 

 

Government advertising is extensive — usually with the name of the Cabinet Minister and frequently 

with his picture, particularly if that Cabinet Minister comes from North Battleford (Mr. Kramer). I can 

assure the House that the more you do of this, the more you can cut down on your campaign expenses 

during election time. A look at any newspaper in Saskatchewan, particularly at election time, 

demonstrates clearly what I have just said. 

 

The Government has resolved to present a nice new package to us. It has evolved a new program of 

publicity for the MLAs. It proposes that each private Member have two one-minute T.V. clips, the 

Ministers, the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) five, five-minute clips, all at 

public expense. The result is that the Opposition has 33 of them and the Government has 133, a ratio of 

four to one. And while the New Democrats line up at the trough filled with the people’s money you can 

be sure that they haven’t overlooked every or any opportunity to spend the people’s money. When the 

good people of Saskatchewan see an advertisement in the newspaper or on the radio, I am sure they will 

remember that it is their money that is being spent. The Government is trying to bamboozle our people 

with their own cash. 

 

Fifthly . . . 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Tell us about the Budget. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — This is the Budget, Hon. Member for Touchwood. This is the Budget transferred to 

the benefit of the New Democratic 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

567 

 

Party. 

 

Fifthly, having placed its party politicians on the Government payroll, having expanded its party 

apparatus at public expense, having commenced the committee system at public expense, having created 

a huge network of other committees such as the Land Bank Committee, having expanded the 

Information Services for the benefit of the Ministers and the Government, having paid for Government 

advertising with the pictures of Ministers going throughout the province, particularly during Federal and 

Provincial elections, having offered publicity to the MLAs at public expense, with only token 

allowances for the Opposition, there remains one step more to continue this wild spending spree. One 

step more to eliminate democracy in this province and that is to place limitations on the Opposition. 

 

Two years ago the budget for the Opposition was $21,600. This was raised to $24,000, an increase of 

$200 per month. The Budget this year provides for no increase at all to the Opposition. The Opposition 

will continue to receive the same as in the past, $24,000. And so while the Premier’s office increases by 

hundreds of thousands of dollars, the Opposition receives $24,000 in a two-year period while the party 

faithful fatten at the public trough. The Opposition is given a token contribution or no increase at all. 

There is only one more thing we may expect and that is a Bill which will limit the election expense. That 

kind of a Bill would effectively stifle the Opposition and as I have pointed out it would have virtually no 

effect on the Government. 

 

As a result, it is doubtful if any Government in Canada has so effectively converted the power of 

Government to the direct support of a political party. The threat to democracy alone demands that the 

people of Saskatchewan rise up against this Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: —Now this Las Vegas trip of this Government is made possible by huge Federal 

payments. I want to talk for a moment about some of these contributions. In this Budget these items 

from the Federal Government total $295 million, 40 per cent of the Provincial Budget this year comes 

from Ottawa. It is no wonder that the Hon. Mr. Cowley is silent when he goes to Ottawa on these 

conferences. He just doesn’t have the conscience to ask for more and that’s saying something. 

 

I shall not try to deal with too many statistics, but there are some figures which are extremely important 

and interesting, and I think the people should know about these statistics. This year, the Provincial 

Government will be spending on welfare a total of $59 million; on medicare $42 million; and $105 on 

hospitalization. These significant figures total $207 million. I can assure you, that the NDP speakers 

throughout the length and breadth of the land will take all the credit in the world for spending these 

monies. What is less known, is that while the Provincial Government spent $59 million on welfare, the 

Federal Government contributed $34 million of this. While the Provincial Government spends $42 

million on medicare the Federal Government will refund to it $28 million. While the Provincial 

Government spends $105 million on hospitalization, the Federal Government will give the province $59 

million for this purpose 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

568 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — In every single case where the Provincial Government takes credit for its concern for 

people, more than 50 per cent of every dollar that is spent is paid for by the Federal Government, despite 

the fact that these are provincial responsibilities. 

 

The Federal Government pays 57 per cent of welfare in Saskatchewan; the provincial Government pays 

43 per cent. A difference of 14 per cent in favor of the Federal Government. In medicare, the Federal 

Government pays 67 per cent — that is two-thirds of the entire medicare budget in Saskatchewan is paid 

for by the Federal Government. The Provincial Government pays 33 per cent, exactly one-third. The 

Federal Government pays $2 for every $1 spent by the province, by the NDP Government, on medicare. 

Under hospitalization the Federal Government pays 56 per cent; the Provincial Government pays 44 per 

cent. 

 

Federal medicare came into being on July 1, 1968. I was fearful that a Conservative victory in 1968 

would result in the cancellation of the Federal Medicare Plan. Dalton Camp, then a leading Conservative 

candidate, said the Federal Medicare Plan was a dead duck. Other Federal Conservative candidates 

echoed these sentiments. But the Prime Minister stated that medicare would proceed. He considered it 

essential to the welfare of Canadians as a whole that the Federal Government help the provinces by 

making these medicare payments. Without the Federal aid our provincial medicare and our 

hospitalization plan would be seriously in jeopardy. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that taken as a whole for welfare, medicare and hospitalization, the three 

things which the NDP Members in this House take most credit for, in speech after speech, out of a total 

of $207 million, the Federal Government pays $122 million. The Federal Government pays 58 per cent 

of all these costs; and the Provincial Government pays 42 per cent. How many times in this House have 

we heard the NDP take full credit for medicare; how many times do we hear them take full credit for 

hospitalization; how many times do they take full credit for welfare; and how often have the Members in 

this House heard NDP Members give credit to the Federal Government for contributing 58 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — It is no wonder that politicians get a bad name, when the NDP have people running 

around the country taking 100 per cent credit for a 42 per cent effort. It is no wonder that the people 

believe less than half what the NDP politicians tell them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Only if the NDP is a movement and not a party, only if it is a form of religion to its 

adherents, can such a monstrous lie be accepted as gospel. Now I have looked through Hansard; I have 

listened to the debates of this House; I have listened to the speeches on the radio, and I have never heard 

anything but vilification and condemnation of the Federal Government by the 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

569 

 

New Democratic Party, yet it is that very Federal Government, the Liberal Government at Ottawa, 

which has sustained medicare and hospitalization plans of this province. In not one of the three major 

categories does the Provincial Government pay even half. If the Provincial Government has a 42 per 

cent concern for people, then sure the Liberal Government should be given credit for a 58 per cent 

concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — When the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) says that the Government program 

demonstrates their party’s concern for people, what he means is his party’s 42 per cent concern for 

people. Any way you cut it, the Liberal Party’s concern for the sick, the aged, the welfare recipients, 

those mentally and physically infirm, those worse off than ourselves, is 16 per cent greater than the New 

Democratic Party. 

 

Now there are numerous other payments from the Federal Treasury. A post-secondary education 

payment amounting to $12.5 million. A statutory subsidy of $2 million. Under manpower agreements, 

more than $5 million were paid by the Federal Government, and I might say that that is in addition to all 

other payments which are made into the province and not directly to the Government. Health Resources 

Fund is another $1.65 million. ARDA payments to the Government of Saskatchewan $2.8 million. 

Winter Capital projects come to $3.6 million. Other projects $7 million and so on. I was not even 

counting these payments when I was discussing the three large ones of welfare, medicare and hospital 

insurance amounts. 

 

There is a fourth one and that is the equalization payments. I will discuss that in a few minutes but from 

a total payment out of this province this year $723 million, the Federal Treasury puts in $293 million — 

$4 out of every $10 spent by this province is given by the Federal Government. 

 

I want to talk in a few minutes about the equalization payment but first, Mr. Speaker, I want to see what 

good, if any, the Government has done in this wild spending spree. 

 

The Qu’Appelle Basin Study — now that study was created in August of 1970 by the Federal 

Government and the Governments of Saskatchewan and Manitoba. Both the Liberal Government in 

Saskatchewan and in Ottawa were extremely concerned with the growing pollution in the Qu’Appelle 

Basin system. This was part of an anti-pollution program which at that time was the best in North 

America. The Liberal Government passed The Litter Control Act, The Pollution by Livestock Control 

Act. They continued to improve the pollution control standards and anti-pollution requirements of the 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill. It had imposed even higher standards for the proposed Athabasca Pulp Mill and 

it had commenced studies on the extent of pollution in other areas of the province. The Liberal 

Government of that day was determined to find out the causes of pollution, the extent of pollution and 

obtain a no-nonsense report with recommended action. The Liberal Government was determined to take 

effective action. 

 

The Qu’Appelle Basin Study group began its work immediately. It completed its efforts last fall. This 

Qu’Appelle Basin Study Report was transmitted to the Minister of Environment in 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

570 

October of 1972. The Minister did not reveal this report until late January 1973. The report tells about 

the eutrophication or the death of the Qu’Appelle Basin system. This process involves the continued 

addition of nutrients and sediment to the Qu’Appelle system through sewage and run-off which 

nourishes vegetation and ultimately kills the lake. With the increase in nutrients and plant life the 

available oxygen in the water declines. The level of the lake decreases as the bottom fills with sediment. 

The lakes become shallow, reedy ponds, then marshes and ultimately meadows. This excellent report 

can be obtained for $1 from the Queen’s Printer in Regina or Winnipeg or from Information Canada. It 

identified the problem and identifies solutions. 

 

There are two kinds of recommendations. There are the long term recommendations and there are those 

which require absolutely urgent attention. Seventy per cent of phosphorus entering the Qu’Appelle River 

enters from the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. Every time the Minister of Finance flushes his toilet (I 

assume he can do that without the assistance of a committee) he adds nutrients to the Qu’Appelle Basin. 

Immediate action is required to control these effluents. Six million to $8 million is urgently required for 

sewage treatment in Moose Jaw and in Regina. The total cost is in the neighborhood of $15 million. 

Cities, villages and towns like Lumsden just cannot afford the cost. Immediate action is required by the 

Provincial Government. 

 

Despite the fact this Government received the report in 1972, it took no action and the Budget provides 

little or no action on the urgent recommendations of the study. The total budget of the Department of the 

Environment is $3 million. Grants to cities pursuant to The Water Pollution Control Act are a miserly 

$200,000. The biggest increase for Environment is a million dollar study on the Churchill River. 

Practically nothing is offered to the cities of Moose Jaw, Regina or the town of Lumsden. Little hope is 

offered to those of us concerned with the future of the Qu’Appelle Basin. 

 

The only action taken by the Minister of the Environment was the appointment of another committee. 

On January 23, 1973, the Leader-Post published an announcement by the Minister which begins as 

follows: 

 

Neil Byers, Minister of the Environment announced on Tuesday the establishment of a 12-member 

environmental advisory council to review department policies and transmit public views back to the 

department. 

 

Apparently the Minister is unable to review his own departmental policies. This is serious enough. What 

is worse is that he, a politician, needs a committee to transmit public views back to him. It is quite 

apparent that the Minister will take no action whatsoever until he hears what the public has to say. This 

is either a demonstration of the total incompetence of this Minister or is an excuse for delays in 

implementing the recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Just an excuse for delay. The Government must realize that the threat to the 

Qu’Appelle Basin is serious and immediate. The Government must answer to the people of Regina and 

southern 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

571 

 

Saskatchewan for its failure to take action. Failure to take action, however, does not mean, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Government doesn’t wish to take full credit for everything. I refer to this as the “cowbird 

syndrome”. The cowbird, as you know, uses nests prepared by other birds. It takes advantage of the 

other birds’ efforts not only in the preparation of the nest but in the hatching of the eggs. The cowbird 

simply lays its egg in the nest of the other birds. It is, therefore, a freeloader on the efforts of the other 

birds. This is being refined to a high skill by the present Government. 

 

The Hon. Minister of Labour, MLA for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Snyder). 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s a cowbird all right. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — He is reported in the Times-Herald on February 5 as follows: 

 

He told more than 70 persons attending the second in a series of six NDP sponsored Sunday forums, 

these recent developments reflect the continued determination on the part of the Government to place 

Saskatchewan in the vanguard of social and economic progress. 

 

And he said as follows about environment: 

 

In the area of environment, he said the establishment of the Qu’Appelle Basin Study Group was a step 

toward fulfillment of the Government’s commitment to protect our natural environment. 

 

I would remind the Minister that the Qu’Appelle Basin Study Report was created in August 1970 with a 

Liberal Government in Regina and a Liberal Government in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Ninety five per cent of the cost is paid by the Saskatchewan and Federal 

Governments and five per cent by the Province of Manitoba. The report was well and promptly done. 

The recommendations are clear. The Government will stand judged by history for its failure to take 

action. The citizens of the southern part of Saskatchewan in particular will in the next election have 

ample opportunity to demonstrate to the Government their feelings about the conversion of this report 

into a political plaything. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The money spent on party politics by this Government is more than enough to solve 

the Qu’Appelle Basin problems. But you can’t spend it in Las Vegas and still have it in Qu’Appelle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — Vote against the Budget. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I certainly will vote against 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

572 

the Budget, I can assure you, Mr. Member who removes liquor licences and permits and takes them 

somewhere else. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are about to see the effects of last year’s Budget very shortly. By April 30 we 

shall all be filing our 1972 Income Tax Returns. This year’s Budget will result in a further three per cent 

tax increase and further deductions from people’s pay envelopes. When a school teacher or a secretary 

looks at her pay cheque every month and sees the huge income tax deductions she must wonder whom 

she is working for. When a Regina housewife helps her husband fill out his tax return this year she will 

realize that her husband worked for the Government two or three months and sometimes four and five 

months every year. 

 

Last year the Federal Government decided that something had to be done, particularly for people in the 

lower income tax bracket. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Federal Government increased the exemptions, allowed deductions for working 

people, allowed working mothers to deduct costs of baby-sitting, gave working people special expense 

allowances, allowed workmen to deduct the expense of their tools and their equipment. These are just 

some of the changes in the tax returns people will fill out in the spring. The Federal Government was 

determined to reduce taxes but the Provincial NDP Government refused to accept any reductions. They 

increased the provincial income tax rate a year ago from 34 per cent to 37 per cent. And now the NDP 

wants another three per cent which will raise the provincial taxes to 40 per cent in the current year. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The highest in the country. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The result is that the Government of Saskatchewan will make $95 million out of the 

workers of Saskatchewan this year. Twenty-five million dollars more than last year. And the corporate 

increase — a moderate $3 million increase to corporations. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Friends of the people. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Government opposite says that we are the friends of the people. Well they 

certainly should be because they’ve got all the people’s money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Part of the increase in tax revenue, of course, comes from an upsurge in the economy 

resulting in higher wages. But at least $7 million of the tax increase comes from that extra three per cent 

on the personal income tax. Working people of Saskatchewan will pay $95 million out of their pockets 

to a Provincial Government which hires defeated NDP candidates at $20,000 a year to carry on political 

activities. 

 

The Federal Government began to tax capital gains a year 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

573 

 

ago and it decided that since it was taxing the capital gains it did not need an estate or gift tax. But the 

Provincial NDP not only wanted and receives its fair share of the capital gains tax, it wants the 

succession duty and estate taxes too. 

 

Last year the Government had a surplus of about $10 million. I have no doubt that this will be gobbled 

up before the end of the current fiscal year. With a $10 million surplus, with unprecedented payments 

from Ottawa, with an upsurge in the economy producing more revenues from almost every other source 

of taxation, we in this party cannot see the need for an increase in personal taxation at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The burden of this taxation is far heavier on working people than on corporations. 

David Lewis, the national NDP Leader is calling for reductions in personal income taxes. It is obvious 

that he didn’t speak to the New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan. It is equally obvious that what the 

New Democratic Party says when it is out of office has no relation to what it does when it is in office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I would have less objection to the increased rates if it were being carefully saved up 

for a rainy day. I would have less objection if we were developing the province to help out in the future. 

I would have less objection if we were saving this extra money or using it for pensions or a drug plan or 

some other good purpose. But none of these things are occurring. 

 

The three per cent extra income tax would be unnecessary if the pulp mill had been built. When you 

consider the extra education and health tax, the extra income tax from workers in the mill, the revenue 

from stumpage and permits, the extra corporate tax, the $6 million wasted by this Government to kill the 

project, the reduction in welfare payments that would have resulted from employment in the mill, that 

extra three per cent tax that we pay from now on might well be called a pulp mill replacement tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — So when we pay that extra three per cent each year to the Provincial Government, 

when we fill out our tax return we should each remember that this is what it costs each of us personally 

each and every year from now on not to have a pulp mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on this spending spree the Government isn’t really spending money, it 

is spilling it. When the Government says there has been a shift, they mean an increase. The load may 

have been shifted but it’s heavier and it’s on the backs of the same people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

574 

Mr. MacLeod: — And that is the Budget that Mr. Cowley says he’s proud of. 

 

Let’s deal with unemployment. The Minister of Finance reports that unemployment in 1972 was “A 

staggering 6.4 per cent.” He said that Saskatchewan’s rate of unemployment last year had reached a 

point where corrective measures were necessary and the Government took action. Well, Saskatchewan’s 

unemployment has now risen to seven per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, oh: 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Obviously whatever the Government was doing was the wrong thing. The 

Government action was inadequate or unsuccessful or it had the benefit of too many planners or too 

many committees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — In any event, Mr. Speaker, while the rate of unemployment in the rest of Canada was 

stabilized or going down, Saskatchewan’s rate of unemployment was going up. But despite this the 

Government has not promised to continue its winter works program. It has reduced the moneys available 

to STEP (now called PEP) from $1.5 million to $1 million, and even with the promised Government 

employment it falls short of the moneys expended last year. It is obvious that the Government’s concern 

for the employment of our young people is not as great today as it was at election time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Government’s efforts on unemployment are a sorry solution to a serious 

situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Minister says that the long term solution to achieve economic stability is to get 

more business. Well, now, that’s interesting. It’s like someone turning a light on in the Government 

offices. The Minister says we must have diversification of the agricultural industry. Now isn’t that what 

we’ve been saying for years? He says we must have the development and processing of our primary 

resources. Well, isn’t that where a pulp mill might come in. Wouldn’t it help to have a steel industry in 

Saskatchewan if we had an iron mine or two? And the Minister says we must have secondary industry. 

Wouldn’t it be nice to have a few primary industries around on which to build secondary industry? 

 

The Government Members are confused. They are under the impression that you solve unemployment 

by making a speech about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — This may be the way to win votes but it’s not the way to get a person a job. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

575 

 

Now I am particularly concerned about older people. People who have many years of useful service to 

themselves and to contribute to others. Nothing destroys a man or woman more than the feeling the he 

or she is not wanted or is not needed and that’s where business is so all-important. 

 

Now the NDP would have us believe that business is solely for the businessmen. Nothing could be 

further from the truth. And if it were so, one wonders why the New Democratic Party so vigorously 

attempts to attract industry. Why would the Minister of Industry be so pleased to announce the extension 

of the Robin Hood plant in Saskatoon? The fact is that business is not just a plaything of the rich. It is 

part of the fabric of our lives. It is part of the process by which each one of us can be better off. Without 

industry there will be no unions. Without industry and without business there will be no satisfaction of 

earning a living. No satisfaction of the soul-satisfying feeling of performing a good job well done. And 

the fruits of business whether government or private, including co-operative business, are used by us all 

to help provide those things to those parts of society which need assistance. 

 

In October last the British Columbia Government passed a Guaranteed Minimum Income Assistance 

Act. This provided for additional guaranteed monthly supplements for old age pensioners in British 

Columbia. The first cheques under that plan were paid to pensioners in British Columbia in December of 

1972. The cost of the B.C. program is $65 million. Somebody said it’s because they’ve got a New 

Democratic Government. I say it is because they haven’t had a New Democratic Government up to now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The cost of the B.C. program is $65 million, but the Federal Government pays $25 

million of it. The Prime Minister has made it clear that the Federal Government is always willing to 

contribute to welfare, old age pensions and worthy projects within the provinces. B.C. was able to take 

advantage of the generosity of the Trudeau Government because it did not have the blessing of a 

CCF-NDP government for 22 of the past 29 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — It was able to take advantage of the Federal program because it has productive 

business. B.C. is proud of its pulp mills. It has encouraged the development of its mines. In 

Saskatchewan the Government paid nearly $7 million to kill the pulp mill and it neglects the Choiceland 

iron mines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The cost to Saskatchewan of a guaranteed income supplement to the level of $200 

per month to our old age pensioners would be approximately $22 million a year, with the Federal 

Liberal Government paying $9 million. Now this Federal assistance is lost to Saskatchewan because this 

particular Government has failed to develop the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

576 

Mr. MacLeod: — But despite this, Saskatchewan could well have afforded the payment of this income 

supplement if the $22 million required for the project had not been wasted on the political apparatus of 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Saskatchewan has received generous equalization, welfare, medical and hospital 

payments from the Federal Government. There is absolutely no reason why this Government could not 

have taken advantage of the Federal Government plan for increased pensions. We could have a 

supplementary income payment to our old age pensioners to the level of $200 per month. 

 

The Premier says we can’t afford it. Yet his Government spends $30 million for farm land which he 

refuses to sell to young farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — In this, Mr. Speaker, he fails not only our young people but our old people. The 

Liberal Government of Saskatchewan would be anxious to increase the old age pension supplement to a 

minimum of $200. How long it would take to rectify the damage of four years of New Democratic 

Government is hard to imagine but repair of our province would be a top priority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Provincial Government will receive in the first three years of government almost 

$300 million in extra equalization payments, that is more than was given for the previous three years. 

Yet, they have increased taxes on the working man from 34 per cent to 40 per cent and yet have failed to 

provide for income supplements to our old age pensioners; superannuation benefits to our retired 

teachers and civil servants because they can’t afford it. Mr. Speaker, only the grossest mismanagement 

of our resources and our finances could have put this province in this position where it spends $300 

million additional dollars with so little to show for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — One thing this Government doesn’t want to do apparently is spill any money on our 

old age pensioners or our superannuates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now I can assure you that this high living, this Las Vegas style of life is not my cup 

of tea and I suspect not the cup of tea of many of our young people who want jobs, or our old age 

pensioners who want security. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now we are pleased to see 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

577 

 

the construction of the Heritage development in downtown Regina. That apartment building is a new, 

12-storey apartment building for elderly people in Regina. It contains 127 suites and houses 

approximately 200 elderly people. This project was authorized in 1969 by a Liberal government in 

Ottawa. Who built it — the Hon. Cy MacDonald was the Minister when that was authorized by the 

Saskatchewan Government and a Liberal government was in power in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The cost of the building is $1.6 million, 75 per cent is paid for by the Federal 

Government, 20 per cent by the Provincial Government and five per cent by the City of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — This project was opened a week ago by Federal, Provincial and City officials. At that 

time, the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood) announced that, “We are going to build 

another one.” In fairness, the Minister of Municipal Affairs more properly should have said the Federal 

Government is going to build another one, assisted by the City and the province. 

 

Unfortunately, we saw the cowbird principle at work again in senior Members of the Government. The 

Minister and the Premier were present at the opening of the Heritage Apartments. They were quite 

willing to tell everyone (quite wrongly) that the Provincial Government co-operates with Federal and 

City governments, but at no time did they point out that the project was authorized by the Hon. Cy 

MacDonald when he was Minister of Welfare . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — . . . they did not point out that the contribution of the two other governments was 80 

per cent and that the amount supplied by the Provincial Government was $1 in $5. The construction 

itself was under the authority of the Regina Local Housing Authority and not the Provincial Government 

and most of the people involved are from Federal sources and the City. 

 

We have no objection to the formula. We object to the manner in which the Premier and in part the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs is willing to claim a political benefit for someone else’s efforts. They are 

political freeloaders. We support the construction of accommodation downtown for our elderly people. I 

have on previous occasions expressed disappointment that our senior citizens have been forced to live 

on the edge of town. The serious problem of growing old is the isolation from society. This is 

accentuated by placing them in buildings at the edge of town. Our senior citizens are people. One of 

their most important needs is to be wanted and to be around younger and active people. They want to 

look in the stores, have tea in the restaurants, they want to walk in Victoria Park and generally enjoy 

being part of the movement and hustle of the community. This cannot be effectively done by putting 

them miles away from the centre of activity. 

 

I, therefore, support the construction of additional units 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

578 

near the centre of the city and I am pleased that the Federal Government will again pay 75 per cent of 

the costs of the next one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — On the question of co-operation with the Federal Government, except for the 

minority situation in Ottawa at the present, I am afraid that the record of the NDP isn’t a very good one, 

unless someone has actually completed a project or has completed a study. Then they co-operate around 

the clock. 

 

The Government isn’t co-operating with the Federal Land Transfer Program and I can assure you that 

the Federal Government could have used a little help on the Stabilization Bill, which would have put 

another $160 million into the Western economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — By the time the NDP mathematicians got through, nobody could figure out what was 

happening and unfortunately, the NDP long-range accounting had more to do with defeating the Liberals 

than with helping the farmer. 

 

Another area in which the Government has failed to carry out its moral obligations is with respect to our 

retired teachers. I spoke about this in 1971 and I gave particular emphasis to it in 1972. I pointed out that 

one teacher who had taught school for forty years had retired. He was then earning a pension of just 

slightly over $200 a month. The Government increases to these retired teachers have been insignificant 

to the point of being an insult. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — In most industries today, unions have arranged with employers to establish 

superannuation funds on an equal basis. That is, 50 per cent of the moneys contributed are from the 

employee and 50 per cent from the employer. I am not suggesting that that is a necessary or the only 

formula. I am suggesting that since this Government assumed the employer’s responsibility it has 

consistently failed to meet its true responsibilities with respect to our retired teachers, particularly those 

in the more elderly bracket. And this applies to the eleven years of Liberal government and the 22 years 

of CCF government since the plan was put into effect. 

 

In the last annual report of the Teachers’ Superannuation Committee, it is pointed out that the provincial 

funds paid to the Commission amount to $1.3 million, during the same period, teachers themselves paid 

$5 million. 

 

The Budget makes no adequate provision to rectify this situation. In fact, the Government has belatedly 

announced to the House the other day, a Committee to study the superannuation plan. (Another 

committee). We regret that these committees have been used, either for political purposes or in other 

cases, as an excuse for delay. If it is the intention of the Government to improve pensions just before 

election time, we will have no hesitation to remind the retired teachers of the callous 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

579 

 

use of these people as an election gimmick. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now, last year, Mr. Speaker, I expressed concern for people who still lived in small 

villages and hamlets in Saskatchewan. People had retired to a village only to find that all the other 

people began to move away. The storekeeper and garage owners discovered that new roads take their 

customers away to the larger towns; they close their businesses, often with their lifesavings tied up in 

unsaleable assets; often too old to make a new start in life. A new road has often been the economic 

‘kiss of death’ to these small communities. I am very disappointed to see that no program to help these 

people is offered by the New Democrats. But I knew that in advance, Mr. Speaker. I knew that there 

would be no program planned for these people. When the NDP have no program or no plan, it places a 

resolution on the Order Paper condemning the Federal Government. The minute I saw the resolution on 

rail line abandonment, when that appeared, Mr. Speaker, I realized that the cupboard was going to be 

pretty bare in this province so far as these small towns and communities were concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an examination of the Budget shows that the New Deal for People is getting frayed around 

the edges. There are some good things. You can’t spend $700 million without helping somebody. But 

some governments do more by accident than this Government does by design. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Property Improvement Grant or Homeowner Grant program, which has been in 

effect, had the basic elements of fairness and equality, until now. The Property Improvement Grant 

presented by the NDP gives more to the rich than to the poor. The big farmer gets more than the small 

farmer; the big businessman gets more than the small businessman. Under the NDP Property 

Improvement Grants working men in towns and cities get proportionately less — they are worse off than 

before. The average citizen isn’t doing nearly as well as the big farmer or big business. The Government 

tells us the Property Improvement Grants are to reduce our taxes. If that is the case why do cities now 

find it necessary, for the first time, to begin taxing community-owned property, such as the Red Cross 

properties, the Marian Centre here in Regina — and I suspect that perhaps some city people will be 

involved in this and very interested why that becomes necessary — the Cosmos Activity Centre for the 

Mentally Retarded here in Regina, the Saskatchewan Council for Crippled Children and Adults, Boy 

Scout buildings, Girl Guide buildings here and in Saskatoon and other non-profit organizations. The 

City of Regina, proposes to impose a tax on these properties for the first time. Saskatoon is doing the 

same, so are other municipalities in the province. For the past year, these cities have been discussing the 

possible requirement that they include church properties on the tax roll. 

 

The New Democratic Party is doing nothing for the social and cultural welfare of our province if they 

shift the tax burden to these non-profit organizations. The biggest deficiency in the Property 

Improvement Grants is that it doesn’t live up to the Government speeches in this House. The increase in 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

580 

taxes in Saskatchewan will be more than the increase in the grants. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Taxes on Saskatchewan property will increase more than the $7 million increase in 

the Property Improvement Grant Program. The Government promises to reduce property taxes to 25 

mills. That promise is not being kept. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the school program. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — It didn’t say school program in the programming. It’s amazing how when you get to 

be the government you suddenly change the meanings. 

 

I would have little to say about the Homeowner Grants except to support the plan if the Government 

wasn’t trying to deceive the people into believing that taxes were being reduced, because that claim is 

absolutely false. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Property Improvement Grant system still has not been extended to renters. Each 

person in Saskatchewan, secretary, carpenter, clerk, pays increased taxes to the Provincial Government 

to provide these grants. These people rent property, yet they fail to get any direct advantage. 

 

Our cities are finding it harder and harder to finance their programs. In Regina the City Police is offered 

a 10.6 per cent raise, which still does not bring them into parity with other police forces. Our police 

force in Regina has generally been one of the best and we must be vigilant to see that the high standard 

is maintained. The Provincial Government has an obligation to contribute sufficient funds to maintain 

that standard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — This is particularly so in Regina and Saskatoon, which are the beneficiaries of other 

problems imported from other parts of the province. Taken as part of the overall municipal tax picture 

and taking these services provided by the municipalities, the increase in the Property Improvement 

Grant and the other grant programs, taken together, are totally inadequate, they have not even kept pace 

with normal increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, when the Government takes $25 million more out of our pay 

envelopes, when it gives a measly extra $7 million in Property Improvement Grants, not enough to pay 

the tax increases, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a shift, that’s a shaft. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

581 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this is the second year in a row that Agriculture, Highways and Industry 

and Commerce have been short-changed in the Budget. 

 

Agriculture was to receive the main thrust of this Government’s program. I’m sure that the thrust it got 

was not the thrust it wanted. The total Budget for Agriculture was increased. A little examination shows 

that the farmers got precious little of it — almost all the extra money is spent here in Regina in 

Agriculture Minister Messer’s office, mostly for political work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — More for the political pork barrel. The total Budget for Agriculture went up $2 

million but the actual amount spent for farmers (that is the Capital Budget) went down by about $2 

million. Last year $10 million was allotted to the Land Bank. The expenses of the Commission were 

$640,000. When you talk about a rental of five per cent you will discover that the $500,000 produced in 

a year’s rental from that would not meet even the ordinary expenses of $640,000 without even 

considering the deficiency on the interest. The only beneficiaries of this program are the farmers who 

have sold their land for cash. Now we are very happy for them and we wish them well, but what we 

object to is the inefficiency and waste in the Department of Agriculture. The rental just does not cover 

the cost of the land in the year the land is purchased. 

 

This year, the Land Bank promises to be no more efficient than the last — the operating budget is a full 

additional $20 million. In two years the Government has budgeted a total of $1.7 million in Land Bank 

expenses and has yet to receive a penny in rent. Moreover, the Government candidates promised a Land 

Bank with the right to buy the land on reasonable terms. I wonder if they have changed that promise, 

because the promise has not been kept. The long-term implications for farmers are serious. Land prices 

tend to rise. If they rise gradually, the rise is steady. When they rise sharply, such as occurred in the mid 

‘60s the rise is usually followed by a leveling-off period, or even a slump. One thing is certain, land 

prices over the long haul will rise. There is not one farmer in Saskatchewan who bought land in the ‘40s 

and ‘50s (at prices he thought were pretty high then) who didn’t see that land greatly increased in price 

ten years later. The same will occur in the future. Land is probably going to double again, perhaps in as 

few as ten years The result is that rents, being tied to value, will continue to rise. The tenant will find 

that his rental cost is up but that he has gained none of the increased value of the land. 

 

A farmer, wishing to help his son, will have discovered that his son’s rent has doubled but the son is no 

better off financially. When the time comes for the son to retire, he will have nothing to sell; he will 

pack his bags; get what cash he can for the buildings he has put on the farm and he will leave. He will 

not be making a sale to the Government like his father did, and he’ll be far worse off. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — When the son comes to 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

582 

retirement he will find that he was little better than a government sharecropper. 

 

The Highway budget is little more than a ‘hold the line’ budget. Last year there was no increase at all, 

this year the increase is about $3 million. It is obvious that the Hon. Minister of Highways meant it 

when he announced that the Government was commencing a “Poor Roads Program.” He declared that 

the Liberal Government had built highways to a standard higher than necessary and that the NDP 

intended to build only to see the standard required for the traffic. I defy the Minister to demonstrate 

effectively that Saskatchewan roads have in fact been overbuilt. 

 

The fallacy of this (the fallacy of building at too low a standard) was seen in the road such as the 

Regina-Weyburn highway. This was built by the NDP Government, built to a lower standard than 

necessary, and in short order had to be rebuilt. This is totally false economy. 

 

Despite the fact that the Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) regards industrial development as absolutely 

necessary, the Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Thorson) appears not to have received the 

message. 

 

The most significant things about the first year in office of this Government, and its first Budget, was the 

way it had turned its back on development. The Premier had become determined to live on Federal 

payments, including Federal-Provincial equalization payments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Federal equalization formula determines what the tax potential is of all the 

provinces in Canada. If any province in Canada falls below the national average, the Federal 

Government pays the difference. This means that every province in Canada will get the national average 

in taxes, either from its own resources or the Federal Government. Unfortunately, this does not put any 

pressure on any government to carry on development. It is true, that without development, our 

population will continue to decline, our young people will go elsewhere, but the province itself will 

continue to maintain a standard for those who remain, equal to the national average. This accounts, in 

large measure, for the indifference of this Government when it comes to the development of business. 

And it’s becoming a scandal. Some people aren’t too pleased with NDP freeloaders and even this 

Government is becoming embarrassed. 

 

The Minister of Finance says that one of the most frequent requests is for management advice and 

consultative services. What I suggest is that the businessman needs a little less talk and a little more 

action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — What the businessman requires more than anything else is a loan to improve or move 

or renovate his premises. 

 

In the last two years the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon have spent almost as much money and 

have provided more 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

583 

 

total effort to attract business to Saskatchewan than has the Provincial Government. The reports put out 

border on the ridiculous. I have before me the last annual report of the Department of Industry and 

Commerce. Under industrial development they proudly list some 29 projects. They range from large 

ones like Central Canadian Distilleries in Weyburn, opened in May 1971 down to items so small the 

Government has not listed the amount for fear of embarrassing the Government. 

 

After examining the report I am led to comment on another invention of this Government and that is the 

art of fictional development. On page 14 of the report under Regina Paper Box and Printing Limited is 

the following comment: 

 

This plan expanded its facilities this year. New equipment valued at $130,000 was added and eight 

new employees were hired. 

 

I want to inform the Minister that this plant never expanded. It purchased absolutely no equipment of 

any kind. Not $30,000 not even $30. I doubt that this plant employed eight people at one time in its 

history. In fact, the Minister might be interested to learn that the company was seized by its creditors in 

September of 1972 and all the equipment was sold for $5,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now that’s a new industry. And that is put forth with all solemnity and formality in 

the annual report signed by the Minister of Industry and Commerce. The Report also mentions Signal 

Industries Ltd. This plant owes its existence in Saskatchewan, not to the present Minister but to the Hon. 

Dave Boldt, the Minister of Highways who was anxious to have license plates used in Saskatchewan 

manufactured here. In fact, I was present when this plant opened just after the Government came to 

power in 1971. I was pleased to hear the Hon. Minister welcome them. I was not pleased to have him 

take credit for the encouragement which the Government gave that industry. Apparently the cowbird 

syndrome is contagious. 

 

Under this Government Industry and Commerce continues to be a joke. I mentioned last year that the 

Department had one of the smallest budgets in government. The same is true this year. The amounts for 

industry and commerce under the Industry and Commerce Development Act are $205,000. Mr. Speaker, 

that amounts virtually to an insult when you consider a Budget approaching three-quarters of a billion 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about some Budget changes before closing. There are two important 

changes. One is the alteration to a gross budget. I support that change, Mr. Speaker, because it more 

properly reflects the true spending of the province. For example in last year’s welfare budget the amount 

shown was 7.6 per cent, the corrected figure was 10.25 per cent. Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that 

at last we have got a gross budgeting system which properly reflects the amount of money actually 

expended for services by the Government. 

 

Another development pleases me far less. It was not approved by the Committee on Public Accounts, 

that is the proposal by the Minister that he adopt a system of financial statements over a long period. 

Here is his announcement. He said 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

584 

that the finance department will begin to use a new concept of long term or cycle fiscal accounting 

which will allow us better to handle fluctuations in the economy and federal equalization payments. I 

underline federal equalization payments. There will be no attempt to set the length of the cycle in 

advance. They will be terminated and initiated according to economic conditions. These are very 

revealing. I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that cyclic budgeting is just nonsense. This Budget is a 

spendthrift Budget and the Government recognizes that it will be getting into trouble. 

 

Briefly, Mr. Speaker, what has happened is this. In 1969, 1970 and 1971, that three-year period they 

received $14 million, $10 million and $42 million from the Federal Treasury in equalization payments. 

Those three years received $66 million in total in Federal equalization payments. But they were earning 

huge payments which were to be paid at a later date. In 1972, the first year of government of this New 

Democratic Government the amount is $107 million. The last budget presented for the current year was 

$119 million and the Budget we received last Friday shows for the 1974 year, $136 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last three-year total under the Liberals was $65 million. But they were earning huge 

credits for the subsequent period. So in 1972, 1973 and 1974 this Government can budget for $362 

million. Almost $300 million more during this three-year period than the last three-year period. With 

this snow storm of money any prudent government would be running up surpluses of $50 or $100 

million a year. But what will happen in 1975, 1976 and 1977? These buoyant years, Mr. Speaker, are not 

earning the huge equalization payments. With the result, Mr. Speaker, 1975, 1976 and 1977 may well 

show disastrous reductions in the equalization payment. This spendthrift Government, this Government 

which is on a spending spree, this Government has failed to put anything away for the rainy day. But it 

has made plans for the rainy day. What it has done it has gone to a long term open end fiscal budgeting. 

Listen again to what the Minister said. He said the Department will use a long term concept of cycle 

accounting. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — No, it says cycle, despite what the Member said. It says cycle in the paper and I will 

read exactly what it says: 

 

The Finance Department will begin to use a new concept of long term cycle fiscal accounting which 

will allow it to better handle fluctuations in the provincial economy and Federal Equalization Grants. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what he really means is that he is worried that he will fall short in an election year. 

There will be no attempt, he says, to set the length of the cycle in advance. I will tell you when the cycle 

will terminate. It will terminate when it looks good for the Government. So the Minister is proposing 

that this House accept the principle of open end fiscal or long term accounting. He says that the fiscal 

period may be two years or four years or six years. He says he won’t tell us in advance. His exact words 

as quoted in the paper, although the Government doesn’t always rely on the paper, says there will be no 

attempt to set the length of the cycle in advance. They will be terminated and initiated according to 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

585 

 

current economic conditions, which you can translate as whether or not economic conditions are good or 

bad for the Government. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, the real purpose of the cyclical budgeting is to deceive the people. I intend to 

oppose and I desire to expose it as a fraud. When the Minister says that it will be terminated and 

initiated according to current economic conditions he is asking for an absolute open end period. 

 

There are two major failures in the plan. Firstly, the plan is open ended to be closed at the whim of the 

Government and secondly because it does not provide adequate information or projections. As a result 

cyclical budgeting, Mr. Speaker, is nothing but a trick. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that this is the Budget of which, Mr. Cowley, is so proud. A 

Budget which increases taxes on people to the highest level in Canada; which gambles on resources, 

turns its back on development; transfers money to the New Democratic political party; fails to help our 

elderly; receives a handout of 40 per cent from the Federal Government; disguises the true financial 

condition of the province; fails to tackle pollution of the Qu’Appelle Basin; which relies heavily on 

profits such as the liquor industry; and still can show a profit, a margin of surplus of less than one in 

700, a dangerous proportion, indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been honored to have the opportunity to study this. I have been honored by my 

colleagues and I wish to thank them for the assistance which they have given me. The support and the 

assistance of the Leader, Mr. Steuart, and all the Members of caucus. I have studied the Budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and I regret to say there is not anything in it except by accident which I can support. I have no 

doubt that when the vote comes I will not be supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, before getting into the debate, I wish to 

congratulate the Member from Albert Park who has just finished speaking. He has done an excellent job 

of analyzing the Budget, especially considering that this is the first year that the Government has used 

this method of gross budgeting. His remarks, both his critiques and his constructive suggestions should 

be well considered by every Member of this House. 

 

I should also like to compliment the Minister of Finance for delivering his first Budget Address and I 

would extend the same compliments to his staff for the preparation of the Budget and to his wife for the 

preparation of his tie. 

 

First of all, I should like to say a few words about the great hypocrisy of this Budget, and that is, of 

course, the huge tax increase in this Budget. The taxpayer in this province is being asked to pay over 

$30 million in tax increases this year. The NDP Government is going to extract $25 million more in the 

form of income tax alone. There is no justifiable excuse for this huge tax increase in a year when the 

economy is so buoyant and when the equalization payments are so huge from the Federal Government. 

We will likely be the only province in Canada with income taxes increased this year. It is incredible for 

the NDP to raise the income tax at this time. Last October 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

586 

they scoured the province during the Federal election demanding that income taxes should be lowered. 

They claimed that this would be the answer to most of our problems, especially unemployment. And yet 

within a couple of months, Mr. Blakeney raises income tax. Even today the National Leader of the NDP, 

David Lewis, is demanding a reduction of income tax, and he threatens to bring down the Government 

of Canada unless he gets a tax reduction. 

 

The credibility of the NDP both nationally and provincially has dropped to an all time low, as a result of 

this Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Blakeney claims that his Budget contains a tax shift. Well if this is a shift, it is 

a shift from high taxes to higher taxes. It is utter nonsense to claim that there is a tax shift. There is 

simply a tax increase. It is nonsense to claim that if you pay out $7 million in Homeowner Grants and 

increase income tax $25 million that this represents a tax shift. It is also nonsense to claim that the 

Homeowner Grant will have the effect of lowering the educational mill rate to 25 mills. It would take 

NDP arithmetic to add up figures to get that kind of results. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I would defy the Premier to show even one person in Moose Jaw or Regina how 

their property tax has been lowered to 25 mills. The Premier can’t show this because it simply is not true 

and it is hypocritical of him to say so. If the Premier wants to be honest, he should admit that this 

Budget does not represent anything but a huge increase in personal taxation and that it’s an increase in a 

year when taxation should have been reduced. I would suggest that Premier Blakeney should consult 

with David Lewis because they are saying opposite things today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Member from Moose Jaw North, I represent a city constituency and some of my 

remarks today will reflect the view of what effect this Budget will have on our cities in Saskatchewan. 

 

When a government presents its budget, it shows the priorities of that government. It is the duty of the 

treasurer to establish and then present these priorities for the various spending programs. 

 

Well, quite frankly, I was extremely disappointed with the Budget priorities presented in this House last 

Friday. I sat for a half hour and listened to the Finance Minister read the Budget Speech which was little 

more than a political speech and I waited for the Estimates to be placed on my table — for it is in these 

Estimates that the true story is told. I immediately opened up the Estimate book to the section on 

Municipal Affairs and the true story was there. The story was ‘a bad deal for our cities.’ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The priorities established in this Budget indicate that 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

587 

 

municipal mill rates in Saskatchewan will soar again this year. You know, Mr. Speaker, that the mill rate 

went up nine mills in Moose Jaw last year from 118 to 127 and Moose Jaw was just a typical example of 

any municipality in Saskatchewan. 

 

There is absolutely no doubt that as a result of the deficiency in this Budget, the mill rate will go up just 

as drastically or even higher, this year. The people of Moose Jaw are going to be forced to pay a 

crushing burden for property tax or else they are going to have to slash services. I might add that these 

services that will have to be cut are already inadequate for our modern society — and I think especially 

of our recreational programs for all our people but especially the senior citizens and the children. I think 

of our programs for environmental control and for establishing parks and recreational facilities. I think 

of urban roadways, police protection, fire protection and public transportation. These are the services 

that we will be forced to cut back or else our property taxes will become staggering. 

 

I want to give full credit to the city council in Moose Jaw. They have had two meetings with the 

Cabinet. They have presented comprehensive briefs outlining urban problems. 

 

Other municipal councils have done the same. Our city council in Moose Jaw came away from these 

meetings with assurances that some of their requests for assistance would be met. They were told that 

they could expect great things in the Budget. Well the Budget has arrived and it reads, “NDP Budget 

will Shaft the Cities.” The NDP talk a good game but when it comes time for action they prove it to be a 

dud. Mr. Blakeney’s credibility is a little suspect in this Budget. When he spoke on the Budget in 1966, I 

should like to quote: 

 

Certainly some of the most expensive and most necessary road projects are in our cities. Bridges, 

railway underpasses, ring roads, all these are necessary if our cities are going to continue. 

 

He went on commenting on the need of cities to get financial help from the province and I quote: 

 

As a matter of fact I would commend to the Government their looking at the idea of grants for 

municipal public transit systems of the kind which have recently been announced in Winnipeg. The 

time has come for cities to get some of the tax revenues that comes from gasoline. 

 

I ask Mr. Blakeney today where his concerns of 1966 have gone, or where his apparent concerns are that 

he showed when he talked to the City Council in Moose Jaw. I am afraid that the Premier is a two-faced 

politician and the public are not going to accept this double talk for very much longer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — You know it is really too bad that Premier Barrett brought down his B.C. budget 

the same day that we had ours presented. It gives us a chance to compare them and unfortunately 

Saskatchewan compares very badly in at least four areas. 

 

First, financial help to hard pressed municipal governments. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

588 

Two, plans for job creation to ease unemployment. Three, aid to senior citizens by way of guaranteeing 

$200 per month for those over 65 and the handicapped. Four, expansion of existing health care 

programs. 

 

Mr. Blakeney’s Government has not taken any action on any of these four areas and they are all vital. I 

take no hesitation in calling on our Government to institute programs in these vital areas at once. We 

don’t have to expect our province to have as large a budget as B.C. and I don’t make any comparisons 

on that basis. It is the principles and priorities that can be compared. 

 

The previous Liberal government in Saskatchewan recognized that grants of an unconditional nature 

must be made to municipalities and in 1970 the Liberal government made the first such grant. These 

were doubled in 1971. These were most welcome grants and enabled municipalities to lower mill rates 

by approximately two mills. This was certainly not enough but it was a step in the right direction. 

 

Last year, Mr. Blakeney gave no increase, in fact, there was a decrease. This year the increase is so 

small that it is a joke. This is in an area where it is fair to compare Saskatchewan to British Columbia. 

 

Saskatchewan municipalities will get grants amounting to a little over $2 per capita, British Columbia 

has raised the grants to $32 per capita. These grants are unconditional and they are a great help to 

hard-pressed municipal governments and to the property owner. By not giving these grants Mr. 

Blakeney is simply passing the buck in trying to make municipal governments take all the responsibility 

for increasing taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I urge Mr. Blakeney to assume the responsibility that is rightfully his and to 

immediately institute a program of unconditional grants so that municipalities can provide adequate 

services and so that property taxpayers can afford to own their homes, without overbearing taxation. 

 

A second point that deserves comparison between British Columbia and Saskatchewan is the priority 

given to the unemployed people. British Columbia has announced an extra $43 million for job creation 

programs. This is a priority that meets with my approval. 

 

What does Mr. Blakeney have for us? He has nothing. He refuses to acknowledge his responsibility and 

the only reference to unemployment in the Budget Speech is a short line and I quote: 

 

The major responsibility for the chronic problems of unemployment and inflation rests with the 

Federal Government since it has the fiscal and monetary capacity to alter this situation in a significant 

way. 

 

This indication shows that Mr. Blakeney is not going to make any attempt to combat unemployment, he 

is content to simply blame Ottawa. This refusal to take measures to combat unemployment is a most 

callous and serious failure of this Government. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

589 

 

How can the Premier expect to keep our young people in this province if he will not take some measures 

to see that jobs are available? 

 

The day before the Budget, we on this side of the House, wanted an emergency debate to discuss the 

unemployment rate which has reached an unacceptable seven per cent. We wanted to discuss measures 

that could be adopted that might be effective in Saskatchewan. Mr. Blakeney refused to allow that 

debate and I expected that the reason was that in 24 hours we should see the Budget and that it might 

give some solutions to the problem. However, the programs for job creation is even less than was 

budgeted for last year and those measures didn’t even make a dent in the problem. 

 

Just a couple of months ago the Premier suggested that the unemployment picture looked like it might 

get very bad and even reach the high of six per cent. Now we have seven per cent unemployment and 

the Premier does nothing. If six per cent was bad, then seven per cent is a catastrophe. We have 24,000 

people unemployed today in Saskatchewan and I am sure they don’t appreciate Mr. Blakeney trying to 

pass the buck. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — They look to his Government for a little leadership and a little sincerity in dealing 

with this problem. 

 

I think that this seven per cent of our work force — this is 24,000 people — might wonder what is 

wrong with our Government when they read that the British Columbia Government is willing to spend 

an extra $43 million on top of the normal programs in order to produce jobs and the Blakeney 

Government is not willing to spend a cent. 

 

I wonder what our 24,000 unemployed will think when they see this Budget with no unemployment 

measures but yet there is $20 million for the state to buy up land. It should also be obvious that if our 

Government would produce a few jobs the welfare budget wouldn’t have to go up by $22 million, to a 

record of $88 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — This priority of no jobs, but lots of welfare does not sit well with me, nor I am 

convinced will it sit well with those people receiving welfare who would rather be working. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very tired of listening to Mr. Blakeney whine at Ottawa and blame them for everything 

and at the same time do nothing constructive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I get very short of patience with a person who is not willing to help himself. The 

Federal Government provides 40 per cent of all our money in this Budget and yet Mr. Blakeney will not 

accept any responsibility to act. He will not pass this federal money on to the people who really need it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not just the province of British Columbia 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

590 

that has recognized these problems and is dealing with them. The reason I use British Columbia for 

comparison is that they just happened to bring in their Budget on the same day. Most of the provinces in 

our Dominion have recognized these two vital concerns of the hard-pressed municipalities and the 

unemployment. The other provinces are doing their share and are bringing forth remedial action. 

 

I am not asking an unreasonable request nor am I asking Saskatchewan to lead the way in Canada. I am 

asking that the Government of Saskatchewan do its duty to the 24,000 unemployed and to the 

municipalities which are creatures of the province. 

 

It would be appropriate to say a few words about the Qu’Appelle Basin study. The citizens of Moose 

Jaw and Regina and surrounding district have studied the report and, to a large degree, would support 

most of the recommendations. By and large the recommendations have my support. We recognize the 

obligations to take action on these recommendations and to clean up this great natural endowment in our 

province. The people in Moose Jaw also are aware of the need to restore the Moose Jaw River which 

flows into the Qu’Appelle River. 

 

The Budget Speech is a little alarming in this respect. First of all, there are no adequate provisions in 

these estimates for proceeding with a clean up. It is recognized that expenditures will be well over $15 

million. The alarming thing in this Budget is that it says that the Government is going to evaluate 

recommendations of the study. This alarms me because the record of the Blakeney Government makes 

me think that this means another study will be conducted. Studies seem to be the only answer to the 

NDP. They form a committee for any trifling matter that seems to come along. More studies are not 

what we need. We need some leadership and we need some action. Nothing of value will be done until 

the Government gives this leadership. First, priorities of action must be set down by the Government and 

then the financial problems of restoring the valley and the rivers of the basin must be met. 

 

Financial aid will be available from Ottawa. It is up to the Provincial Government to initiate plans that 

will encompass the financial obligation of all three levels of government. Only then will we seriously 

attack the pollution and the restoration of the Qu’Appelle Basin. 

 

The mention in the Budget Speech about further study and the comments of the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Snyder) last week leads me to think that the NDP are inclined to talk about the problem but take no 

decisive steps to eradicate the source of pollution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I should like to refer to the meeting that the Minister of Labour had one week ago. 

At that meeting he said that the establishment of the Qu’Appelle Basin Study Group was a step toward 

fulfilling the Government’s commitment to protect our natural resources. Well I should like to tell this 

House that his implication that the NDP established this study is absolutely false and every Member of 

this House knows it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

591 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Liberal Government established that study a year before the NDP were in 

power. The Minister was simply taking political advantage in front of the public who didn’t know the 

facts. This is the same Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) who met with us at Moose Jaw in a tri-level 

government meeting about one and a half years ago. 

 

When we asked him for any commitment as to action on the Moose Jaw River he got quite gruff and 

told us that we couldn’t expect his Government to Cross the ‘t’s and dot the ‘i’s at that meeting. Since 

that time we have watched for a year and a half and nothing has been done and no plans initiated. So 

today I urge the Blakeney Government to quit pretending and promising and to start providing the 

leadership that this great and urgent reclamation project requires. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I can assure Mr. Blakeney that if he does his part you will find the co-operation 

from all of the people in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before taking my seat I have several things to say in the field of public health in 

relationship to this Budget and in relationship to statements already made. 

 

I am very concerned with the apparent direction that this Government is leading the field of health into. 

Health care is a very costly essential service and every possible means must be taken to make sure that 

we get as much for our dollar as is possible. We must also attempt to deliver health care in a more 

efficient manner. There should be no argument with these statements. However, I am prepared to argue 

with the methods of the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek). His answer to escalating costs is to put 

an arbitrary freeze on health spending. 

 

He recognizes that the cost of delivering health care is rising at the rate of 11 or 12 per cent and yet he 

has put an arbitrary ceiling of seven per cent on increases for hospitals. Hospitals all over this province 

are encountering the largest deficits ever experienced. Now they are told that they will only be allowed 

seven per cent increases next year. Hospital boards will be caught in an impossible cost freeze. 

 

Wages make up 70 per cent of operating costs in hospitals, so how do hospitals cut back on costs? Mr. 

Smishek says that staff will have to be reduced. This is a very simplistic approach by the Minister of 

Health. If the service costs too much then cut back on the amount and the quality of that service. Every 

hospital board member that I have talked to says that it might be all right somewhere else but that they 

need all the staff they have. 

 

No, the answer to rising health cost is not simply to cut back on the quality of care. This may satisfy the 

Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) but it won’t satisfy this side of the House or the public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

592 

Mr. MacDonald: — There are methods of cutting health costs and other methods will be found. But we 

cannot simply cut back in staff within our established method of health care delivery. The system of 

delivery will have to be modified otherwise quality of care will suffer. There is no doubt Mr. Minister 

that the quality of health care is going to diminish under your direction. 

 

I am also convinced that the NDP Government doesn’t care and likely never has cared about the quality 

of health care delivery. This fact has become very evident with two of your new plans, chiropractic care 

and denticare, and I will say something about these in a minute. 

 

The concern of the NDP for health care is that such a service be available, no matter how good or how 

bad, just simply that it be available. It doesn’t concern the Government that highly qualified specialists 

are leaving our province and have left our province. They just point to the figures and say that it is 

hogwash that doctors have left. We have 1,040 doctors in Saskatchewan and that’s all that is important 

to them. They don’t seem to be at all concerned about the qualifications of the doctors that have left. 

Quantity of doctors and not quality of doctors is the concern of the NDP. 

 

I can tell this House that the medical profession is concerned about the escalating health care costs. They 

are prepared and they feel that they should have input into planning for health care. The profession feels 

it should be consulted on such matters as global budgeting and programs like the community health and 

social service centres. The NDP will not ask for input from the Saskatchewan Medical Association nor 

will they accept input from the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

 

This is a very serious and accurate charge that I make against the Blakeney Government. It is not in the 

public interest for the Government to experiment in the field of health care without full consultation with 

those knowledgeable and expert in the field. I repeat that I am concerned by the arbitrary ceiling on 

health care spending. When we examined the Budget we find an increase of only six per cent in 

spending in Public Health, in existing programs. 

 

This six per cent figure takes into account the moving of expenditures to the Department of Social 

Services and Northern Health Services. A six per cent increase for existing programs will not allow for 

accustomed quality of care to Saskatchewan. It will force hospitals to give poorer health services. 

 

The first look at the proposed denticare program gives me cause for concern. The proposed denticare 

plan gives too much leeway to dental auxiliaries to diagnose and to make judgments. The plan would 

allow for auxiliaries to make the first diagnosis and appears to allow for auxiliaries to be in a position to 

decide what is to be done and then, of course, to do it. This, again, is an example of quantity and not 

quality and it’s an approach I cannot condone. 

 

Speaking personally, I am in favor of a plan for dental care for children, but I absolutely insist that it be 

a program that is carried out by auxiliaries under the direct supervision of qualified dentists. This does 

not mean that dental auxiliaries would be under the supervision of a dentist within a 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

593 

 

region where the dentist would drop in once a week or so as the NDP plan proposes. An adequate plan 

would involve access to a dentist by the auxiliaries for judgments and for treatments. 

 

I do not want any plan at all unless the quality of dental care is of a high level and has the approval of 

the dental profession. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The program in which chiropractors are included under Medicare is another 

concern. This plan is not acceptable to the profession. It was forced on them. The chiropractic profession 

wanted into the Medicare Plan. They felt that without their inclusion, their patients were suffering 

financially. The Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) coerced them into agreement. He said you guys take 

it or you guys leave it . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — . . . and that he was in no hurry if they didn’t like it and that he still had two years 

before another election and that he would be back. 

 

So for various reasons, official recognition as a profession is one of those reasons, they accepted Mr. 

Smishek’s ultimatum. The fact that one third of the profession will opt out of the plan is a recognition of 

how bad a plan it is. I can assure you that if I were a member of their profession, I would not be 

intimidated by the Minister of Health either, I would opt out. It is to their credit that they have the 

courage to opt out and stand up to the intimidation. 

 

To operate under this plan, a chiropractor must work at least 25 per cent longer to have the same take 

home pay. In most cases this will not be possible and chiropractors will be forced to take a pay cut of 20 

per cent or so. There is no logical reason why this plan should be so dictatorial. 

 

The manner of payment to chiropractors is a familiar trait of the NDP. They love to see everyone as 

being equal. So under the plan the good chiropractor will be paid less than he deserves and the poor 

chiropractor more than he deserves. It is a plan where the less you do, the more payment for unit of 

service you get. The more you do, the less payment per service you get. This is a system that appeals to 

socialists but it is a system that ensures less quality. At the present time, chiropractors see their patients 

an average of 8.5 visits per year. Mr. Smishek claims that they are wrong and that the average patient 

visit per year will be about four. 

 

Under the method of payment, Mr. Smishek may be right. You get $6 for the first visit and then $4 and 

finally after four visits you get $3. There might be the temptation under this arrangement to do a lot 

more $6 visits and less of the $3 visits. It is just a bad system that forces the profession to cut back take 

home pay and that rewards the poorest and penalizes the best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much more to be said about the Budget but I will leave that to other Members of 

my caucus. In closing, I just want to say that this Government will get very little 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

594 

support for this Budget from the majority of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Certainly not from the unemployed, from the senior citizens, from the city 

residents, from the sick, from the students or from the people filling out their income tax forms. I would 

recommend to Mr. Cowley to make a few changes to meet some of the problems that have been pointed 

out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P.P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, for the past few days I have been wondering why all the 

garbage cans are on that side of the House. Well now I know and it is because there is an awful lot of 

garbage over there. I should like to inform the Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) if he was 

in such a dither to get into the library here, he could have done so. All that he has to do is ask for a key 

and he can use the library facilities at any time. I am quite sure that after consideration they will trust 

him with keys. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that it is difficult to criticize something that has many excellent points. It is doubly 

difficult and frustrating if you live in an ivory tower, detached from people like the gentlemen opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this in mind, Members on this side of the House realize that it is with this kind of 

difficulty and frustration that Opposition Members are trying to pick holes in this year’s Budget. Now I 

say to them that it is a useless effort for them to try to do so. I invite them to go down in history as the 

first Opposition to admit an obvious truth, the truth of the soundness of this Budget, of its appeal and of 

its humanitarianism. I ask them to side with the many, who over the weekend, have publicly praised it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I should like publicly to congratulate the Hon. Minister of Finance (Mr. 

Cowley) on a job well done. Off to a flying start I know that he is rapidly winning the respect of people 

of all political faiths. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the rules of this House, because of the rules of decency, I am not able properly 

to comment on the false charges levelled at the Special Committee on Welfare. At no time did this 

committee ever make a decision of importance without it being unanimous. You didn’t ask your people 

that one! Well, just hold it! At no time did we ever suggest that it was improper when the Liberal 

Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) suggested that this committee visit northern points. We never 

argued about that. And at no time did Members ever think it was improper when the Hon. Liberal 

Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) seconded the Welfare Report. Gentlemen, I told you that I would be 

brief on this topic and I will at this time, but I think something -an be learned from all of this and that is, 

never trust a Liberal MLA . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — . . . especially one under the influence of a Leader 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

595 

 

willing to sacrifice the few principles left on decency for the sake of cheap political gain. Mr. Speaker, I 

should like to inform you, and maybe as chairman I will mention this to the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Steuart), that the committee decided recently to ask the Hon. Minister of Social Services (Mr. 

Taylor) if they could accompany him to a conference to be held in Ottawa in the spring. Now quite some 

time ago, or roughly a few weeks ago, the Hon. Minister said that he would be able to take one, and one 

only. Now when one of the Liberal Members on that Welfare Committee suggested that two could go, I 

promptly asked the Minister. I certainly hope that the Minister will take two, a Liberal and a New 

Democrat, but being cost conscious, I know that he will want to save the province some money and for 

all I know he will probably end up taking one. I don’t know though. 

 

Mr. Engel: — Why take them if you can’t trust them. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Well, you know that was mentioned. I found out — you know I went into this game 

thinking that you could trust certain politicians, but fellows that has gone by the board. You fellows 

have just proven that what I am thinking is absolutely right. As I mentioned before, you can’t trust a 

Liberal MLA because he will undermine you, he will undermine the people of the province, just for his 

own political gain. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the one from Athabasca? 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Well, the one from Athabasca (Mr. Guy), that calls for a whole session as far as I am 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that this Government will spend close to $55 million this coming year 

in the field of Agriculture. The FarmStart program allocation of $15 million indicates that this 

Government, sensitive to that terrible catastrophe of the LIFT program, the one that those opposite say 

was good, is willing to invest in diversification to ensure more uniform and higher returns for the 

farmers. The $20 million for the Land Bank program really means $20 million for the good of a large 

number of our older farmers, and I know, of course, that they would be against that too. 

 

Now I should like to bring something to your attention in regard to the Land Bank, Mr. Speaker. It looks 

as if those master distortionists opposite are using scare tactics again this year to discredit this plan. 

 

Now it seems that they are using the same Hitler-like tactics that they used to promote hate and division 

when Medicare was introduced. I see one of the KOD boys leaving just now. The same division as when 

an NDP Government announced a plan for rural electrification years ago. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that 

the Liberals are ever again going to fool the people of this province with their usual scare tactics. I know 

of many who tell me that they are fed up with these tactics, the very tactics that they themselves 

condemn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Hon. Members opposite to stop promoting fear and division in this province. As 

an alternative 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

596 

to their past ways I ask them to ally themselves with our party to promote more harmony amongst our 

people. Now, gentlemen, to admit that you have been wrong, won’t be taken as a sign of weakness, 

rather in this new role for you, you too, can have a hand in determining new and bold policies for the 

good of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members opposite seem to be obsessed by payments made to Saskatchewan by the 

Federal Government under the equalization grants formula. Listening to them ranting and raving — one 

fellow ranted and raved for one hour — one would think that we should not accept these payments, that 

we should be ashamed to receive what we rightfully have coming. Now I ask them, would they refuse 

these payments? There is absolutely no doubt that we are more than justified in receiving these 

payments. 

 

Now it has always been unanimously said that we in Saskatchewan pay too much for a host of things 

which are either Ottawa or Eastern Canada controlled. Now look at the discrimination in freight rates, 

the differential in livestock prices, or look at the rich industrial tax base enjoyed by Eastern Canadian 

provinces, aided by rich giveaways to rich corporations. No, Mr. Speaker, payments from Ottawa are not 

handouts as the Liberals suggest. They represent a small portion of what we should really be getting. If 

Opposition Members really have the best interests of this province at heart they should be demanding 

more along with this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — They should not belittle this Government on this point unless they think that Ottawa 

should give less to Western Canada and more to those who don’t need it in Eastern Canada — and there 

is a good possibility that this is the way that they think. Maybe they think more should be given to 

millionaires to promote horse racing, such as was the case a little while ago. Or maybe we need another 

aircraft carrier refitting. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Another senator. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — I’ll have more to say later on the senators. It is my opinion that the Government of 

Canada could really do a lot for old people, and that is simply to appoint all old people senators. And no 

muss, no fuss, and I am quite sure that some of them could really contribute to Canada. 

 

Another point to be made here is that the large Federal payments, with a time lag involved, really gives 

us a reading on the economy as it was about two years ago. Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe there was a 

Liberal regime in at that time. Now surely we should get a hefty payment because of that fact alone. I 

like to think of it as a payment for the seven years of suffering that we endured, the seven years that saw 

the economy plummet, people leave by the thousands, a sell-out of our resources, area bargaining 

rammed down the trustees’ throats, a hog incentive program for our forested areas and a regime which 

insulted people by failing to admit that they had a right to be consulted on major issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased to note the increase 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

597 

 

of roughly $10 million to school boards for operating grants. The mill rate for Saskatchewan taxpayers 

should not increase. In fact, with the drastic increase in our new and greatly expanded Property 

Improvement Grant it will mean a decrease in absolute terms to the vast majority of our citizens. 

 

I should now like to get on another topic, but still related to education, and that is the absence for many 

years of some sort of financial incentive for school boards to keep on hiring highly qualified teachers. I 

will admit that most boards do, but it seems to me that some boards will be giving this serious study in 

the future. Why not put in an incentive program now or very soon, why not pay school boards more for 

hiring more qualified teachers? Why not help our school boards before a backlash starts to take effect? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day I heard the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) predict terrible 

things about teacher bargaining — up to his usual tactics. I suppose when you have a hand in something 

you are probably in a pretty good position to predict. However, I wish to make one thing clear and that is 

the position of most people in Hanley constituency, and that position is that people in general are sick 

and tired of all the bickering and haggling which has been going on in the past. People are fed up with 

charges and counter-charges which we had in the past. Now the Leader of the Opposition forewarns that 

great storms are brewing in this area, and when he does that, he seems to be smiling as far as I can make 

out. 

 

I ask him to use all of his powers of persuasion to help see that this does not happen. Now let him use 

the same persuasion that he and his party used when it forced the trustees to accept area bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members opposite have really knocked this Government’s proposal to establish a 

Crown corporation to explore for our petroleum and natural gas in this province. Naturally, they want no 

one to compete with their friends, the oil barons. Now, I don’t blame them for that because oil barons 

are good for people, at least for some people, well, would you believe, at least for a few people. So this 

Government allots $500,000 for this purpose and what do Opposition Members do? They belittle the 

amount as being peanuts. 

 

Now I would have thought that these so-called peanuts were just what they wanted. After all $500,000 

isn’t going to cause a corporate ripple. So there you have it, Mr. Speaker, gross inconsistency. On the 

one hand fear of competition and on the other hand ridicule because of a lack of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard much from Opposition Members about public assistance and how they 

think too much is being spent on it. Are they saying that an increase of $8 million for our elderly in that 

department this year is too much? Are they saying that the extra $7 million for the mentally and 

physically disabled is too much? Are they saying the extra $2 million to be spent on social and family 

problems is too much? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that is exactly what they are saying in the hope that 

they can get some cheap political gain, and why shouldn’t they. After all it is much more expedient to 

use these people as the scapegoat than it is the true culprits — their Bay Street friends, the manipulators 

who worship at the profit altar and think they have some God-given 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

598 

right to expound the principle of ‘dog eat dog’ free enterprise for the rich. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — No, Mr. Speaker, too many of us have friends who are physically and mentally 

disabled. We are not going to use them as pawns as Opposition Members are doing. It is their collective 

conscience that they will have to live with. I am sure that it is one that is going to produce nightmares 

for them over there. So it is with this in mind that I ask Opposition Members to re-evaluate their 

thinking on this subject. Leave your whips at home, boys! Don’t hurt these innocent people as you have 

been doing. Accept a manly challenge to cease and desist from such a despicable practice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — And while I am on the topic of social services may I say should make a concerted 

effort be responsible for all assistance that all Members of this House to have the Federal Government 

given employable people. 

 

Why should a man who has worked steadily for 40 years have to apply for social assistance shortly after 

he has been laid off. Should this be his reward after 40 years of service to this country, after some big 

outfit has decided that more and higher profits can be made by massive layoffs in one area of the 

country? I never hear of them crying about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) made reference to the city councils of 

Saskatoon and Regina. Now I believe that he stated that these councils could not trust the MLAs from 

these two cities, that they now have a policy of not letting MLAs in on anything of importance. Now if 

this is true, I ask the Hon. Member, the one from Albert Park, how, where and when he got that 

information. Does he know something that the other MLAs don’t know? Is he one of the chosen ones 

that Regina City Council has picked as being worthy of consultation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that such talk is pure gibberish and he knows it. Or rather, he would like it 

that way. The truth of the matter — and here I speak as one representing a portion of Saskatoon — is 

that the Saskatoon MLAs and Saskatoon City Council are to be commended for their part in this 

situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: —As for Regina City Council, if the Hon. Member from Albert Park thinks that Regina 

council is not functioning in the best interests of Regina citizens, he should tell council just that and in 

front of council members, not here. No, Mr. Speaker, this slap in the face that he is giving these two 

councils will not wash down well with council members and it shouldn’t. Now I ask the Hon. Member 

to work for the good of his city and not against it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased to see that under 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

599 

 

Occupational Health and Safety Services in the Department of Labour a substantial increase in 

expenditure is anticipated. It is in this area that I believe much more could be spent in the future to 

ensure that the highest safety standards are maintained for our working people, and I am not about to 

praise all employers for what they have done in the past. Most of them, praise, yes, but there are a 

number of concerns which have had poor records and continue to do so in spite of records on paper to 

prove otherwise. 

 

Now to be more specific I say to these concerns that the number of man-days not lost due to accidents 

doesn’t mean a thing when men are unduly pressured into corning back to work in different job 

capacities. 

 

While I am on the topic of industrial safety, I am under the impression the new safety committees are 

going over well with labor and management. However, it has been brought to my attention that at least 

one large concern is still living in the past. It refuses to acknowledge the right of workers to participate 

in a safety program in a meaningful sort of way. Such a situation must be reversed. I ask the Minister of 

Labour to use every means at his disposal to see that the wishes of this House are not thwarted. 

 

I notice that there is to be a hefty increase for Culture and Youth. I think this is good. It shows this 

Government’s confidence in our heritage and in our youth. However, there are two things that I should 

very much like the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Tchorzewski) to consider. The first is a complete 

overhaul of the structure through which our parks and recreation boards now operate. Now I know that 

many, and I stress the word, many, are doing a fine job, but it seems to me that their grant structure 

could or should be overhauled so as to induce more use of the tremendous amount of human resources in 

our smaller centres, not now being utilized. 

 

The second consideration I ask, is in regard to more government promotion of the various talents of our 

youth. Why can’t consideration be given to an annual talent hunt with government participation 

financially and otherwise. When the best talent from our youth is found in this province, why couldn’t it 

be put on television, on our prime time so that all of our citizens could enjoy this talent? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I should like to commend this Government for presenting to this House a 

balanced Budget when most other provinces are not able to do so. I believe British Columbia is, but that 

is understandable seeing they had a change in government recently. The logical conclusion from such a 

balancing when one considers that we are not a rich province is that capable people have scanned every 

detail to ensure that Saskatchewan people are getting their money’s worth. With this in mind I am more 

than happy to say that I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. L. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, again this afternoon we have been blessed with the usual kind 

of speeches from the other side. I have been trying this Session to find some suitable label for the kind 

of performance that we have seen. I couldn’t think of 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

600 

anything much more appropriate than to call it the Liberals’ lament. They lament the fact on the one 

hand that we are spending too much, on the other hand they lament that we are spending too little. They 

lament on the one hand one group is getting too much and another not enough. It seems to me that this 

truly describes the actions of the Liberal Party. 

 

If I were to comment on the real content of the Budget, I would have to say that it is a challenging 

Budget, challenging for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — And very challenging for this Government. It certainly fulfils the direction that this 

Government set itself on when we were elected. That we had a young new Minister of Finance 

presenting his first budget of this type certainly is very commendable. He did the kind of job that would 

make any Minister of Finance proud. I couldn’t help but feel, Mr. Speaker, as he was outlining the 

contents of the Budget to the House that he knew where he was going and where Saskatchewan was 

going. He spoke with confidence, he spoke with conviction and above all he spoke with facts behind 

him. 

 

I was amused this afternoon before the Orders of the Day — I am sorry the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Steuart) is not in his seat — when he referred to the South Saskatchewan River Dam Development, 

Mr. Speaker. Somehow or other I recall in years gone by when the Liberal Government won several 

elections on the South Saskatchewan River Development issue. I recall very distinctly in the late 1950s 

being in Ottawa, being in the late Hon. Mr. Gardiner’s office, then Minister of Agriculture, talking about 

farming, talking about livestock and inevitably, of course, we talked about the Dam. I was quite anxious 

to get his comments on when we would proceed with it. We talked about it for a while and he said, “You 

know one of the real problems, one of the real drawbacks and one of the real hindrances is the CCF 

Government in Saskatchewan.” He said, “I’ve got files of information showing that they will not 

co-operate with us.” He said that if you really want the dam you are going to have to change that 

government. Well, Mr. Speaker, if my memory is correct, we changed the government, but it was not in 

Saskatchewan, it was in Ottawa and it seems to me that somewhere along the line we got the dam. We 

got it in spite of the Liberal Party, we got it in spite of a lot of bickering and dickering and election 

campaigning and promising and so on. Now the Leader of the Opposition all at once is crying crocodile 

tears over the fact that development isn’t going as fast as he would like to see it. You know, I am 

wondering when he is going to stop playing hop scotch, he hops from one square to the next, back again, 

forward and back again. The Liberal Party and their policies and the new image that he is obviously 

trying to project reminds me of a mad man on a pogo stick, you really don’t know where he is going. 

His little show this afternoon was really rather hypocritical I thought. 

 

I was also amazed at the financial critic of the Liberal Party when he had the nerve to stand up and talk 

about the Stabilization Bill. I happened to see the Hon. Eugene Whelan on Country Calendar yesterday 

afternoon talking about agriculture, talking about some of the programs that he thought we needed, Mr. 

Speaker, talking about some of the directions we 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

601 

 

ought to go with the problems and what have you. He was finally asked to comment on the Stabilization 

Bill. His comments were very interesting. He said the Stabilization Bill was a very bad piece of 

legislation at the outset. He said unless we can improve the Stabilization Bill and put into it some of the 

things that will really be of some benefit to agriculture, we had better leave it alone. That was Eugene 

Whelan, the new Minister of Agriculture, Federal Government, Liberal at that! I think he must be one of 

the small ‘l’ Liberals. It becomes rather amusing when the financial critic has the nerve to stand up in 

this House and talk about a Bill that would have done nothing more than stabilize poverty in 

Saskatchewan and blame the NDP for not bringing it in. 

 

I said in my opening remarks that I wanted to say something about the general direction of the Budget. I 

am not going to go into a mass of figures, a mass of quotes, I am rather going to talk about the direction. 

The figures will be quoted very adequately by the Ministers as they outline the effects of the Budget on 

and in their departments. I think the direction of the Budget as I have suggested is very challenging to 

Saskatchewan. I think that it is challenging because it definitely spells a positive direction, a direction in 

agriculture, a direction in health, a direction in education. That Saskatchewan at this stage in our history 

should move in this direction in this positive fashion is in my opinion very noteworthy and worthwhile. I 

think no one can deny and no one can question some of the real challenges and problems that face, not 

only Saskatchewan, but Canada and people of the world as a whole. I think that when you look at the 

role that Saskatchewan has to play, a primary purpose and a primary aim must be to chart the direction 

that we must go to fit into the global society that is evolving and developing around us. 

 

I said something in the Throne Speech with regard to the challenge of agriculture in the global field. I 

think it is more important than ever that we put down some very important guide posts so that we know 

where we are going. This Budget to a very large extent proceeds to do this. That a young Minister of 

Agriculture, rather aggressive, has chosen very ambitiously to embark in this direction is very 

noteworthy and very worthwhile. The direction of agriculture in Saskatchewan and in the West is going 

to fail or succeed on the basis of some of the things that we do or don’t do at this particular stage of 

history. I don’t think that anyone can deny that the role of food and the role of agricultural production 

not only as food, but as utilization of land and resources is going to be the backbone of every nation in 

the world in time to come. 

 

The field of health. In spite of the cries from some of the Members across the way, I want to say and to 

remind them that if it wasn’t for the pioneering of a CCF Government without support from Ottawa and 

without the money that was turned over and that the Members across the way are so envious of, we 

would not have had any health programs. Let us keep things in proper perspective. Because of the 

direction that we chose at that time, health care has now become a national asset and the Federal 

Government and the country as a whole sees fit to contribute to it. This ought never to be forgotten. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — Let no one, of whatever political stripe ever 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

602 

stand up and belittle the principle of health care in Canada emanating from Saskatchewan. To do this, 

Mr. Speaker, is to belittle the direction of the people, belittle the courage of people and to belittle the 

very principle that underlies the whole program. 

 

When I look at education, it rather worries me, the amount of money that we are spending. Yet we can’t 

afford not to spend this kind of money. It is very regrettable, it is very sad that we are educating, Mr. 

Speaker, a lot of young people to a very high degree, young people with talent, with skills, with a lot of 

brains who are going out into the rest of world and Saskatchewan is losing their contribution. 

Nevertheless, we cannot afford to do less, we cannot afford not to give them the opportunity. The 

challenge of Saskatchewan and of this Government and of this Legislature is to provide in our own 

province opportunities for them. To this end, the Budget is making a start and pointing a very positive 

direction. 

 

When I look at the feeble and probably meagre little start that is being made with regard to resource 

development and resource conservation, I feel rather proud. What we are doing in the resource field in a 

very small and insignificant way may in some respects be parallel to the thought that some of us had 

many years back with regard to land utilization. Let us never forget that resources are an expendable 

commodity. They were given to us, they were here, they have always been here. Once they are exploited 

and destroyed, they are lost forever. I can’t, Mr. Speaker, subscribe to the theory that they must be 

exploited and raped for profits only. I can’t subscribe to the theory that we must develop them and get 

rid of them regardless of consequences in the future. I am of the firm belief that man was put on this 

earth as a guardian of resources, as a guardian of food, a guardian of the things that were put here by the 

Creator, and not act as a destroyer. This start we are making in this resource field even though it is a 

small one heralds a new direction, heralds a new concept that takes into account the basic principle that 

the earth must conserve its resources because they are non-renewable and therefore must be preserved 

for not only our generation, but for generations to come. 

 

There are many other aspects of the Budget that could be gone into in detail, many of them are 

housekeeping, many of them are necessary to improve the operation of Government. I get dismayed, Mr. 

Speaker, when I listen to the criticism, the nitpicking, the picayune statements that are being made 

across the way with regard to employment in government. Whether we like it or not, the role of 

government in the whole world is becoming more and more important. There was a time when you 

could justifiably say that the role of government was not as significant as it is today. That time is long 

gone by and anyone who criticizes the Government for trying to staff itself with competent people to do 

a job that must be done, is not abreast of what is going on in the world, and not abreast of what will be 

the pattern of development in the future. Let no one ever kid themselves that this is not essential and not 

necessary. To try to belittle efforts of anyone that moves in this direction is just admitting and 

confessing to utter ignorance and utter lack of recognition of where the world is going today. 

 

We heard a great outcry over taxes. I am not one of those 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

603 

 

Mr. Speaker, that get particularly up-tight or excited about income tax and paying taxes when I have the 

money. I have always found that when I get into the tax bracket I have money to live a little better and 

for my family to live a little better. I am quite prepared, in fact I’m quite in agreement, with taxing 

where the money is available. If I have any criticism of the Budget I would say that probably we ought 

to have hit a little harder where the real money is, Mr. Minister, rather than use other sources. 

Corporations with their tax rip-off and with their absolute freedom from responsibility in development 

have no sympathy from me insofar as tax impositions are concerned and I would have been happy with 

seeing corporation taxes probably increased to their proper share. 

 

I can’t go along with the concept of property taxes being the base of providing and raising money for 

services in public works or in government. Taxes on property bear no real relationship to the ability to 

pay. It is a convenient way to tax that has been established over years, it’s archaic in its approach, it 

doesn’t meet the needs of the day and when the Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) moves in the 

direction of the Property Improvement Grant I say more power to him and that he is on the right track. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — We have heard considerable, Mr. Speaker, in this Session about socialism, its sins, its 

ills and its vandalism (if you like). When we hear the Liberal Party talk about socialism it is supposed to 

create a rather blinding emotional urge within each human being, as it seems to do in them. I want to 

say, Mr. Speaker, that this doesn’t frighten me. You know, capitalism has been on the earth for quite 

some time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Too long. 

 

Mr. Larson: — It thought that it was rather generous when it adopted the slogan that ‘you live and let 

live.’ This was supposed to be an all-embracing cliché that really described the humanitarian aspect of 

capitalism. However, it hasn’t worked that way. It hasn’t worked that way at all. Socialism on the other 

hand, certainly is not perfect. Certainly it is not the Utopia that many people dream about. I am firmly 

committed and dedicated to the principle of democratic socialism and its approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — I say this, Mr. Speaker, not because I personally feel that I am going to gain anything 

out of it. I am a socialist, not because of what I can get out of the system but because of what I can give 

to it. 

 

The principle that must be adopted by the world today must be ‘live and help live.’ Socialism dedicates 

itself to this principle. Nowhere along the line can we continue to rape resources, to exploit human 

beings and continually to use the individual as the end all and be all. If we fail to adopt the principle of 

living and helping live our society is going to be 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

604 

in a great amount of difficulty. That we are moving in this direction, in the Budget, is quite obvious. 

 

When I look at my own country, when I look at the Federal scene, I become rather excited and rather 

frightened. When you see, after a Federal election, the country divided into segments as we have today, I 

become rather perturbed, when men of good faith (and I’m speaking now of all politicians) strive to 

form a government and to do things that are necessary for the country, and you have those who would 

play petty politics with this kind of an approach. That our country is in danger can be easily seen by 

anyone who wants to look at the facts. As a nation we embrace an area from sea to sea, a very real and 

worthwhile concept, based on a great variegated geographical area. If we fail, if this present Government 

fails to recognize the principles involved in this concept, and if our politicians try to set up small issues 

instead of overlooking these and don’t become cognizant of the broad facts of life in our country, then 

we may not enjoy or continue to enjoy our country as we have it and see it today. 

 

Separatism is a real issue and it’s a dangerous one. I, for one, have every compassion for the people on 

either side. I think that if we adopt the principle of living and helping live that we will go a long way 

towards solving the real problems. Rather than make a political issue out of it, let’s make it a human 

issue and see that we can, and I know that we can solve it. 

 

When you look across the line at the great United States, the most highly developed, the most 

technically developed nation on earth, and you see some of the things that happen, powerful beyond all 

calculations. Yet, Mr. Speaker, their armies have gone out into the world, they have fought wars that 

have been bitter wars, they have been (in the opinion of those in power) to protect an image or to protect 

something. They have not been beaten on the field of battle. They have not been overwhelmed by a 

super power, yet, their armies are coming home, largely defeated. Not by war, not by might, but 

defeated by a moral decay that is taking place right within their own country. It can be paralleled with 

the days of Rome, with the days of the Roman Empire, when their armies went out and conquered and 

yet came home to a demoralized and to a very, very broken up country that couldn’t survive. 

 

It is my hope, it is my hope that we will have the sense, have the judgment, and I appeal to the American 

people to let this kind of judgment prevail so that we don’t have a total destruction of this magnificent 

power and magnificent country. 

 

When you look at the amount of money that is spent in American elections, it is estimated by Time 

Magazine that a total of some $50 million was spent to re-elect Nixon. When you look at the money that 

was spent and the scandal, scandal of the Water Gate Trials as they are now becoming to be known, 

where one political party distrusts the other to where you have to ‘bug’ their committee rooms, then, Mr. 

Speaker, our country and our society is in real danger. When you see and when you find that we have 

some of very grave realities of drugs, permissive society, disregard to law and order, alcoholism, 

pornography, emphasis and exploitation of sex, the effects of the news media on every mind in the 

country, exploiting this kind of thing, then it makes one very frightened if you have 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

605 

 

Christian principles and Christian morals. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that a lot more could be said on this theme. That our country is escaping 

these evils and these problems is, of course, not the case. When you look at what is going on inside of 

our own Saskatchewan and Canada, we find that we are not very much better. A recent survey 

conducted by the Federal Government, indicates that we have approximately 100,000 people that are 

either drug addicts or experimenting with drugs. This is the prelude and the forerunner of the breakdown 

of the society that many of us have fought wars for and nations have gone to war to preserve. So I say, 

we are in difficulty and that we want to be very, very careful. 

 

In concluding, Mr. Speaker, I think that the real challenge in this Budget is to get behind it, to support it 

and to rise above the partisanship and the partisan bickering of petty politics. This is our country, our 

province, so let’s all of us get behind what is trying to be done to make it successful and make it work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister. I shall be looking forward to 

the day when he will introduce the first one billion dollar budget that Saskatchewan has . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — . . . with his enthusiasm and with the prospects of the future, I hope that we shall see 

this, then I shall congratulate him again. obviously, Mr. Speaker,, I shall be supporting the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B.M. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park): — I want to say how pleased I am to join my colleagues in 

supporting this Budget, Mr. Speaker. It is a Budget that has something in it for everyone in this 

province. It is a progressive Budget, it is a Budget that reaffirms the faith of this Government in the 

people of Saskatchewan. This document is a document that has frightened the party opposite. They are 

afraid, and this fear is exemplified by the comments of the Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod). 

 

He talked at length, earlier today, but he rarely mentioned the Budget. He didn’t talk, for example, about 

the FarmStart program; he didn’t talk about the Property Improvement Grant program; he didn’t talk 

about the 10.2 million additional dollars for school boards across this province; he didn’t talk about the 

programs for senior citizens; he didn’t talk about Operation Open Roads and Operation Main Street; he 

didn’t talk about the programs for industrial development of this province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this Budget speaks for itself and no one understands it better than the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I should like, for a moment, to turn to some other area. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

606 

During the last seven years, since 1964, this Province has sustained some rather difficult times. You 

know the political party represented by the Hon. Members opposite would have had us believe in 1964 

that the land of milk and honey was just around the corner. Their story is a real Alice in Wonderland 

thriller with even greater exaggeration. You know, Mr. Speaker, in 1964 one would have thought that 

the heavens were about to open and huge quantities of investment and industrial development would 

suddenly pour forth; that jobs would be created; that the population would suddenly sky-rocket and that 

the provincial economy would be eternally buoyant. In point of fact, however, what was their record in 

terms of investment and industrial development? 

 

From 1968 to 1970 the investment actually declined from $1.242 per capita to $1,038 per capita. This 

per capita investment takes on particular significance when one considers that our population was 

declining during this period of time. With the exception of the 1930s people were leaving this province 

at an unprecedented rate. Retail sales were falling off. They thought that the panacea to all of our 

problems as they saw them was simply to attract large, usually foreign-owned, corporations into the 

province. Over those years we had banner headline after banner headline reporting all the new 

businesses coming into our province. Somehow most of these measures never materialized, along with 

those 80,000 new jobs. Although the 80,000 figure had no significance as it applied to jobs it did 

roughly equate or equal the loss of population during those austere years from 1964 to 1971. 

 

There was the Heavy Water Plant at Estevan — was it built? No. After the Heavy Water Plant there was 

to be a $20 million Ammonia Plant at Estevan. Did it materialize? No. There was the $2.5 million 

Asbestos Cement Pipe Manufacturing Plant to be built in Regina. What happened to it? There was the 

Iron Processing Plant to be built by Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company, it never materialized. 

There was the chemical plant in Prince Albert — $5 million, there was a Volkswagen Distribution 

Centre and the list goes on and on. The end result in the main, was the investment by a handful of giant 

corporations who were attracted to this province by social welfare in the form of loans, grants, royalty 

holidays and numerous types of subsidies. In the end we are left with a series of oversupply situations in 

these industries — an oversupply of pulp; an oversupply of potash; an oversupply of uranium; an 

oversupply of sodium sulphate. 

 

The Hon. Members across the Chamber and the rest of their colleagues who could not escape their just 

reward at the polls have failed, Mr. Speaker. The champions of big business have failed in their own 

corporate backyards. Their promises so full of fire and fury in the final analysis signified nothing. A 

more classic case of government mismanagement and failure in the development of industry could not 

be found anywhere in the annals of modern political history. 

 

Well, the fairy tales are over. People of this province got a little tired with this level of fiction and said 

we will have no more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — Although the present 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

607 

 

Government has been in only a few short months, what does the record show? The Department of 

Industry and Commerce reported that in 1971 we had new investments of over $10 million with 

creations of many new jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — In 1972 we had reported new investments of over $21 millions. Let us examine a partial 

list of the new industries and expansions that developed or were completed in Saskatchewan in 1972. 

 

Hillcrest Farms, Bruno — $350,000 investment, 12 new jobs; Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Yorkton — 

$296,000 investment, 8 new jobs; Topline Feed, Swift Current — $300,000, 4 new jobs; Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, Saskatoon — $3 million, 20 jobs; Tisdale Dehydrators, Tisdale — $207,000; Beaver 

Lumber Company, Yorkton — $500,000; Oxbow Industry, Oxbow — $76,000 — 11 new jobs; Pegasus 

Industries, Shellbrook — $65,000 — 8 new jobs; Canaday’s Limited, Moose Jaw — $100,000, 23 jobs; 

M and M Fabricators, North Battleford — $34,000, 7 new jobs; Walbaum and Paul, Saskatoon —

$415,000, 62 jobs; Leon’s, Yorkton — $33,000, 20 new jobs; Morris Rod Weeder, Yorkton — 

$388,000, 25 new jobs; Smith-Roles, Saskatoon — (the company that was supposed to leave our 

province) $129,000 investment, 6 new jobs; Brickset Manufacturing Limited, Frontier — $100,000 

investment, 8 new jobs; Glaslyn Forest Products, Glaslyn — $240,000, 17 new jobs; Meadow Lake 

Sawmill Company, Meadow Lake — $6,500,000, 90 new jobs. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this partial list is an impressive list. I submit that this list will continue to 

grow in the years immediately ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dyck: — During the last year I served on the Legislative Committee on Business Firms, which is 

investigating the problems and prospects of business across this province. I met with a number of 

business people and they expressed some of their concerns to me. Some of their concerns involve the 

growth of the large corporations and the effects that this growth is having on their own business 

operations. I understand their concern in this regard. In the city of Calgary, I understand that the 

Safeway Stores in that city are now moving into the corner grocery store business. The corner grocery 

store business, Mr. Speaker, as this House will appreciate, has always been the domain of the small and 

individual operator. But no longer, the larger retail stores want this business as well. They don’t want 99 

per cent of retail sales, they want 100 per cent of retail sales. 

 

Furthermore, what are the giants doing in the oil industry? In Saskatoon alone I know of three service 

station outlets that will no longer be run by the individual but will be taken over directly by the 

corporation — Imperial Oil in this particular case. The line between the wholesaler and the retailer is 

getting less distinct almost daily. The small retail operator is concerned about the chain wholesaler 

making inroads into his business. 



 

February 12, 1973 

 

 

608 

I want to suggest to the small and independent business sector of this province that this steady and 

continuous erosion, this steady and continuous encroachment will result in the demise of the individual 

operator. Yes, the business community is concerned about these developments and I believe so should 

the people of Saskatchewan. Multi-national corporations are growing at every turn with their tentacles 

reaching out around the globe. This process has produced a growing list of companies where foreign 

investment in sales are equal to or greater than the revenue derived from their domestic operations. Take 

the Americans, for example Standard Oil of New Jersey, Esso, International Telephones and Telegraphs, 

Singer, Colgate-Palmolive, Mobile Oil, National Cash Register, Corn Products, Goodyear, are all giant 

corporations which are approaching a figure where half of their fixed assets are outside of the United 

States. There are scores of smaller corporations in the same position, like International Packers, 

Burroughs, H.H. Heinz, Warner-Lambert Pharmaceuticals, Gillette and so on. Foreign operations 

contribute anything between 30 and 50 per cent of the total profit earned by such giant American 

corporations as Eastman Kodak, Caterpillar Tractor, International Harvester, Minnesota Mining and 

Manufacturing. IBM now does more than one-third of its total business outside of the United States. No 

country in the Western world has been more influenced by foreign investment than Canada. As early as 

1926 some 35 per cent of Canadian manufacturing industry was under foreign control. By 1963 this 

figure was already up to 60 per cent. Thus by the mid 1960s substantially more than half of all Canadian 

manufacturing industry was overwhelmingly under American foreign control. They control over 50 per 

cent of the Canadian Mining and Smelting industry and 75 per cent of Petroleum and Natural Gas 

industry. This type of investment by the multi-national corporations is beginning to dominate the 

international scene and the most internationalized country in the world is Canada where the domestic 

economy has been taken over by foreign companies. This should raise some serious questions in the 

minds of the people of Saskatchewan and in the minds of the people of Canada. Questions about the 

right of Canadian people to chart their own destiny. Questions about the powers of the large 

corporations to allocate resources and decide which resources will be developed and which will not. 

Questions about the power of these organizations to control the market place, to develop new wants, to 

advertise and use other promotional techniques. Questions about the powers of these organizations to 

employ or not to employ. Questions about the powers of these organizations to allocate income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to come back to some of these points at a later date but in the meantime I beg leave 

to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:27 o’clock p.m. 


