



















































Hansard: March 27, 1973


1895 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

44th Day 
 

Tuesday, March 27, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. D. M. McPherson: — (Regina Lakeview) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the 

Members of this House, 10 adult upgrading students from the Sacred Heart Applied Arts and Science 

situated on 13th Avenue. They are here to go through the House today and learn what progress we are 

making. They are here with Mr. Ermel and Kent Lynn. On behalf of all Members I should like to give 

them a big welcome here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy: — (Last Mountain) Mr. Speaker, I say for all Members of the House and on your 

behalf, Mr. Speaker, we extend a very warm welcome to the senior Teens Young Peoples’ Group of the 

Baptist church at Raymore. They are accompanied by Pastor and Mrs. Allan Crossman, Mr. and Mrs. 

Dale Berken and Mrs. Stan Jordon. They are in the Speaker’s Gallery. 

 

Raymore is part of the Wadena constituency which you, Mr. Speaker, represent. It is very close to Last 

Mountain, in fact, in the recent past very, very close. We welcome the young people and we hope they 

have had an enjoyable day so far and that the remainder will be very fruitful and we wish them a very 

safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Saskatoon Riversdale) Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

introduce to you, Sir, and to the Members of the Assembly, 41 people who are members of an adult class 

from the Friendship Inn in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

The Friendship Inn is located on 20th Street in Saskatoon. I believe between Avenue F and Avenue G. I 

am not sure of the exact location. It is doing an excellent job for the community. It has a great volunteer 

involvement. They are accompanied by Marlene Smith, Sharon McClement and Jennifer Fulton and I 

welcome them to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Feedlots Included in 45 Per Cent Shares of Intercontinental 
 

Mr. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, before the 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1896 

Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). 

 

In the purchase of Intercontinental, did the Government or SEDCO buy one or more feedlots included in 

the package that the Government bought, at least in the 45 per cent of the shares that they bought? 

 

Hon. K. Thorson: — (Minister of Industry) Mr. Speaker, the answer to that question is no. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Grand Championship Bull 
 

Mr. D. W. Michayluk: — (Redberry) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to bring 

to your attention, and through you to the Hon. Members of the Assembly, a news item worthy of note. 

 

Mr. John Grant of Edam, Saskatchewan from the Redberry constituency has exhibited a Grand 

Champion bull in the Aberdeen Angus breed at the 1973 Annual Bull Sale in the Exhibition Auditorium 

on Sunday. 

 

The bull, Early Sunset Emulous 52 C took the Grand Championship. Might I at this time extend my 

personal congratulations to Mr. John Grant on his success in breeding championship stock on his farm 

near Edam for many years. This, Mr. Speaker, is but one more success and championship of the many 

that Mr. Grant has won in the Aberdeen Angus class. 

 

He has exhibited the Aberdeen Angus in other parts of Canada. I want at this time to wish Mr. Grant 

further success in his livestock enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post another very interesting article appeared under the title, “Price is 

Record”. I quote: 

 

The Grand Champion Early Sunset Emulous 52 C owned by John Grant of Edam went for $4,500 to 

Don McPherson of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — The purchaser, Mr. Speaker, is Don McPherson, the Hon. Member for the 

constituency of Regina Lakeview. It appears, Mr. Speaker, that Regina Lakeview and Redberry have 

something in common and that is plenty of bull at a good price. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO SWEEPSTAKE WINNER IN SILVER BROOM 
 

Mr. Michayluk: — While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, may I congratulate Mrs. Vera Hrycyna of 

Glaslyn a constituent form Redberry constituency on her winning $40,000 by splitting the $80,000 

sweepstake on the Silver Broom, World Curling Championship with Mr. Steve Beiler from Sherwood 

Park, Alberta. 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1897 

It is understandable, Mr. Speaker, why a great number of Saskatchewan residents were somewhat 

saddened by the unexpected loss by the Regina Rink in the final event of the Silver Broom World 

Curling Championship. However, Sir, the draw on the tickets on $80,000 will be remembered by Mrs. 

Vera Hrycyna. 

 

Through you, Sir, I want to congratulate Mrs. Hrycyna on her luck and fortune. I am certain that 1973 

Silver Broom World Curling Championship will be long remembered by her. I am aware of the family’s 

financial means and might I assure you, Sir, and the Members of this Assembly that this money will be 

put to good use by Mrs. Hrycyna. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, just a word with respect to the remarks of my hon. friend 

from Redberry. 

 

I certainly want to join with him in congratulating John Grant from Edam, who is a client of mine, in the 

continuing of his winning ways with respect to his Angus bulls. I want also to ask all Members to join in 

and congratulate a colleague on this side of the House, for the purchase of that bull, Mr. Don 

McPherson, for his contribution to Angus breeding in the province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Water Supply Board Report 
 

Hon. E. L. Cowley: — (Minister of Finance) Mr. Speaker, I should like to table the report of Mr. Austin 

Hunt, chartered accountant, on the operations of the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board. 

 

This Report fulfils in part a request of the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, which 

recommended at the last session that the Government establish a committee or other appropriate body to 

enquire into the causes of the financial problems of the Water Supply Board and to recommend 

solutions. 

 

This Report, is I believe, a useful first step towards the development of a sound provincial policy of the 

development and operation of multi-purpose water supply projects. The second step will commence 

immediately. The Inter-Agency Co-ordinating Committee of the Department of the Environment will 

undertake a detailed review of provincial and federal water development policies and programs. 

 

This review will cover programs involving construction of Water Supply projects by provincial 

agencies. The Committee has been asked to recommend how these programs can be integrated and 

co-ordinated in order to provide a more effective approach in meeting Saskatchewan’s water supply 

needs. 

 

The reading of Mr. Hunt’s report, which will be distributed shortly, will reveal that four of the five 

recommendations made are related to the need for this kind of detailed review. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1898 

QUESTIONS 
 

Alfalfa Cubing Plant Expenditure 
 

Mr. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask a question 

of the Minister of Agriculture and it has to do with the financing of the Alfalfa Cubing Plant, South 

Saskatchewan River. I asked the question of the Minister of Government Services last Friday and he 

suggested that I ask the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) about the financing. 

 

From the Cabinet Press office, you will recall there was a statement reporting on a statement made by 

the Minister of Government Services (Mr. Brockelbank) who said, “We are not abandoning the South 

Saskatchewan River Area, in fact, we are spending almost $750,000 on establishment of an Alfalfa 

Cubing Plant there.” 

 

In the Leader-Post a day or two later, the headline says: “Mr. Brockelbank Contradicted” and he 

indicates that they are spending $500. 

 

I wonder if the Minister could tell us, in cash, how much money the Government is spending on the 

Alfalfa Cubing Plant. Is it $500, as Mr. Davidson says, or is it $750,000 as the Minister of Government 

Services says? It was mentioned in the Throne Speech and there is certainly some discrepancy in these 

two figures. I am wondering, in cash, what is the amount that the Government is actually spending? 

 

Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker, I think that the question could be better 

answered during Estimates. But I can assure the Member opposite as well as his colleagues that the 

Government is by guarantee or by loan, providing virtually all of the money for the establishment of the 

Alfalfa Cubing Plant in the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project. 

 

All that will be put in by the members of the co-operative will be $500 per share and the Government, I 

think, will be contributing by various means, the other needed money and the Member will have all the 

time available to him during Estimates to pursue it further. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Just a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, is it correct then that the Government in 

cash is spending $500? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the question can be better answered in Estimates. 

 

Federal Committee Dealing with Food Prices 
 

Mr. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask a question of the Minister 

of Consumer Affairs. 

 

Some week or so ago he indicated that he had not made any representation, and the Government of 

Saskatchewan had not made 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1899 

any representation, to the Federal committee dealing with food prices. He seemed to be a little bashful in 

his holding back for an invitation. 

 

I understand that the Province of Alberta has made a presentation or has indicated that it will make a 

presentation, without an invitation, and I wonder if the Hon. Minister would indicate now whether or not 

the Saskatchewan Government is prepared to act more boldly and make a presentation to the Federal 

Government. 

 

Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski: — (Minister of Consumer Affairs) Mr. Speaker, in reply to the question from 

the Member opposite. 

 

The Department of Consumer Affairs has not made a presentation to the Federal commission. We, at 

this point in time, have not made a decision to make such a presentation. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Just a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder having regard to the answer of the 

Minister, if they do not consider that there is any problem of any kind with respect to food prices in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker I did not indicate that. I think that as all Members will agree there is 

a problem with regard to food pricing all over Canada, not only in Saskatchewan. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 236 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 236 showing: 

 

The complete financial statements of Intercontinental Packers Limited for the company’s fiscal 

years 1970, 1971, 1972. 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the Government has no 

intention of giving us this information. The information that is asked for is a complete financial 

statement of Intercontinental Packers Limited for the company’s fiscal years 1970, 1971 and 1972. 

 

It is equally obvious that they have it — they have it on record at SEDCO. It is also, I think, equally 

obvious to anyone who has the slightest knowledge of how you evaluate a going business that one of the 

major ways in which the value of a business can be ascertained is through its net earnings. One of the 

other ways is through its equity position. 

 

Now the Government has refused to give us this information. The Premier stood up the other day and in 

refusing some other pertinent information, made one the weakest speeches I have ever heard him make 

in this House, on either side. He really 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1900 

gave no reason why the Government is refusing to give to us and through us, to the public, the true facts 

about the Intercontinental deal. The facts would explain why they paid $10.2 million for less than half of 

this company. Facts would explain, for example, what they got for their $10.2 million. 

 

I just asked an oral question and I was informed that the Mendel family, or the company, did not include 

in the assets their feedlot — at least one feedlot as they may have more than one. I was aware that at one 

time this feedlot was held in the name of Mr. Fred Mendel or of other members of the family. This, 

again surprises me. I thought at least having valued his company at something in the neighborhood of 

$22 million to $23 million, that the feedlot would have been included. 

 

As I say it is obvious that they have no intention of giving us this information. They have every intention 

of withholding this from the public, using as an excuse that this is a private company and that it would 

not be in the best interests of the company’s future operations to reveal this information. 

 

In spite of the fact that their competitors, Burns and Company, Canada Packers being public companies, 

are forced by law to make their statement public and they are public property. In spite of the fact as the 

Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) pointed out that they came into this Legislature and 

one of the promises that they made to the people of Saskatchewan was that they would, in fact, be an 

open government. They would, in fact, give the public the facts on their policies, their programs and 

their projects, and that they had, in fact, confidence in the public to be fair-minded and to judge their 

actions having been given all the facts. 

 

It is very interesting that Mr. Gedge, who is the vice-president of Intercontinental Packers has chosen to 

speak up publicly. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — To tell the truth. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, it is the truth? I don’t doubt that he told the truth as far as it goes. 

 

I have a write-up, Mr. Speaker, from the Leader-Post of March 26th, and oddly enough it is wrong — 

maybe correctly enough as it maybe doesn’t surprise anybody. But I had this misquote pointed out to 

me. But what Mr. Gedge says in effect in this press release and evidently what he said over the radio is, 

that my estimates of the worth of this company are wrong. Well I made no estimate of the worth of this 

company. I brought in a report from Dun and Bradstreet that indicated that the net worth as of a year ago 

was four and a half, or five or five and a half million dollars. I pointed out that time that it was so far 

from the price paid by the Government, the valuation placed on the company by the Government, that 

there must be more to it. That even the NDP couldn’t be that stupid and couldn’t be that naive in buying 

this company. So I said that there must be more to it and I asked the Government then, and I ask them 

again today, to change their mind and give the public the figures and the facts and the contracts and the 

agreements upon which they based the deal. I think they have a serious moral responsibility to do this. 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1901 

Anyway Mr. Gedge says that my figures were wrong and the article says that A. Gedge, Vice-President 

of the Saskatoon Company said: 

 

Intercon’s insurance company estimated in 1972 that the buildings, machinery in the firm’s four plants 

was worth $25.1 million. 

 

Later on in his interview, he pointed out that they had inventory, cash and accounts receivable, they 

were valued at between $16 million and $17 million. This writeup in the Leader-Post says: “total 

slightly less than $1 million” and this is wrong. 

 

Mr. Gedge actually said that the value of the accounts receivable, cash and other inventory was around 

$17 million. He said, in this writeup and it is true as I checked that with him, that they have some current 

debts of about $12 million. 

 

So if you take the $12 million off the $17 million it leaves $5 million and you add that on to the $25 

million you get $30 million of assets, according to this calculation. Then he said they have about $7 

million in long-term debt, you take that off and you have a value of about $23 million and he said, that is 

what the Company is worth. Mr. Speaker, I have never heard anything as ridiculous in my life to try and 

say that the value of what you insure, the fire insurance you put on your buildings and your facilities 

would indicate the true worth of a company. It’s a red herring, it has nothing, absolutely nothing to do 

with the real worth of this company. The proper measure of the real worth of a company has to be 

gauged or judged by its net profit after taxes and also . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Dun and Bradstreet. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Not necessarily Dun and Bradstreet. Certainly if you were involved, Mr. Attorney 

General, in the purchase of this let me tell you very clearly that you are far better at chewing gum than 

you are at evaluating a company and making any estimates because I will tell you this statement made 

by Mr. Gedge proves more than anything else the absolute weakness of the Government’s case. This is a 

red herring, it is sheer nonsense to say that the evaluation placed by fire insurance gives you the true 

total value of a company. That is ridiculous. I have never heard of anything like it. To begin with the 

evaluation placed on these buildings I am sure will be the replacement value. Now some of those 

buildings up in Saskatoon are 40 years old at least. The evaluation placed on the buildings here for 

replacement for insurance value would be far in excess of what the buildings are worth. But regardless 

of that, when we were the Government we bought that old GM building over there and we paid 

$750,000 for it. I am sure if a private person had bought that they might have put insurance on it for $3 

million or $4 million. The replacement value of that old GM building would be far, far in excess of 

$750,000. So if someone had bought that and paid $750,000 for it and started up a business in it and 

then said well, we are only doing $20,000 or $30,000 a year business but we have our assets here 

insured for $3 million so the value of this company must be around $3 million. This is exactly what they 

said here. It is absolute nonsense. Not only will it not fool anybody if that was the purpose of this 

statement, not only will it not back up the 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1902 

Government’s claim that they made a good deal, if that was the purpose of the statement and I think it 

was, but for those people who know anything about business it will point out the absolute weakness of 

the Government’s case and the absolute necessity again of the Government making public the true 

figures. 

 

Now I checked with the radio statement because these figures in this write-up were garbled and I talked 

to radio station CFQC in Saskatoon which had been given this statement also. I had heard that Mr. 

Gedge had made this statement that had I contacted him or the Company they would have given me the 

figures and then I wouldn’t have had to stand up and quote some figures that, according to him, were 

wrong. So I phoned Mr. Gedge this morning and I suggested that I was quite willing to come up and 

look at the figures anytime he wanted to show them to me. I pointed out to Mr. Gedge that the reasons 

that I had not come to Intercontinental was that this was a Government deal. Mr. Romanow had stood up 

here in the House very proudly and announced buying a 45 per cent share for $10.2 million while the 

Premier and Mr. Thorson were up in Saskatoon making a similar announcement. Since we are members 

of the Legislative Assembly and this was public money, the proper place to ask about the true evaluation 

of this Company, the proper place in which to ask the Government on what they based spending $10.2 

million of taxpayers’ money was here in this Legislative Assembly and the proper people to ask the 

question of were the Government. But, I said, “Now that you have raised the question, Mr. Gedge I will 

be most pleased to come to Saskatoon and have you show me your financial statement, your profit and 

loss statement”. I should also like to see your equity position because this has a very distinct bearing on 

the real worth of that Company or any other business enterprise. Mr. Gedge informed me that if the 

Government of Saskatchewan was agreeable that he would be pleased to show me these figures on a 

confidential basis. So I say to Mr. Thorson and to the Premier that I would be prepared to go with Mr. 

Thorson or with the Premier to take a look at those figures and I would treat them confidentially, on one 

condition and the condition is that we took someone, a chartered accountant, bank manager or someone 

who had experience in business, who was recognized in this province, whose integrity is beyond 

question — I’m sure we could agree on such a person — we would look at those figures . . . 

 

Mr. Lane: — . . . the Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, I’m afraid I wouldn’t take the Ombudsman, he is a lawyer by trade. 

 

I have a great respect for the legal profession but listening to Mr. Romanow and watching the 

performance of Mr. Blakeney I don’t have really all that much confidence in their ability in the business 

world, so it will have to be a chartered accountant or someone like that. We would look at those figures, 

we would look at their statements for the past number of years, we would look at their equity position 

and I say right now, publicly, if in fact the net profit of the last year or two or three years indicated by 

yardsticks that are recognized and well known, eight, ten, twelve times net earnings, an equity position, 

that is at least 50 or 75 per cent of the true evaluation that they put on it of $23 million. In other words if 

Intercontinental has an equity position, if in fact that Company is worth $23 million, which the 

Government obviously said it is, then Intercontinental’s equity position must be $10 million, $12 

million, $15 million, in that area. Their net profit must be $2 million or $2.5 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1903 

million. If this is borne out by an examination of their books I would stand up publicly and say, yes, 

while I disagree with the philosophy of the Government having bought into this Company, while I 

disagree with the Government taking over $10 million of the taxpayers’ money and investing it in an 

on-going business that doesn’t produce any new jobs. In fact, if there needs any shoring up of this 

Company and I am sure they don’t, then they are shoring up another 700, 800 or 900 jobs for people in 

Alberta and British Columbia, and I don’t know why our taxpayers’ money should be used for that 

purpose. So, if in fact, the figures, the real audited figures bear out that the Government did not make, as 

I suspect, a very bad business deal then I would stand up publicly in this House and I would say exactly 

that. Again, I would still argue the philosophy and the propriety of the Government buying into that and 

the need for them buying into it, but I wouldn’t question that having bought into it they got the best price 

possible, any more than I would question that they got the best price possible when they bought into 

IPSCO. 

 

The Government I think was wrong to buy into IPSCO. I don’t know why they did it, I am sure there is 

more to the story than we have seen yet, but I have not nor do I today question that they paid too much 

money. They paid market price and no one can argue about that. But since there is no established market 

price for Intercontinental shares because they are privately held, then I think we must use other equally 

well known and equally recognized yardsticks to measure the real worth of this Company, to measure in 

fact how the Government has used the taxpayers’ money, the people of Saskatchewan’s hard-earned 

money. We have a right to know this information, we have a right to base our judgment on that 

information and the people of this province have exactly the same right, in fact more right than we have. 

 

So again I say to the Government, give us these figures or else accept my offer to go with one of them 

and someone else whom we can mutually agree on and look at these figures. Again, I commit myself 

that if, in fact, the real audited statement shows that this Company is worth what you paid for it, I will 

withdraw any objection I have to the price but not any objection I have to the deal itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, we have seen a rather strange performance this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I can’t think of a more responsible position taken by any Member in this House on either 

side of this House than the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) has taken this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I hope the people of Saskatchewan will recognize that position for what it is. The Leader 

of the Opposition has said that he is prepared to go and look privately at the audit 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1904 

and the financial statements of this Company in which the taxpayers have invested $10.24 million. He 

has offered to go with the Premier or the Attorney General or the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) or 

anybody that you name on that side if the House or anybody else to go with him, and to take a reputable 

and responsible man, well known in the financial community that is involved in meat packing or other 

industries of that kind, and look at those figures. He has said that if those figures bear out that the people 

of Saskatchewan have invested in a good deal, he is prepared to stand up and publicly acknowledge that 

the financial aspects of it are proper and I think that he is right in suggesting that he still has the right 

and responsibility of not approving of the philosophy of such a deal. I don’t know where you could get a 

more responsible attitude. You know the other day we listened to Members opposite say all the Liberal 

Party wants to do is use the deal for political purposes. They want to go and they want to spread rumors. 

If you ever had a more responsible attitude to stop the rumors as of today, that position was placed 

before the Premier of this province and the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) a few minutes ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Now surely to goodness, Mr. Speaker, the Government has some responsibility to the 

people of this province when they are spending $10.24 million. Surely to goodness the Leader of the 

Opposition has some responsibility to be responsible in criticizing deals made by the Government. The 

Leader of the Opposition this afternoon made it absolutely clear he wanted to take it out of the political 

arena, he wanted to get the facts that the people of Saskatchewan are entitled to, he was prepared to do it 

on a confidential basis with the Government involved and with a private banker or accountant, approved 

by both sides of the House or by both of the individuals, and what did the Government do? The 

Government turned him down. It is unbelievable in the annals of this province that a government would 

act in such an irresponsible manner. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I could go on with this debate for an hour or two hours but I tell you it is not 

necessary. The position taken by the Leader of the Opposition this afternoon I think has made it 

categorically clear the position of this side of the House regarding the deal that has been carried out by 

the Premier and his colleagues opposite. I think that they will condemn the Government for trying to 

keep the people of this province under a cloud that could go on forever. If they won’t provide the details 

on this particular purchase they could go out tomorrow and the day after and the day after and make 

purchase, after purchase, after purchase, and we would never find out the details. 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Are you predicting we will be the Government forever? 

 

Mr. Guy: — No, I won’t predict that. All I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is to ask the Members, the back 

benchers, on that side of the House to just think for one moment before they vote and consider the 

position that the Leader of the Opposition has taken this afternoon. If it is not a responsible position then 

all right, vote against the motion. But I will tell you that the people of Saskatchewan will find the 

position taken as outlined by our 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1905 

Leader on this side, the most responsible position that has ever been taken by a Leader of the Opposition 

in any House in this country. 
 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 16 

Messieurs 

Steuart MacDonald (Milestone) Lane 

Coupland McIsaac MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) 

Loken Gardner Guy 

Weatherald Wiebe Grant 

MacLeod Richards Boldt 

McPherson   
 

NAYS — 40 

Messieurs 

Blakeney Brockelbank Taylor 

Dyck MacMurchy Matsalla 

Meakes Pepper Faris 

Wood Michayluk Cody 

Smishek Byers Gross 

Romanow Thorson Feduniak 

Messer Whelan Comer  

Snyder Kwasnica Rolfes 

Bowerman Carlson Lange 

Kramer Owens Oliver 

Thibault Robbins Feschuk 

Larson Tchorzewski Kaeding 

Kowalchuk Cowley Flasch 

Baker   
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 9 — Establish Grains Income Stabilization Program 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Kaeding (Saltcoats): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government to proceed immediately with legislation to establish 

a grains income stabilization program for prairie farmers, the program to provide for: 
 

1. A guarantee that total grain receipts in the prairie region will not fall below 1.2 billion dollars 
during the 1972-73 crop year, and that this figure be adjusted in subsequent years to take into 

account costs of production; 
 

2. The establishment of a Stabilization Fund for the purposes of this program with contributions from 
producers; consumers, through a two-price system for wheat; and the Federal Government, 

through an annual contribution from the Treasury; 
 

3. A payout from the Stabilization Fund in any crop year 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1906 

  that gross receipts fall below the guaranteed minimum, with distribution on the basis of a 

minimum price for all grains, the minimum prices to apply up to a certain maximum number of 

bushels per producer. 

 

Mr. A. Oliver: — (Shaunavon) Mr. Speaker, the Member for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding) has done a great 

job in giving a great outline of the problems concerning the stabilization plan and I don’t intend to go 

over that same ground but there are a few points that I should like to bring to the attention of Members. I 

think we farmers of Western Canada need a Grain Stabilization Income Plan that would not hold us at a 

poverty level such as the one that the Liberal Government have proposed through the generous auspices 

of Otto Lang. We need a program that will guarantee that total grain receipts will not fall below $1.2 

billion during the coming crop year, and that it be adjustable so that in later years it would take into 

account the cost of production. I believe that we are going to have to have contributions to this fund 

from producers and consumers through a two-price system for wheat. The most important thing is that 

we will have to have an annual contribution form the Federal Treasury. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada seems to be the only country where grain farmers are not substantially subsidized 

by their Federal Treasury. 

 

In the United States at one time the subsidy ran as high as 40 per cent to the farmers. But Canada has 

lagged far behind and has had a high of around 5 per cent. However, this is understandable with the 

types of federal governments we have had in the past years. In speaking of that Federal Government, 

Mr. Speaker, we all remember those words of wisdom that the Prime Minister of Canada spoke, on 

occasions when he was in Saskatoon and Regina and his advice at that time was, sell your own wheat. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the leader of our country arrogantly rejected his responsibility and his Government 

did not provide the necessary leadership for the total of Canada. 

 

That was a time when there was a surplus of grain. And what did Mr. Trudeau and his cohorts in Ottawa 

do? They sat on their hands when they should have been out actively selling grain to other countries. But 

instead of selling that grain they decided to hold back production and this of course was through the 

LIFT program. Mr. Speaker, this caused the Western farmers to deplete their grain stocks and now in a 

year when sales are higher and prices are better we find ourselves short of our main source of income. 

 

Prairie farmers in 1970 lost $318 million as compared to the 1969 income. Mr. Trudeau, of course, at 

that time dangled what Mr. Kaeding called the $100 million carrot in front of the Western farmers and 

called it The Prairie Grain Stabilization Act. 

 

I am sure that all farmers in Western Canada will remember this bit of a carrot. I have here a part of that 

bit of a carrot that Mr. Lang mailed out to us in the summer of 1971. I will quote from that. 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1907 

The figures on this insert represent the amount you should receive as a transitional payment under The 

Prairie Grains Stabilization Act when legislation has been passed. 

 

Note, Mr. Speaker, that it hadn’t been passed up until that time. 

 

The Bill has reached the report stage in the House of Commons and can be dealt with after the House 

of Commons reconvenes. The House is adjourned until September. 

 

Mr. Speaker, later on in October 1971 a second letter addressed to all prairie grain producers was mailed 

out. In part it says: 

 

If you deliver wheat to the Canadian Wheat Board during the crop year 1969-70, you will likely have 

received your supplementary final payment in recent days. You are receiving this Canadian Wheat 

Board cheque because the Government has been forced to withdraw its proposal for a Prairie Grains 

Receipt Stabilization Program because of delays in passing it through Parliament. 

 

The delays meant that the courts would have to be placed in an awkward position of hearing a case 

involving The Temporary Reserves Wheat Act while Parliament was at the same time debating 

proposals of this Act. 

 

Further on in the letter it states: 

 

We believe that the prairie farmers would have benefited far more this year from the transitional 

payment under The Prairie Grain Stabilization Act. We also are convinced that the Stabilization Plan 

would be of much greater assistance to producers on a continuing basis. However, circumstances force 

the Government to withdraw The Stabilization Act at least temporarily. I personally regret having to 

take this step because this was the most advanced piece of legislation ever offered Western grain 

producers and would have been a real benefit in protection grain farmers’ income in years when sales 

were low. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the circumstances which delayed that legislation and caused its postponement, 

that was the New Democrats whom we had in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Oliver: — the Conservatives of course threw in the towel, they didn’t hold out like our people did. 

They were willing to sell out the Western farmers to keep them at a low income level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that prairie agriculture and the grain sector in particular should be expected 

to function without a public commitment to provide support and assistance of a meaningful kind. This is 

true for a number of reasons. When you take a long view of world markets it is almost certain that 

prairie resources will be needed to meet future world food demands. We all know what low returns will 

mean to the farming sector of Saskatchewan and to the rural community. It means a 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1908 

decline in the number of farm people and from the quality of farm capital. Relatively short-term 

reductions in output should not be brought about through forcing people off the land and through 

increased obsolescence of farm capital structure which leaves producers with a less effective productive 

system. 

 

Prairie farmers should have the same rights as people in the non-farming sectors of our economy, as far 

as program which provide protection against uncontrollable economic hardships are concerned. 

 

These programs constitute part of the accepted national responsibility. This responsibility must be 

extended to the farm sector. Canadian farmers and grain farmers in particular also require more 

equitable treatment as compared to their counterparts in other developed countries. Practically all the 

countries in the world are providing substantial assistance to producers to use their own income and 

financial reserves to compete with other national treasuries. And Otto Lang’s Grain Receipts 

Stabilization Bill did nothing in this regard. Mr. Speaker, the withdrawal of that Grain Receipts 

Stabilization Plan by the Federal Government was a historic occasion in Canadian agricultural policy 

formulation. 

 

It is one of the first times that farmers joined together with interested people in rejecting a short-term 

band-aid type program on the basis that it did not deal with the fundamental problems in relating to farm 

prices and returns. 

 

Stabilization plans that ignore production costs have proved to be ineffective to date and they will 

continue to be ineffective. The rejection of the Federal Government’s program indicates that this is now 

more widely recognized. It is also interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that after October 30th, and the 

rediscovery of the West by the Liberal Party that they did not introduce this Grain Stabilization Bill 

again. They finally got the message that stabilizing the prairie farmers income at a poverty level just 

wasn’t all that popular out here. 

 

I would urge that all Members opposite do all they can to force the Federal Government to recognize the 

needs of the Western farmer. Mr. Speaker, they can do their part by supporting wholeheartedly 

Resolution No. 9. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 105 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. G. Lane (Lumsden) for 

Return No. 105 showing: 

 

The number of representations that were made by the Executive Council of Saskatchewan to Her 

Majesty’s Ministers of the Government of Canada regarding rail line abandonment in Saskatchewan in 

the year 1972. (a) If any, the dates of such representations and to whom they were made. (b) The 

manner and form of such 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1909 

representation. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Messer: 

 

That all the words after the word “representations” in the first line be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

or contacts made by any Minister or official of the Saskatchewan Government to any Federal agency 

or authority regarding grain handling or rail line rationalization or abandonment in the year 1972 and 

(a) the dates of such representation or contracts, (b) the agency or authority of the Federal Government 

that was involved. 

 

Mr. J. G. Lane: — (Lumsden) The amendment which was voted on by this House as proposed by the 

Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) is the first admission by the Government opposite that it is 

playing politics with rail line abandonment and that it has refused to discuss the question of rail line 

abandonment with any Cabinet Minister in Ottawa. 

 

It is unfortunate that we have had a lot of talk about what the Government opposite is going to do for the 

Saskatchewan farmer and rural Saskatchewan in stopping rail line abandonment. I don’t intend to rehash 

the debate that went on on rail line abandonment that has just been voted on by this House. 

 

But a question was asked of the Government opposite — what representations their Cabinet had made to 

the Cabinet in Ottawa. Then we find out — the Attorney General says lots — we find out in their 

amendment that they have brought in that they haven’t made any representations to the Federal Cabinet 

in Ottawa. It is very surprising, Mr. Speaker, that the Government opposite in all its talk about rail line 

abandonment has never talked to a Federal Cabinet Minister about rail line abandonment. 

 

They brought in an amendment to a motion which simply states that, Mr. Speaker. They state that they 

have contacted Federal agencies or authorities regarding grain-handling. Well we know that the 

Attorney General and the Minister of Agriculture took a weekend jaunt out to Vancouver a year ago and 

then they talk about the dates of representation, contacts etc. But not one contact, not one representation 

to a Federal Cabinet Minister dealing with rail line abandonment. It is obvious that the Government 

opposite is playing cheap politics with rail line abandonment. They don’t want to talk to the Government 

in Ottawa because they want to make an issue of rail line abandonment. They have no proposals, no 

policies and they don’t really care about the true interests of the Saskatchewan farmer because they have 

made no effort. And this amendment is an admission by the Government that they have made no effort 

to talk to a Federal Cabinet Minister. We now have on the record of this House the real stand of the 

Government opposite, it doesn’t want to talk to Ottawa. It does not want to talk to the Federal 

Government because it wants to play politics with rail line abandonment, unfortunately that is the record 

now before this House. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1910 

Return No. 109 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse) for 

Return No. 109 showing: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Huron No. 223, as of January 25, 1973: (a) the number of applications 

that were received to sell land to the Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of contracts or 

agreements to purchase by the Commission that have been approved; (ii) the number of purchases that 

have actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) and (ii) above, the (a) land number of each quarter 

section; (b) acreage cultivated in each quarter section; (d) acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter 

section; (e) assessed value of each quarter section and (f) price offered for each quarter section. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Messer: 

 

That all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Huron No. 223 as of January 25, 1973; (a) the number of applications to 

sell land which were appraised by the Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of offers to purchase 

land by the Commission that have been accepted by vendors; (ii) the number of purchases that have 

actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) and (ii) above, the (a) land number of each quarter section; 

(b) acreage cultivated in each quarter section; (d) acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter section; (e) 

assessed value of each quarter section. 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — (Morse) Mr. Speaker, on closing debate on this particular Motion, I should like to 

make a few comments on some of the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Order for Return No. 109 which is moved by the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) 

— there is an amendment by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) so the Hon. Member can’t close 

the debate until the amendment is put. But he can speak to the amendment at this time if he wishes to 

speak to the amendment. The Hon. Member has already spoken to the amendment so you will have to 

wait to close the debate. 

 

I must ask the indulgence of the House. It is so long since this motion came up that it takes me a few 

minutes to check on who has spoken. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Debate continues on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this Motion, I should just like to make a few 

comments on some of the remarks that were made by Members opposite. 

 

Initially the comment made by the Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk), I am sorry that he is not in 

his chair today, 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1911 

where he accuses us of being the manufacturers of rumors in terms of the Land Bank questions which 

are going throughout the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — And yet when one looks at the NDP organ, The Commonwealth, you see under a 

department called, “You can’t Win Department” in which they had supposedly quoted a statement 

which I had made in a Press release. They were quite sorry that you can’t win. Now, the Liberals are 

crying that they reduced the rate down to 5 per cent from 6½. And yet all I stated in that release was that 

it proved that the Land Bank was not working, that they had to reduce the rate from 6½ to 5 per cent. I 

also went on in that Press release to say that I was very happy that the rate had been reduced from 6½ to 

5 per cent. 

 

So here in their own official organ, The Commonwealth, they are spreading rumors like this throughout 

the province. 

 

Another comment I should like to make is one made by Mr. Comer regarding the hundreds and 

thousands of applications which the Land Bank has received from the constituency of Morse, 

applications to sell, purchases which have been made and also applications to lease the land. And yet 

from the Orders for Returns which we have received it is quite evident that there might be 

approximately 20 altogether. Twenty compared to thousands as stated by the Minister of Agriculture and 

the Member from Nipawin. 

 

So here again where are the rumors being spread? They are being spread by Members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. It seems rather strange that the Government has not decided to answer this particular question, 

Return No. 109. And yet I have on my desk the answer to Return No. 110. A Return which was 

amended and in that amendment they omitted clause (f) of that Return which requested the price offered 

for each quarter section. And yet in Return No. 110 they have agreed to answer that particular question. 

And I notice in the Votes and Proceedings for March 9, that that is the way it is recorded. So all of a 

sudden they decide to answer one of the 10 question and yet refuse to answer the others. I really am 

quite happy that they have decided to answer this question. Because it clearly shows that on the land 

which they have made offers in the RM No. 194 that they do not have a formula. They have no formula 

whatsoever as to assessing the value of land, what crops were produced and so on. It goes strictly by the 

assessment of that land. And in each and every case on this Return it is four times the assessed value of 

that land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the comments that we have had by the Minister of Agriculture and Members opposite that they do 

have a formula, they have refused to give us that formula which they are using. The reason why they 

have done it, Mr. Speaker, is because they do not have a formula. Their only formula is four times the 

assessed value of that property. 

 

But then one wonders too, the Attorney General mentioned that this was an error and yet possibly, just 

now, it possibly isn’t recorded, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1912 

Mr. Romanow: — This is a Point of Order, so I adjourned this debate. I wish the Member would not 

quote me, I did not enter it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I should like to remind the Member that you can’t bring up things that happened in 

previous debates or new matter used in closing debate. You can only answer questions that have been 

raised because we get astray. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Well, Mr. Speaker, regardless of that, the Attorney General is quite apt in speaking from 

his seat instead of speaking from his feet and because of this he has not been recorded in his statement 

and he has a good out in this regard. 

 

Now, going back to the formula which the Government refused to supply and the fact that they have 

decided to answer one of the Returns, No. 110 and still are refusing to answer the remaining 9, which 

have been amended, one begins to wonder whether possibly under Return No. 110 the RM of Enfield, 

they do not have anything to hide and because of this they decided to answer the question which we 

have asked. It leads one to wonder that possibly in the other nine Returns that they do have something to 

hide and because of the fact that they do have something to hide they don’t want to answer this question. 

 

As I was saying earlier, Mr. Speaker, I do not want to prolong the debate. It’s very regrettable that this 

Government has taken this attitude. It is also very regrettable that they have decided to continue with the 

rumor throughout this province that was generated, not by us, Mr. Speaker, but by the Members 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 13 — Grant to Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to consider a grant to the Palliser Wheat 

Growers’ Association similar to those made to other agricultural organizations and that the Palliser 

Wheat Growers’ Association be encouraged to expand its research and investigative activities. 

 

Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker the Motion that has been brought forward 

by the Member for Milestone in regard to the Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association and provisions of 

money or grants to that organization is similar to those that have been received from other farm 

organizations. When we take a look at the kind of organization that Palliser is we compare it to other 

farm 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1913 

organizations, not necessarily to organizations but to the specific duties in research that organizations 

have endeavored to carry out with some recognition, financially, from the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have had discussion with the members of the Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association, also have had some 

correspondence from their membership, from their executive, in regard to the possibility of some money 

coming from the Provincial Government towards their organization. 

 

I think in most instances that as far as requests have been concerned in the past, it has been for a blanket 

grant and I don’t think under any circumstances has this Government, up to this point in time, simply 

given a blanket grant to an organization because it is a farm organization. It has always had to relate to 

some specific concern that that organization is concerned about and is willing to investigate it and if the 

Government sees fit in participating or joining with that organization in not only recognizing that 

concern but hoping that some solution would ultimately emanate from this particular organization’s 

involvement, then it would, I think, make a decision as to whether the money would be well spent or 

not. The situation with regard to wheat and the Palliser Wheat Growers’ is unique among that of many 

other products that are on our farms in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the case of wheat I think it’s safe to say that it is marketed and its movement to market is in fact 

controlled through the Canadian Wheat Board, and there may be some remarks pro and con in regard to 

the activity of the Canadian Wheat Board, and its ultimate benefit to the grain producer in 

Saskatchewan. Nevertheless, the Board has had a long experience and I think has wide expertise in grain 

marketing and in scheduling the movement of grain from the farm to the export terminal. Prices are 

pooled and I think that it enjoys support from most farmers within the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Over and above that, more than half the wheat that is sold is handled through farmer-owned 

co-operatives, as far as the three prairie provinces are concerned. These exist in all three prairie 

provinces, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta. They own and operate country elevators and terminal 

elevators where the grain is assembled, cleaned and ultimately exported. There are few locations in the 

three provinces where farmer-owned facilities are not now available. I think because of that kind of 

organization, in regard to the movement of grain, and in particular wheat, which the Palliser 

organization, I think, is most concerned about or I think should be most concerned about by virtue of 

their name, the Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association, there is a good deal of opportunity for producers to 

voice concern and also to bring forward change if they think it is needed. 

 

Grants, as I have said earlier, to other organizations and as I think was pointed out by the Member from 

Milestone when he introduced this Motion, have been made by the Government, but generally speaking, 

I think in fact under all circumstances, have been made for specific purposes. To do certain specific jobs 

in particular areas and I think I tabled an answer to question 91 earlier in this House containing a list of 

money that was made available by the Government of Saskatchewan up to January 25, 1973. If we look 

at those we see that they went 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1914 

to a good number of organizations but in all instances went for a specific purpose. The Saskatchewan 

Pork Promotion Council in May 25 of ’72 received $6,000 and that was for a specific task in the 

promotion and advertising of pork products in the province. The Saskatchewan Poultry Council on 

August 1st, ’72 had $850 granted to it for a specific undertaking in regard to poultry promotion in 

Saskatchewan. We could go on and refer to the Canadian Pork Council and the Saskatchewan Livestock 

Board where there was $15,000 made available to carry out some investigative work; Canadian Western 

Agribition, a $10,000 grant which was towards the development of the Agribition in Regina, which I 

think is proving to be most beneficial and most rewarding to our livestock producers in Saskatchewan; 

Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders Association; Swine Breeders Association; sheep breeders; Saskatchewan 

Hog Producers and Swine Producers Association; Sheep Breeders Association again in December of 

1972 and so on. The Farmers Union also got a grant in regard to organization for committees in various 

rural areas of the province to recognize, not only the problems that they were confronted with, mainly 

grain handling and railway rationalization and abandonment, but to endeavor to give them some help as 

to how to organize as small urban or rural communities to voice their concern and to take the kind of 

action that has to be taken in order to bring matters to the light of senior levels of government and how it 

may effect if the actions are carried through the smaller areas in the province that do not have real 

legitimate ways of voicing the problems that they are confronted with at any particular time. 

 

Now the Palliser has, I am told, requested a check-off on wheat sales. They made that request to the 

minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board and I am further told that he has said that he would 

consider such a check-off when this organization could demonstrate that they, in fact, had majority 

support from farmers who were producing wheat or grains and I think as far as a check-off is concerned, 

in regard to that area that the Palliser is not anywhere near a position of demonstrating to the minister in 

charge of the Canadian Wheat Board that they do have majority support of farmers and so I should, 

therefore, think that it would be obvious that they would not be getting a grant or a check-off by that 

means in the very near future. 

 

Now I’m not saying that the Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association is not to be commended for some of 

its direct interest that it has taken in grain marketing. Certainly the Member from Milestone pointed out 

a number of instances where they had undertaken, I think, something that was considered to be new, 

somewhat revolutionary. I am not saying that in all of those instances they have been a direct benefit to 

the grain producer but they certainly have, I think, instilled and brought about some considerations in 

regard to the movement of grains and the selling of grains which would probably not have been brought 

about had not this organization brought it to the attention of bureaucrats or higher levels of government. 

But I think because of the existence of other organizations mentioned and their functions, this 

organization is likely to be very different from say the Sheep Breeders or the Hog Producers or the 

Swine Producers or the Canadian Western Agribition Association. So, because of that, Mr. Speaker, I 

am not saying that the Government would not consider grants to organizations such as Palliser, but 

because we do not want simply to say that any organization in Saskatchewan that organizes itself and 

has 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1915 

some representation made or brought about in regard to some particular commodity — that the 

Government is necessarily obligated to give them a grant. I think that they have to show that they are 

firstly a worthwhile organization and that the endeavors, that they plan to undertake, will in fact be 

beneficial to farming in Saskatchewan in general. 

 

I, therefore, should like to amend Resolution No. 13 moved by myself, seconded by the Hon. Attorney 

General, that Resolution No. 13 be amended by deleting all the words after the first line and substitute 

the following therefor: 

 

Give consideration to providing grants to recognized farm organizations and the commodity groups 

for undertaking projects and activities directed at organizing and promoting programs related to the 

farming needs in expanding and establishing a viable agricultural industry in Saskatchewan giving 

particular attention to the fortification of family farm operations. 

 

Mr. D. Boldt: — (Rosthern) Mr. Speaker, I should like to say just a few words regarding the Motion 

and then the amendment. 

 

First of all I want to commend the Minister for his low-key speech regarding this Motion. I am a 

member of the Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association and the reason I am a member is because there is no 

other organization to my mind, that promoted the sale of wheat. There was no other organization that 

has knocked on the door of the Wheat Board more often that the members of the Palliser group and there 

is no organization that contacted the Hon. Minister Otto Lang more often than this group trying to sell 

wheat. Now the Minister has said that there are other organizations which could do this promoting of 

beneficial programs for the farmers. I believe he mentioned the Wheat Pool and other organizations. 

When we did have that great surplus about which the Palliser group was concerned, I was concerned 

about, when we had the surplus in wheat I don’t think that it was the Wheat Pool that really took the 

initiative to go out and tell the Wheat Board to sell. They more or less took the attitude that you have to 

have $1.95 per bushel of wheat and if you don’t get it you don’t sell any. I believe the Palliser group 

were the first group that urged . . . I see the Member from Watrous is trying to barge in. He mentioned 

the other day that this was just a group of Liberals and Conservatives, NDP and Social Credit (if there 

are some) who are trying to sell wheat, who have surplus in wheat and they are not a political 

organization, they are just trying to sell wheat and I believe that they have been very, very fortunate, 

very productive in trying to convince the Wheat Board and Otto Lang that certain things had to be done. 

If my memory holds correctly they were the first ones to recommend the method of unit trains. They 

recommended this, which has been very successful. They were the first ones that recommended the 

using of the government elevators. These elevators were dormant, they were standing out in the country 

at Moose Jaw and Saskatoon, they had been filled for years and they were never emptied, they were 

never used and the Palliser group were the first ones that recommended the use of the government 

elevators. 

 

By reading some of their material and minutes I also came across the fact they were very much in favor 

and this has been experimented with, that the cleaning of grain should come first 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1916 

before it was shipped either east or west. Here again, the Government or the Wheat Board has taken 

some of their advice and some of their grain has been cleaned, the screenings have been left in Western 

Canada, where it belongs and where it can be used for feed. 

 

I think that the Palliser group has done a tremendous service to the wheat farmers in particular. They 

have done a tremendous service to the Wheat Board and they have been a tremendous help to the 

Federal Minister Otto Lang and I certainly would support the main Motion. I don’t think that there is too 

much wrong with the amendment. But certainly I would hope that the Minister will consider if this 

Motion passes that he will also consider giving the Palliser group some financial assistance. 

 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, in closing the debate I should like to make some 

comments . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member can’t close the debate yet because the amendment is before the House. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — You’re right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, my colleagues sitting to your right said, “not political.” I certainly 

don’t intend to make it that way, Mr. Minister. 

 

First of all I want to say that I certainly voted for the amendment even though I am disappointed. I am 

disappointed because the original intention of the motion was to clearly pinpoint one organization in 

Saskatchewan which took a real interest in a single commodity and the results and achievement of that 

organization merit some very worthwhile consideration by any government. 

 

I want to make a comment and I should like to say to the Member from Watrous (Mr. Cody) that I 

would hope that any Member in this House because an organization sees fit to criticize him at one 

individual time . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He did not speak in this debate. I should like to remind the Member that he can’t bring 

in new material. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly eliminate the Member from Watrous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is that I hope that at no time that any individual organization in the 

Province of Saskatchewan or in Canada would be looked down upon because they had the courage to 

speak out against the Government about an individual policy. Certainly this does not stamp them as 

political, because this is the strength of the Palliser organization or the strength of any commodity 

organization. The fact that they do have the courage and certainly they have spoken out against the 

Federal Government as all of us are 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1917 

aware on many, many occasions. But they have also been the first to commend the Federal Government 

on a good policy. I would hope that they would do so on a provincial basis as well. Certainly they are 

very, very widely recognized as a non-political organization. In fact some of them have run as 

candidates for various political parties as an indication. 

 

I do want to point out to the Minister, he did indicate that because Palliser was dealing with a 

commodity that had some strong commercial support among the Wheat Pools in the three prairie 

provinces and of course the fact that the majority of the wheat, the delivery system, the export marketing 

and so forth was a federal responsibility that this didn’t really put the same importance on them as other 

agricultural organizations in Saskatchewan. I should like to point out to him that on more than one 

occasion in this House we have suspended the normal business of the day to have an emergency debate 

on wheat and the problems of wheat. Last year we even suspended the House after an emergency debate 

and sent two Members of the Government to the Port of Vancouver to check into grain difficulties. 

Wheat is still the bread and butter of the Province of Saskatchewan and therefore it deserves all that 

interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say anything more, I do want to say to the Minister, I hope this 

amendment is not an opportunity to shelve this request. I think that the Palliser Wheat Growers’ 

Association with some financial support particularly in the research area make a very worthwhile 

contribution not only to the wheat growers but to the general economy of Saskatchewan. I would hope 

that this particular resolution will be an encouragement to other commodity groups, that they too will be 

able to make a greater contribution in their area and the commodity of their own interest. I hope that this 

Resolution will not be taken by the Palliser Wheat Growers’ Association as a rejection. In fact I do 

understand that perhaps this Resolution has had a little impact because I understand that the Department 

of Agriculture has now communicated with the Palliser. I am very pleased to hear that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support this and I do urge all Members of the House to support it as well. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 14 — Urges Government of Canada to Reduce Unemployment 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Whelan (Regina North 

West): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to develop adequate employment schemes to 

reduce unemployment in Canada to more acceptable proportions; to disclose details of works plans for 

the winter season at an early enough date to permit maximum participation at the provincial level, and 

to fulfill its responsibility, through its control of Canada’s fiscal, monetary and general economic 

policies, to take action designed to provide long-term solutions to the problem of chronic 

unemployment in Canada. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Lane: 

 

That wherever the word “Canada” appears, it be deleted and the word “Saskatchewan” be substituted 

therefor, and that the word “municipal” be substituted for the 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1918 

word “provincial” in the fifth line thereof (Votes and Proceedings). 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla: — (Canora) Mr. Speaker, a great deal has been said about unemployment during the 

last number of years. Various views have been expressed in an attempt to pinpoint reasons for 

unemployment and to put forward solutions to the problem. 

 

Canadians today are more concerned than ever about the present high level of unemployment. There is 

an existing feeling of insecurity and despair amongst our many young people. The situation, Mr. 

Speaker, is not a good one. It is up to politicians like ourselves seriously and sincerely to grapple with 

the problem. I realize that as a province we can only do so much to alleviate unemployment. Our 

resource base is limited. Much of the solutions to the problem falls in the lap of the Federal Government. 

Nevertheless I do feel that part of this solution can be accomplished through Provincial-Federal 

co-operation in instituting adequate employment programs. 

 

Unemployment, Mr. Speaker is one of the most pressing problems facing Canadians today. Even though 

there was improved economic growth in Canada last year it had very little effect on unemployment. 

Some 220,000 new jobs were added during 1972, yet the year ended with a 6.8 per cent unemployment 

rate, a rate slightly higher than a year earlier. 

 

Recognition must be given to the very fast growth of Canada’s labor force. The high post-war birth rate 

is gradually becoming a thing of the past and of less significance to the unemployment problem. There 

must be other reasons for this unemployment crisis. 

 

As I see it, Mr. Speaker, if we are going to get to the bottom of the problem, one of the basic and 

primary requirements for growth in the economy of the nation is increased investment by Canadians in 

Canada. In meeting this requirement, Canadian investors would have to gear their investment to keep 

our economy moving and in a healthy condition. The control of the economy would then be in Canada 

and not in the United States where controls are manipulative in the interest of the American economy. 

Besides this, it would be necessary to change the structure of our economy. 

 

Our problem today, Mr. Speaker, is that a greater percentage of our raw material is exported for 

manufacture rather than being processed here into either finished or semi-finished products. It must be 

remembered that in a long run it is the manufacturing end of the production which creates jobs. By 

exporting raw materials, we are exporting jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other obvious reasons why Western Canadian provinces are continually being 

faced with high seasonal unemployment is due to lack of geographical distribution of industrial wealth. 

Industrial production continues to be concentrated in Eastern and Central Canada leaving the rest of the 

country comparatively underdeveloped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government continues to cater to the provinces of Ontario and Quebec, 

through generous industrial incentives grants. But to the Western Provinces it provides all sorts of 

excuses for delays and denials in grants. The present 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1919 

DREE grant program and regulations needs to be re-designed and directed towards industrial 

development in the entire nation. If Canada is to develop industrial potential in its rich primary resources 

and if this development is to be meaningful in terms of spreading population and industry and creating 

new jobs across the entire nation, steps must be taken by the Federal Government to institute a massive 

program of distributing the wealth of the nation. I realize that this is something that cannot be done 

overnight, and of course not by a government that lacks courage and initiative. It is something that can 

only be done by a bold and progressive government; it can only be done by a government that has 

convictions about how to solve the unemployment crisis and one that is prepared to talk “turkey” to the 

huge financial institutions. Might I suggest it isn’t a Liberal Government. We know from past records, 

Mr. Speaker, that neither of the free enterprise governments have had the courage to confront the sacred 

financial cow. They are, in fact, politically scared of it. 

 

The Resolution before us, Mr. Speaker, opens for discussion the development of adequate employment 

schemes, including the disclosure of details on plans for reemployment programs during the winter 

season. I believe that the best way to discuss this is to make some reference to what was experienced 

with the administration of last year’s program. 

 

Members of the House will recall that I introduced a resolution at the last session one year ago to discuss 

this very point. Members of the Opposition I recall rather than discussing the problem of experienced 

delays and mal-administration, preferred to go off on a tangent and discuss unemployment. All in all, it 

was a good debate and may I say that it brought some results, although not the kind that I should have 

liked to see. This is the reason why we have this Resolution before us and that is the reason why we 

again want to debate the subject and that is why I have entered this debate. 

 

To elaborate on some of the results, Mr. Speaker, our of last year’s debate I want to start by 

commending this New Democratic Government for taking the lead in extending the deadline date of 

May 31st to July 31st and then to August 31st on its Provincial Winter Employment programs. To many 

municipal authorities the date extension was a blessing and proved very beneficial. It placed them in a 

position to proceed with the completion of their projects as well as to take advantage of the benefits of 

warm weather. Work on these projects continued and they provided employment and economic activity 

in the communities concerned. The effect went further than that. The projects provided communities 

with new and better facilities, and for this you can be assured the people of the community are very 

grateful. For instance, I want to point out, the community of Buchanan in my constituency received the 

approval for their new rink project by this Provincial Government after the Federal Government rejected 

their application. Last summer the district board of trade and the village council demonstrated their 

gratefulness by declaring the day of the Premier’s visit to the community as ‘Special Appreciation Day’. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — I mention this, Mr. Speaker, simply to illustrate how much the small community 

appreciates the much needed financial 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1920 

help it can get form senior governments. If it wasn’t for the help, no way could the community have 

found sufficient resources to undertake the project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest that the leadership we have taken to extend the deadline date had induced 

the Federal Government to follow suit, but only extending the deadline to June 30th. They still fell short. 

Obviously the actions of this Provincial Government triggered the Federal Government to move in the 

same direction. This is what I would call effective Provincial Government. It would seem that the 

Liberals need guidance, it has shown up here and it is showing up in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after setting out guidelines and regulations for the 1972-73 Winter Works Program this 

New Democratic Government lived up to its commitment of starting work on projects earlier. The work 

commencement was set at November 1. Approvals for projects were provided as early as October 18, 

1972. There was virtually no hold-up in the processing. Municipalities and organizations were 

encouraged to start work as early as possible following November 1. In other words this Government 

did everything possible to maintain and continue the summer employment level into the winter season. 

 

But what has been happening under the Federal Local Initiatives Program? Well to start with, Mr. 

Speaker, the starting date of December 1 remained the same. No action was taken to advance it. Surely 

if the Federal Liberal Government was concerned and sensitive to the serious unemployment problem it 

could have moved the starting date to at least November 1st when unemployment starts to take an 

upswing rather than keep it at December 1st. Apparently the starting date doesn’t mean too much to the 

Federal Government anyway. In many cases approval for projects didn’t come through until late 

December and January. 

 

Let me relate to this House, Mr. Speaker, the experience I personally had with the eventual approval of a 

local initiative project in the RM of Buchanan No. 304, of which I am the secretary-treasurer. Our 

application was submitted on November 13, 1972, with the hope that we could get the approval through 

by December 1. We waited and waited. No approval was received until the third week in January, to be 

exact, January 18th, nearly two months later, right smack in the middle of winter. I ask the Members on 

this side of the House and the Members opposite in view of the delay in approving the municipality’s 

application would you say that the Federal Government has made an honest effort to curb 

unemployment? No, must be the answer. There is lots of talk by the Liberals but very little action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Let us take a look at the action of this Government and that of the Federal Liberals. In 

reviewing the municipal files I find the following information,. Since the Provincial Government 

announced this program early, the municipality made application for the project on October 12, 1972. 

Approval for the project was granted about a week later on October 20th, ready for November 1st 

starting date. Following the announcement of the federal program the council decided to make 

application under the program with the view that it would be more advantageous to the municipality. So 

the application was 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1921 

submitted on November 13, 1972. As I mentioned earlier, no approval was received until January 18th 

about two months later. So there you have it, Mr. Speaker, approval within a week with this Provincial 

Government and about two months with the Federal Government. I again ask you, Mr. Speaker, where’s 

the action? Very obviously it is with this Government! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know of one reason why the Federal Liberals delayed approvals on some of the project. 

The reason is a political one. Now let me outline the reason to you. It might be interesting for Members 

of this House to know that Canada Manpower through its Minister has set up some kind of a clearing 

agency under the hand of defeated Liberal candidates in the last Federal election. In the case of at least 

two projects in my constituency, one being the RM of Buchanan project, the defeated Federal Liberal 

candidate for Yorkton-Melville had been in contact with key local Liberals advising them that approval 

to projects is forthcoming, but certain things would have to be met. One of the points was, the cutting 

down of projects to reduce costs and the other point which was more important and significant to the 

candidate was the publicity of the project. The defeated candidate, Mr. Speaker, stressed that the 

requirement for approval was assurance from the contact person that the announcement will be made 

and associated with her name, and publicized by word of mouth as well as by an article in the local 

paper. It is very apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the Federal Liberal applications are contained in a political 

pork-barrel. Whether or not the applications receive approval would depend on the results of the 

political test, and obviously on the reception given to the defeated candidate, the political agent of 

Manpower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this kind of processing of LIP applications by the Federal Government and 

Manpower is wrong and cannot be tolerated by municipal authorities and local community 

organizations. I am inclined to think that one of the reasons for the delay in approving applications was 

and is the involvement of partisan politics. 

 

I feel certain that if this was removed the delays that we had would be reduced. If the objectives of the 

Local Initiative Program are to be met, number one, is creating jobs. Number two, developing 

community municipal projects; the program must be removed from politics and the projects decided 

upon their merits taking into account the established criteria. 

 

At this point in passing, I want to make brief mention of the training-on-the-job program. This program, 

I believe, can serve a very useful purpose to a much fuller degree if its eligibility requirements were 

more meaningful. The program, I agree, is designed with good intentions, but I must say that some of 

the criteria used in determining eligibility is not compatible with the objectives of the program. 

 

This New Democratic Government, ever since the planning of Winter Works Program of a year ago, has 

been making every effort to co-operate with the Federal Government in developing a single program, in 

which the federal, provincial and municipal governments would participate on a cost-sharing basis. Our 

proposal fell on deaf ears of the Federal Government. 

 

This Government urged the Federal Government to announce its 1972-73 intentions by the middle of 

last summer. But there 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1922 

was no action in this direction out of the Ottawa Government. No early action out of Ottawa 

demonstrates one thing, and one thing only, and that is its insincerity and unconcern over the serious 

unemployment problem. 

 

I would be wrong to say that Ottawa hasn’t done anything towards Winter Works employment. It has, 

but always too late and too little. 

 

With the early high seasonal unemployment in Western Canada, due to severe winter climatic 

conditions, I shall like to suggest to his House, to the Federal Government, that an effort be made to 

design a national Winter Works Program, giving the provinces of Western Canada special consideration. 

 

I would urge that the starting date for projects in Western Canada be at least November 1st and that 

every consideration be given to develop a single program involving all levels of government — federal, 

provincial and local authorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment proposed by the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) is 

what I would describe as irresponsible and shows lack of understanding on the problem of 

unemployment. I cannot support the amendment but I will give my full support to the main Motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald: — (Cannington) Mr. Speaker, I have some extremely short remarks on this 

Motion. The one thing that has always impressed me as we receive the sheets on the Winter Works 

Program put out by the Provincial Government is the very great lack of planning that they always talk 

about and certainly a lack of any coherent type of program to tackle unemployment. 

 

Let’s take a look at some of the things that they put into their great program that they so vividly and 

happily talk about. One of them was employing a hockey coach in a community in Saskatchewan. That 

was one of their job-creating programs and they got a grant in that particular town for it. 

 

Another one was the city of Saskatoon, and Saskatoon seems to appear frequently here. I don’t know 

whether it is what the Member for Canora would call political patronage or not, but I think I would. That 

was to provide and maintain ice surfaces for recreational use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that they have been cleaning the snow off the ice in Saskatoon for many, many 

years before the Government came along with the Winter Works Program. But apparently the 

Government opposite in their wisdom decided that this year they would pay half the cost and try and 

start creating jobs by paying for clearing the snow off the ice in the city of Saskatoon, on their outdoor 

rinks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hardly think that this was a job-creating program because I think that people were already 

doing this for many years in the past. I think that appears at least six or seven times on the sheet that was 

presented to me. 

 

We keep going through the list of programs, Mr. Speaker, that the Government opposite has so 

glowingly talked of, of 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1923 

how they will bring about job creation in the Province of Saskatchewan. One of them — another one — 

help produce a municipal map for a community here in Saskatchewan. I hardly think that that qualifies 

as an employment generating program for this province in the Winter Works project. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can go ahead and look through many, many of the plans and programs of the 

NDP to create work this winter. The one thing that comes to my mind is that the Government — if you 

happen to be the right friend of the Government at that time — your chances of qualifying are very 

good. I think probably the city of Saskatoon did rather well in this regard, but I would suggest to them 

that in the future if they are going to create permanent jobs that are somewhat more meaningful in the 

Province of Saskatchewan, that they dwell on jobs other than just the cleaning of open air rinks and 

removing the snow from them. 

 

I would suggest also, Mr. Speaker, that such programs as these are totally unfair to the people of the 

province. I notice in here also as I go through the Winter Works Incentive Program for the Government 

in the past year, I notice frequently assistance to caretakers of rinks. 

 

Well, my colleague, the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) and I am sure my own constituency, 

indeed all the constituencies of Saskatchewan, would be very pleased to have this type of Winter Works 

assistance in employing caretakers. I find that in checking the small towns and all of the towns around 

that they were not aware that there was any type of assistance available to them this winter for the 

employing of caretakers. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I think it was handed out in a very, very extremely haphazard manner, and in a 

manner which if maybe you knew the right people you got the grant. 

 

I would very seriously suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the Government that if this year . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . accusation . . . 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, it is an accurate accusation and you can go through these sheets and it can be 

proved quite easily. In most cases, Mr. Speaker, there was no notice given whatsoever to rinks 

employing caretakers that the program was available in order to qualify for assistance. If you check the 

small communities that are employing caretakers you will find this to be true. The Government had a 

program that they handed out to whoever they felt like, but they made no effort to tell small 

communities that there was a program available in which they would be able to collect part of the cost of 

the caretaker for the rink. There isn’t a community in Saskatchewan that couldn’t have qualified for this 

program this winter, and they should have qualified for it on an equal basis as the same ones that got it. 

You can go through these sheets and you can find 15 or 20 rinks that got half of the cost of the caretaker 

for the last winter paid for. 

 

What legitimate reason is there that every community in Saskatchewan should not get half the cost of 

their caretaker paid for? I know of no legitimate reason, and when I contact these rinks they know of no 

legitimate reason, except that 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1924 

nobody told them that the program existed, because the Government didn’t tell anybody. They didn’t 

intend to tell anybody. They just had a little bit of money that they handed out wherever they thought it 

would do a little good for their own purposes. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, I think is an indication of the type of Winter Works Program that we got from the 

Government and I think that it is an indication that it isn’t good enough. Next winter if you have a 

program for giving assistance, make it available to everyone, publish it and let’s let everybody qualify 

for it and not just hand out a few dollars here and there and wherever you feel like. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G. Snyder: — (Minister of Labour) Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few words to the Resolution that 

was introduced by the Hon. Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). 

 

I want to say first of all that I have the very distinct impression that we are hearing the strains of a song 

that has been played before. As a matter of fact 12 months ago, in this Legislature, this Assembly 

considered a resolution which was very similar to the one which is presently before us. 

 

Both resolutions have the effect of urging the Government — the Federal Government – to create 

conditions of full employment in this country. I think one is entitled to ask a rather logical question: 

Why the duplication, Mr. Speaker: Let’s examine the whole matter just a little more closely. 

 

The 1972 resolution was adopted and its main thrust was made known to the senior government. Now, a 

year after, we are in a position to pass judgment on the effectiveness of the resolution in terms of the 

translation into action of the central recommendations of that resolution passed in 1972. We might start, 

I believe, by comparing the national unemployment rate last year with the current unemployment rate. 

 

The rate as of February 19, 1972 was 7.3 per cent and the corresponding rate, Mr. Speaker, for 1973 is 

exactly the same — 7.3 per cent. What is worse, the absolute number of unemployed persons has 

actually risen from 627,000 to 655,000 in 1973. The Trudeau administration has not only completely 

failed to reduce the substantial pool of unemployed persons in the past year, but it has actually added to 

it in substantial numbers. 

 

Well then, at least we are entitled to believe that the 1972 resolution has exerted some influence with 

regard to the solution of Canada’s employment difficulties this winter, through the 1972-73 Winter 

Works Program. Here again, we are doomed to disappointment. Amid much ballyhoo, the Federal 

Government announced a $350 million capital projects fund to provide loans and grants for provinces 

and municipalities to undertake job-creating projects over this past winter and over the next two years. 

 

This program, Mr. Speaker, is totally inadequate and if forecasts are anywhere near accurate, it will 

provide only 140,000 jobs during the current winter, which will barely 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1925 

scratch the surface and leave something in excess of another half a million Canadians still looking for 

work. 

 

Although it is small consolation, if nothing else, we should be able to report that the 1972 resolution led 

to the announcement of the 1972-73 Winter Works Program earlier than in the previous year, in order to 

allow provinces and municipalities to make appropriate plans for the proper utilization of these federal 

funds. But not so, Mr. Speaker. The many pleas for the release of details concerning the Federal plans 

sooner than in October as in the previous year, fell on deaf ears. The current winter employment scheme 

was not announced by the Hon. John Turner until December of 1972. 

 

Mr. Speaker, winter comes pretty early in the West and even the most sophisticated seasonal adjustment 

techniques which are used in Ottawa cannot alter that particular fact. 

 

Why the delay in formulating the plan? Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Turner indicated that the figures only 

became available late in the year to reveal an economic downturn during the third quarter of 1972. The 

credibility of this excuse is stretched beyond normal limits. The unemployment total was never below 

459,000 in 1972, even in the peak employment period of last summer. If the Federal Cabinet were 

unable to acquire accurate information from their own sources, then, Mr. Speaker, at least they should 

have listened to the provinces under those circumstances. 

 

In desperation, then, Mr. Speaker, we turn our attention to long-term solutions to unemployment, to 

ascertain whether last year’s resolution has been heeded in this respect. Several made known his 

long-awaited budget and how many jobs will that new budget of Mr. Turner’s provide? 

 

Well we are proudly informed, Mr. Speaker, that this time next year 300,000 more Canadians will be on 

the work force than previously. Well, what a letdown, Mr. Speaker! This number will hardly permit us 

to keep our heads above water in terms of absorbing the increases in the labor force in the coming year. 

Moreover, there is room for genuine doubt that the budget of Mr. Turner, the one just brought down a 

few weeks ago, is as expansionary as last year’s budget was. It will actually result in a budgetary deficit 

on a national accounts basis, which is $400 million smaller than that of last year. In addition, the big 

levers applied by the Federal Government to jack up the economy, in the form of tax cuts and 

government spending, tend to generate employment in the large industrialized areas, where it is needed 

the least. This kind of strategy, Mr. Speaker, discriminates against the less developed regions and fails to 

deal with the serious problems of Western Canada. 

 

The only logical explanation for the failure of the Federal Government to take into account the urgent 

and essential points raised in last year’s resolution is that the Trudeau administration has continued its 

policy of deliberately creating conditions of underemployment and unemployment in order to combat 

inflation. However, even in this endeavor, they have been unsuccessful. Prices in Canada have increased 

by almost six per cent in 1972. Although it undoubtedly boggles the minds of even the most ardent 

Federal Government supporters, the simple fact is that they have failed to come to grips in any 

meaningful way with two of the highest priority items with which any government 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1926 

can be confronted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one is forced to conclude that Federal Government mandarins have been playing a game of 

ping pong, with inflation on one side of the net and unemployment on the other. The subject in question 

is not a game, however, when the ping pong ball represents flesh and blood, Canadian citizens with bills 

to pay, with families to support and with career goals to achieve, and with the legitimate desire to share 

in the good life which the politicians in Ottawa say we all enjoy. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, the Members of this Assembly are forced to debate a resolution on 

unemployment again this year, standing in the same spot we occupied last year, with no noticeable 

progress to report in the intervening 12 months with the exception of the expression of a few 

high-sounding ideals during the Federal election campaign a few months ago. This time around, we are 

going to have to make our position a lot more forceful if we are to penetrate that dense fog with which 

Ottawa appears to be surrounded. 

 

Putting aside economic considerations, let us consider for a moment the social ramifications of 

unemployment. A person’s employment must be regarded, Mr. Speaker, as something more than merely 

an economic actively. In many respects the job shapes a worker’s personal attitude and his relationship 

to the world around him. His home, his role in the community, his friends, his financial, cultural and 

political associations, all relate indirectly to his occupation. Studies have shown that a good deal of an 

employee’s life centres on his work and gives him his major source of identity. From this point of view, 

the absence of employment makes an individual feel that he is outside the mainstream of productive 

society. 

 

The economic impact of unemployment is quite apparent and has been discussed in this Assembly by 

other speakers. It will suffice to say that unemployment exerts a chain reaction effect, in terms of losses 

of output, a reduction in personal incomes, declining purchasing power, lower business sales, and 

curtailed government revenues. As a measure of its significance, Mr. Speaker, it has been estimated that 

the wage loss occasioned by unemployment in Canada last year was approximately $4 billion. 

 

The Resolution stresses the need to discover long-term solutions to Canada’s employment difficulties. 

This is particularly urgent in the light of the current labor force trends. Canada has one of the 

fastest-growing work forces in the world, and the problem is and will be in the future to create enough 

new jobs to accommodate new entrants into the labor force, notably young people, our young men and 

women. 

 

Another important point to take into account is that, as a result of technological change, the occupational 

structure of existing employment is changing in such a way that unskilled and semi-skilled jobs are 

continuously disappearing and are being replaced by more sophisticated ones. Three-quarters of the jobs 

now available are skilled, technical and professional ones and only one-quarter are unskilled or 

semi-skilled. It is essential that we develop appropriate manpower training programs and policies which 

will avoid the situation in which the majority of job applicants have inadequate training background and 

must compete for one job in four for which their qualifications are sufficient, while the minority of 

applicants 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1927 

with the necessary qualifications have their pick of three jobs in four which require a higher level of 

education and training. Already, Mr. Speaker, there is a suggestion of a manpower shortage in certain 

specialized occupations, even while many persons are still without work. 

 

Members opposite have been quick to point their finger at the Government of Saskatchewan when 

discussing the need for job creation. We don’t pretend that unemployment is not a problem in this 

province. But we do think that we are taking reasonable action to alleviate it. The Saskatchewan jobless 

total in February was 20,000 for an unemployment rate of 5.9 per cent, compared with 7.3 per cent 

nationally. Of all the provinces in Canada, only Ontario, Manitoba and Alberta reported lower rates. 

While unemployment rose nationally between January and February, the number of unemployed in 

Saskatchewan actually declined by 4,000. It should be pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that there were 24,000 

persons in Saskatchewan unemployed in February 1970. This despite the fact that the Government had 

been in power for a number of years and had a number of years to anticipate and prepare for the 

problem, whereas the present administration had had a lesser period of time. 

 

But what is particularly significant, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the Saskatchewan labor force has been 

growing, with the addition of more women, young people and more persons moving from the rural areas 

to the cities. The more rigid Unemployment Insurance Commission regulations are largely responsible 

for bringing additional numbers of persons into the labor market. At the same time, the Department of 

Social Services regions have tightened up on their regulations to ensure that welfare claimants are 

registered for employment. Moreover, more people may be looking for work in response to the upswing 

in the economy over the last number of months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a consequence of these developments, the Saskatchewan labor force in 1972 averaged 

4,000 higher than in the previous year. The labor force in February, 1973 was 339,000, an increase of 

9,000 over that in February of the previous year. Yet, at the same time, unemployment remained 

unchanged. It is apparent then, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan has been largely 

successful in meeting the employment requirements of an expanding labor force. All 9,000 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — . . . Just listen for a minute. All 9,000 new entrants in the past 12 months have been 

absorbed into the labor force. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — These are facts, Mr. Speaker, they are not a fantasy. They can’t be disputed by 

Members opposite. 

 

Action taken by the Provincial Government to stimulate employment in this province, Mr. Speaker, has 

included the following measures: 

 

1. Participation in and financial enrichment of the Federal Winter Works Program. 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1928 

2. Provincial employment loans program. 

3. The provincial initiatives program under which grants were paid towards local government winter 

employment projects. 

4. The $5 million 1972-73 provincial municipal Winter Works Program, announced last September, Mr. 

Speaker, long before the Federal Government came forward with any job creating proposals and on the 

basis of the realities of the Saskatchewan winter, applicable from November 1 to May 31. 

5, The 1972 House Building Assistance Program, under which grants of some $800 were made available 

to individuals undertaking new housing construction or renovations. 

6. The acceleration of public works and Crown corporations’ capital projects, valued at a figure in 

excess of $7 million. 

7. The provincial housing program for senior citizens. 

8. The business loans programs, and the on-going program under the Provincial Government 

employment program during the summer months. 

 

And we are not finished, Mr. Speaker, we don’t suggest that the job has been done by any stretch of the 

imagination. 

 

The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will be established to carry on programs aimed at the 

improvement of living accommodations for the aged and for those in low and middle income brackets. 

The new Budget includes funds for programs to create jobs for young people during the coming 

summer. We are introducing longer range programs to stabilize the structure of employment. Plans will 

be implemented to facilitate the diversification of the agricultural industry, the development and 

processing of our primary resources and the establishment of secondary industry. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, as suggested in the Resolution prior to the amendment, the Government of 

Canada must assume the major responsibility for the initiation of lasting solutions to unemployment. To 

achieve full employment on a permanent basis and on a national basis, the Ottawa administration must 

take a close look at the number of economic and social measures including a much more expansionary 

monetary and fiscal policy, recognizing regional difference; more positive steps to encourage the 

development of secondary industries to allow for our natural resources to be processed in Canada; they 

must consider action to boost purchasing power; the operation of more appropriate occupational training 

programs; and a greater emphasis on the restructuring of labor demands to match labor supply. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, this country needs a rational and imaginative manpower strategy, the major goals 

of which are the efficient utilization of our human resources, the equitable distribution of income, and 

the provisions of opportunities for all of our citizens in a productive and fulfilling way. 

 

I will be very pleased to support the Motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: (Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, this Resolution is nothing more nor less than an 

attempt by the Provincial Government to avoid its own responsibilities and to avoid the necessity of 

carrying out some of its own campaign promises. 

 

Now, it is bad enough, Mr. Speaker, for a man — a sidewalk 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1929 

superintendent to stand around doing nothing while he watches somebody else doing a worthwhile 

activity. But the conduct of this Government is far worse than that. They condemn the activities of 

someone else while they themselves stand around, not in anyway fulfilling the obligations for which 

they were elected. 

 

The Federal Government has come to the aid of the unemployed people in Canada, to a large extent 

softening the blow of provincial mismanagement, notably provinces such as the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I should like to examine just briefly one or two of these job producing programs of this present NDP 

Government. To begin with there is the well known cancellation of the Choiceland Iron Mine project — 

another program which the former Government designed to increase employment in Saskatchewan. This 

is only one of a number; the Athabasca Pulp Mill is well known to us, another project to create jobs 

which this Government cancelled. It is obvious that the Department of Government Services has failed 

to carry out more than in a moderate way its obligations of last year according to the capital spending 

budget which it promised and which it asked approval for in this House. The $1 million highway 

program — the highway building up in Prince Albert — was not carried out. The only item in the 

Budget for Agriculture, the only capital item in the Government Services building estimates for 

agriculture, was not carried forward at all. 

 

Now there are some people who believe that some of the cutbacks last summer were due to the fact that 

a Federal election was anticipated in the fall. And it is pretty hard to point to a huge unemployment rate 

if, in fact, a huge unemployment rate is not in existence. 

 

The Government of course, this year in the face of rising unemployment, a serious unemployment rate, 

has cut back the PEP program. The generous industrial incentives that the Hon. Member for Canora (Mr. 

Matsalla) worries about, are due entirely to the fact that this Government has, in fact, no real projects 

which would qualify for the kind of incentive grants which the Federal Government would love to pay 

into Saskatchewan. 

 

The Federal Government would like nothing better than to increase substantially the money it pays to 

projects in Saskatchewan, if only the Provincial Government would do something to arrange the kind of 

program which would qualify. 

 

The activities of the Government and particularly of the Premier, indicate that the government wishes to 

ride off in all directions at once. I have in front of me a Leader-Post clipping of November 2, 1972. And 

the Premier is quoted by the Press as stating that: 

 

Concern for unemployment in the winter is certainly exaggerated or inaccurate. 

 

Now Mr. Blakeney says this and I quote: 

 

I realize that figures are very tricky and unreliable. But it does look like we are coping with 

unemployment as well as anyone else in Canada. We are launching what we consider a massive winter 

works program. 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1930 

The same thing occurred in the Budget Speech of the spring. The Hon. Minister of Finance (Mr. 

Cowley) was terribly upset over a 6.4 per cent rate. This despite the fact that the Premier said in the 

Leader-Post the rate in the decline of the province’s population is continuing. High unemployment rates 

such as in British Columbia may be a factor in keeping more people at home in Saskatchewan, but he 

was prepared to consider that it wasn’t anything worth worrying about. 

 

This was followed in the Budget and by the Estimates sometime later in a reduction of the STEP and 

PEP programs. If they carry on one more step I am sure that the entire Student Employment Program 

will be non-existent. It will become NOPE. 

 

We were then treated on the 13th day of March with a long list of irrelevancies from the Hon. Member 

of Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). He listed some 23 items, some of which had some relation to the 

Resolution before us, but most of which had no relation at all to the Resolution. And I am led to believe 

that the Hon. Member may well have prepared his remarks without having read the Resolution in 

support of which the speech was given. 

 

Now I should like to deal with a few of these items and point out to the House that the items in actual 

fact are a chronicle of the failure of the Provincial Government. 

 

To begin with, his first suggestion is that money be made available at low rates of interest for people 

desiring to build their own houses, particularly if the homes are built during the winter months. The 

province has done nothing. He has suggested that huge sums of money at low rates of interest should be 

made available to provincial housing corporations to develop housing for senior citizens, students, 

native people, farmers, co-operative housing. The Provincial Government has offered little or nothing. 

He suggests that a program of loans on a long-term basis with a low rate of interest should be provided 

to build tourist facilities in areas approved by the Provincial Government to guarantee proper facilities 

for the travelling public during the winter and summer. We looked at the Estimates and found a total 

lack of anything adequate in this area. He said there should be a program to develop parks within city 

limits and on a regional basis throughout the province, along the highway for travellers in the North and 

adjacent to historic sites. I might ask the Government what are they doing about this? He has suggested 

that the Federal Government should complete the Yellow Head Highway. And this in the face of an 

announced program by the Provincial Government to reduce the quality and cut back on its own 

highway construction. As a safety feature he thinks that overpasses should be built on the main 

highways across the country at every location where a railway crosses the main highway, whether it is 

No. 1 highway or any other east, west highway. I wonder, what is the Provincial Government doing 

about that. It is doing nothing. He then suggests that north-south roads into tourist areas and potential 

mineral producing districts in the northern parts of the province should be developed by the Provincial 

Government, although the necessity for some of these northern roads may well have been eliminated 

having regard to the general reduction in the activity in the North generated by this Government. 

 

He suggested that full senior citizen retirement pensions should be provided to anyone who has worked 

35 years. This 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1931 

despite the fact that in the years since the Trudeau Government has come to power, the old age pensions 

have virtually doubled in Canada and the Provincial Government despite offers of assistance from the 

Federal Government has done absolutely nothing for old age pensioners. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Gibberish! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Hon. Member says gibberish. The fact is that the Province of British Columbia is 

making provision for the senior citizens which is not in any way being matched by the Province of 

Saskatchewan and in fact, the Government is throwing money away which could well have been spent 

for senior citizens in Saskatchewan with the assistance of the Federal Government. This province is 

losing $9 million a year from the Federal Government, because the Provincial Government is not 

prepared to do its duty by our senior citizens. 

 

Item No. 10 by the Hon. Member for Regina North West. He says shorter work weeks should be 

introduced in Federal Industries and particularly starting in the Federal Civil Service in an effort to 

provide more jobs. 

 

I can tell you that this is a very sorry thing for the Hon. Member to have raised, particularly when the 

Provincial Government is presently working its own out of scope employees longer than anybody else. 

In fact, it makes resolutions, regulations, passes laws requiring business and industry, the ordinary 

working people of the province, the people trying make a living in ordinary business to reduce the work 

week to 40 hours. What has happened? The Provincial Government doesn’t apply the law to itself. The 

fact is that the shorter work weeks are demanded of the Federal Government but what about the 

Provincial Government? You have done nothing, except demand that somebody else do something. That 

is all. 

 

The New Democratic Party is very good at standing around like a bunch of sidewalk superintendents 

complaining of the failures of someone else. Doing nothing constructive itself. 

 

Item No. 11. He suggests that people have a chance to take over part of their pension plans for the 

construction of houses. Now what he doesn’t recognize is the damage that these things could do to 

pension plans. I certainly oppose any action which would reduce pension plans for the future. 

 

What he does suggest is that there should be exemptions for those of the lower income tax bracket. And 

he asks for complete tax exemptions. That is very interesting; the Hon. Member wants to have reduction 

in taxes. This one of the few Governments in Canada in the past two years that has actually increased 

income taxes. While the Federal Government is reducing taxes, the Provincial Government is increasing 

taxes and then complaining because taxes are not being reduced. That is the kind of nonsense we have 

been getting from the Government. 

 

From item 13 on, the suggestions of the Hon. Member wander farther and farther from the subject. He 

suggests that grants or subsidies should be provided at special interest rates for municipalities desiring to 

combat pollution by building of proper sewage treatment facilities. I shall be very interested to find out 

what the Hon. Member has to say when it comes to 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1932 

our resolution which says practically that with respect to the sewage facilities of Regina and Moose Jaw. 

I shall anticipate having the Hon. Member for Regina North West support the Resolution which I put on 

the Order Paper. But the fact is that the Provincial Government, while calling upon somebody else to do 

something is in fact, to date, doing virtually nothing at all. 

 

Item 14 — The Federal Government should attach a cost of living clause to the payment of 

unemployment insurance, so says the Hon. Member from Regina North West. I do not understand how 

you can encourage employment by increasing the benefits of unemployment. That is what the Hon. 

Member has suggested. I don’t understand how this can help employment at all. From then on, of 

course, the subject is barely touched upon; the next half dozen suggestions of the Hon. Member have 

absolutely nothing to do, or very little to do, with the Resolution before us or the proposed amendment. 

Now I would suggest to the Hon. Members that the contradictions of this Government in fact do boggle 

the mind, as suggested by the Hon. Minister of Labour. What I do suggest is that this Government has 

deliberately set about on a policy of cancellation of industries, reduction of employment and refusal to 

carry out its own program of capital works. It may well be an excusable item, if the Government says 

that the capital works program planned in the 1971 budget by the Liberals was not a program which they 

could carry out, that’s quite understandable. But one does find it hard to accept the fact that they are 

unable to carry out their own public works program, a shortfall of more than $3.5 million and that is 

$3.5 million of unemployment created by the Provincial Government. As I say, the fact that there was a 

Federal election on October 30, 1972, may well have had something to do with the deliberate holding 

back by this Government of its own capital works program. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What has that . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I am not entirely sure what it was to do with the Resolution at hand but the Hon. 

Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) spent a little of his time talking about the high cost of living and the 

increasing costs which are borne by Canadian citizens. In a question earlier today the Hon. Minister of 

Consumer Affairs (Mr. Tchorzewski) seemed to have made up his mind whether he should bother 

making any representations at all as far as the Federal Committee on food costs is concerned. He doesn’t 

seem to think it is a problem. The Government of Alberta seems to be concerned enough to have made a 

presentation to the Federal Government; but not the Saskatchewan Government. Either they have no 

suggestions to make and no ideas on the subject (which I accept), or else they don’t consider it a 

problem. But if they don’t consider it a problem I suggest that the Hon. Minister of Labour should get 

together with the Hon. Minister of Consumer Affairs because they are not as one on this issue. 

 

I only want to comment briefly on the remarks of the Hon. Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla). He 

suggests that there is some difficulty or there was some difficulty in passing programs through for 

approval to the Federal Government. I would remind the Hon. Member that the Federal Government in 

announcing its program had requested each province to have a co-ordinator. These programs were 

intended to be co-ordinated by a person in 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1933 

each province appointed by the Provincial Government. The Provincial Government in Saskatchewan 

did appoint a co-ordinator and the mismanagement of this Government was more at fault for delays than 

was any problem at the other end. Ottawa had no end of difficulty with the Provincial Government when 

it came to the programs which were submitted to the Provincial Government for onward transmission to 

Ottawa. 

 

I want to tell the Hon. Member for Canora that if he wants to know why there were delays in having 

approval to his program, he should look to two areas. Fist of all there is the very real possibility that the 

Hon. Member didn’t know how to complete the request for the requisition for the grant. Let’s assume, 

Mr. Speaker, that the program was in fact, or that he had properly framed his request, to fit the program, 

that his request was in order. When he submitted it to the Provincial Government I can assure him that if 

he looks carefully he may well discover that the delays were with the Provincial Government, the 

Provincial co-ordinator, for political purposes was more than willing to delay the onward transmission 

of programs submitted by municipalities in Saskatchewan. They did it time and time again and I am told 

on more than one occasion that when municipal bodies and municipal committees arrived in Regina to 

discuss their winter works program with the Co-ordinator they got a political lecture. It was political 

games by the Provincial Government as much as anything else that caused delays in Saskatchewan 

having its programs approved on time to do worthwhile activity in the local communities. That is, more 

than anything else the reason why Saskatchewan, more than any other province, had difficulty with its 

winter works program. 

 

Mr. Wood: — I am wondering, could the Hon. Member advise as to what those municipalities were that 

got the political lecture. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — I ask him to put it on the Order Paper, Mr. Speaker. I am prepared to give 

consideration to the request of the Hon. Minister. If I can be assured by the Hon. Minister that they will 

not use this on any political vendetta, a matter on which I am gravely in doubt, if I can be assured that 

these municipalities will not suffer thereby, I would be quite prepared to give him one or two names as a 

test. I won’t do that immediately but I undertake to the Hon. Minister that I will give it serious 

consideration and if I am satisfied that no retribution or retaliation is likely, I will be pleased to give him 

at least one name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore support the essential argument in this Resolution which is that the Province of 

Saskatchewan has failed the unemployed in this province. It has failed to do anything worthwhile or 

constructive to resolve the unemployment problem except one thing. It has talked big, it has used 

tremendous language about the tremendous problem but it has, in fact, done nothing. More than any 

other group in Canada the New Democratic Party is responsible for unemployment in Saskatchewan. I, 

therefore, support the amendment but not the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1934 

Mr. J. G. Richards: — (Saskatoon University) Mr. Speaker, the comments in this debate I think are a 

good indication of the sweeping generalities that have so characterized debates in the political arena of 

Canada about unemployment and one more nail, if you like, in the coffin of the incredibility of political 

institutions. I hope that I shall not be guilty of this kind of sweeping generalization, much as in the past I 

have been guilty of going to the high plateau and talking in certain generalities about some subjects as 

nationalizing the oil industry. I shall try, Mr. Speaker, to limit my remarks to what I hope are some 

concrete discussion about what can be done on various levels of government with respect to the 

problem. I find not only the Members opposite guilty of sweeping generalizations, they are also guilty of 

buck passing. The intent of their amendment, of course, is to divert attention to the unemployment 

situation away from Federal responsibility and place it totally in the field of provincial politics in 

Regina. On the other hand, our motion as the Member opposite was quick to point up — a very 

intelligent Member there, sharp on his toes — I might say that our own option was designed to elude 

blame and to put all of it on the Federal Government. I think as I said in the introduction here, we have a 

serious, serious problem about the credibility and about this process of buck passing. We have produced 

the situation in which we have a kind of fatalism, an insensitivity among the country’s leaders on the 

whole question of unemployment. Unemployment has become part of the political rhetoric, nothing gets 

done. 

 

I should like to quote from the annual report in Canada Trust, a distinguished financial institution of our 

country, a document which was circulated to all Members in the last couple of weeks. There is a fine, 

upstanding photograph of a distinguished looking gentleman staring out from a bull’s-eye on the second 

page and Mr. Taylor quotes and I quote him: 

 

The facts tell us we are going to have to learn to live with substantially higher unemployment than in 

the past. We have arrived at this situation which the leaders of our country accept, and it’s a mark of 

their insensitivity. Current high levels of unemployment are a thing that is with us forevermore. 

 

The fact that we have unemployment in Canada of over seven per cent whereas many industrial 

countries consider two per cent to be atrociously high is sloughed over. What are some of the structural 

aspects, Mr. Speaker, of unemployment in the labor market in Canada? 

 

I should like to quote some statistics coming from Statistics Canada — Employment Earnings and 

Hours. The most recent catalogue number in the Legislative Library. They point out some very 

interesting facts. I quote from the years May, 1969 to May, 1972, a three-year period and there are the 

index numbers of employment in various sectors of the economy. If you take the index of employment 

in manufacturing, that declined from 125.8 in 1969 to 123.9, for an actual 1.5 per cent decline in 

manufacturing employment in Canada over that three-year period. We consider ourselves to be a 

manufacturing country, a developed country, but we have to face this kind of reality that our actual 

manufacturing employment is going down. Obviously we are a country which is increasingly involved 

in 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1935 

service industry. In the same period employment in service industries increased by 14.3 per cent. We 

cannot have beauticians and teachers, and garage mechanics in service industries unless we have more 

primary job creating activity. In our reputed forest industry which is of course of great importance to the 

country as a whole, we had a 18.5 per cent decline in that sector over that three-year period. In fact the 

only primary or secondary industry in aggregate which was increasing employment in this period was 

mining. Mining increased by four per cent during that period. Again it drives home the argument that 

ever since Canada’s beginning we have been dependent upon the export of certain essential staples to 

various parts of the world, whether it be furs, fish, timber, wheat, now it is oil, pulp, nickel. We are the 

hewers of wood and the drawers of water for empires through the ages. In some sense Canada is the 

richest underdeveloped country in the world. We do not have a firm independent and strong 

manufacturing sector. Our manufacturing as all Members are doubtless fully aware is two-thirds 

controlled by the Americans. I submit that these are the severe structural problems of our country that 

are not going to be solved, we are not going to solve unemployment problems unless we are prepared to 

inject a great deal more socialism in Canadian politics. 

 

Now, to return to the provincial arena, what are some of the aspects structurally of unemployment in the 

labor market in Saskatchewan. We have 2,000 farmers on the average leaving the land every year. We 

have stagnant manufacturing employment. We have a situation in which the labor force in 

Saskatchewan, 1969 — 350,000, 1970 — 350,000, 1971 — 348,000, 1972 — 352,000. Our total labor 

force is obviously static. That 4,000 increase from 1971 to 1972 although encouraging, half of that 

increase was taken up by an increase in the number of unemployed from 13,000 to 15,000. 

 

Once could argue, and many have argued, why bother? Why bother about the population of 

Saskatchewan and its job-creating potential if we manage to maintain per capita incomes at a decent 

level. That certainly is the attitude of Federal politicians in Ottawa who have various kinds of 

farm-support programs designed to get farmers off the land and who are quite content to have purely 

capital intensive industry going on in Western Canada. I think we have to ask that question seriously if 

we are prepared to put some effort into trying to arrive at a reasonable answer. I think the answer is 

there. I think the answer revolves around the necessity to maintain some minimum threshold from which 

to operate as a Provincial Government with a degree of real autonomy. If we allow the provincial 

population to decline, then we are going to arrive at a situation where, like the Maritimes, we are 

constantly dependent upon Ottawa’s approval for new initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about provincial strategy. I have some sympathy with the amendment made by 

the Members opposite to the extent that I think a great deal more could be done by the Provincial 

Government in micro-economic policy determination to relieve unemployment and especially given the 

inadequacies of Federal policies. Mr. Speaker, there are two areas, and I shall try and be concrete. I 

think one is the absolute need to stem farm depopulation. I think there are certain good programs which 

are now being conceived even if they are in an embryonic state. FarmStart for example. The basic 

philosophy here is to 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1936 

subsidize people not land and capital. Previous agricultural programs which concentrate solely on the 

subsidization of land and capital are obviously self-defeating in the sense that they are encouraging the 

very processes of capitalization of larger farms and of driving people off the land. We must be prepared 

to reverse these situations. Further, the conclusion stares out at us. In organized industry which has a 

degree of monopoly power to administer prices that control entries into the business and to undertake a 

great deal of economic decision making independent of market forces, one can have industrial peace, 

one can have industrial stability. Obviously we are in the process of trying to give that analogous power 

to farming. 

 

The second whole area which I think is going to be absolutely essential if we are going to have a 

reasonable provincial strategy of job creation, is in the area of new policies for resource industry. Mr. 

Speaker, let me quote from a document of some substance which I trust Members on both sides of the 

House will feel is supportive. It is the report on Natural Resources Policy in Manitoba, written by an 

ex-Liberal Federal Cabinet Minister, Mr. Kierans and commissioned by a provincial NDP Government, 

Mr. Schreyer’s in Manitoba. I quote from Mr. Kierans: 

 

A new resource policy must recommend an effective method of provincial appropriation of the returns 

from its own wealth. 

 

It bluntly calls for: 

 

There is an absolute need for Provincial Governments to end the neo-colonialism that sends trade 

missions to the financial centres of the world offering all the privileges that older colonialism once 

imposed on subject peoples. 

 

That might be a critic’s left wing rhetoric but it comes from a distinguished ex-Cabinet Minister and I 

am sure, therefore, that Members opposite will feel fully supported. Now the essence of what Mr. 

Kierans is stating with respect to resource policy is that provincial governments have been competing 

against one another in trying to attract resource industries and they thereby bid away the bulk of the 

advantages to be gained from these actual investment projects. Until in the final analysis little remains 

except the actual jobs created and the actual income spent of those wage earners. All the profits and the 

rents which could be accruing to the provinces inasmuch as the provinces are rightful owners of the 

natural resources within their provincial boundaries are being lost. 

 

The same point was made rather succinctly at a local level with an editorial in the third issue of Next 

Year Country. I quote again. 

 

The resource industries of potash, oil and forests would have to be brought under public ownership on 

terms sufficiently favorable to the province to provide it with major new sources of revenue. 

 

That is trying to make more concrete what Mr. Kierans has said in abstract. If we are going to proceed 

down the roads which Mr. Kierans indicates, he lays out four options which I 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1937 

shall come to. We have got to be prepared to take control of the basic resource industries within our 

provincial boundaries at a price which allows us to achieve thereby a substantial increase in provincial 

revenues, and with these provincial revenues to be prepared to subsidize public works projects, the 

creation of public goods, such as schools, hospitals, etc. Also we must subsidize certain secondary 

industrial activity within our provincial boundaries. Let me hasten to add that subsidization should be in 

the form of subsidies to locally controlled and public industry. My faith in the potential of small private 

businessmen substantially to add to the major entrepreneurial force in creating jobs is definitely limited. 

I think that we are going primarily to have to rely upon the public entrepreneur and not the private 

entrepreneur. The small Saskatchewan businessman is fine to fill up the gaps and provide service 

industries, and far be it from me to suggest the Provincial Government should be running restaurants and 

small implement dealers etc. Nonetheless the basic thrust will have to be to use these funds generated 

from control of resource industries for public enterprise in secondary manufacture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I should like to sum up the fact that it is not merely a question of provincial 

strategies. I have outlined two areas, one where I think the Government is proceeding along the right 

track with increased emphasis on subsidizing people and not capital in farm programs. In the second 

area is the need for a total new resource policy of which I am much less optimistic as to whether the 

Government is making much progress. Obviously unemployment and manpower policies depend 

crucially on the Federal Government. 

 

I have here one small item to refer to, which came to me from the city of Saskatoon. It indicates the 

kinds of problems which provincial governments are going to be faced with in dealing with this cruel 

international world of protectionism. It is a letter which was addressed to a Saskatoon business from the 

State of Montana encouraging it to close up its operations in Saskatoon and return to the United States, 

under the infamous Nixon’s DISC (Domestic International Sales Company) procedures. The letter was 

encouraging this company to close up its Saskatoon operations and return to the United States and if it 

did, “You can organize as a domestic international sales company for exporting and defer perhaps 

indefinitely payment of half of your US corporate income tax liability.” This is the kind of competition 

we are faced with in a world of international protectionism. In order to counter this kind of 

protectionism we need the federal clout which can only be provided by a tough policy coming from 

Ottawa. But will that policy come, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When you return back to the statements at the beginning of my speech, of Mr. Taylor, chairman of 

Canada Trust, who is quite prepared to proceed indefinitely with our current levels of high 

unemployment you see the kind of pressure that exists from our business community on the Federal 

Government. “Chronic inflation is still the greatest threat we face.” That is the kind of thinking which is 

characteristic of the board rooms of Canada, 7.3 per cent unemployment remains a good deal less 

important in their minds than the inflation figures with which we live. In that kind of situation, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it is obvious we need to have a better micro-economic planning policy at the provincial 

level plus strong recommendations from the Provincial Legislature for new policies in Ottawa. With that 



 

March 27, 1973 

 

 

1938 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:13 o’clock p.m. 


