
























































Hansard: April 24, 1973


2911 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

63rd Day 
 

Tuesday, April 24, 1973. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Status of Women Report 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should 
like to direct a question to the Premier, I have had some information from the Status of Women 
Committee in Regina that the Premier or someone in the Government promised to set up an advisory 
committee to look into and advise the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Tchorzewski) on the 
implementation of the recommendations of the Status of Women Report, with the special attention to 
those recommendations that can be implemented by the Provincial Legislature. They were promised this 
sometime in January and they haven’t heard anything. My question to the Premier is: Is he aware of this 
promise that they feel was made to them and if so would he be prepared to tell the House when he 
intends to set that advisory committee up? They also would like to be consulted before the committee is 
set up as to its membership which would include the kind of people who should be on it. 
 
Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, quite frankly I don’t remember the promise but I don’t 
by any means say I didn’t give it because it is a thing we intend to do in any case and I might well have 
indicated to someone that that was the case. The present position is that we have a small working group 
within the Government reviewing the Status of Women Committee Report and making some 
recommendations to us with respect to a terms of reference for an external committee. The small internal 
group is headed by the Deputy Minster of Consumer Affairs, Mrs. Hynd. We have had one opportunity 
to give consideration to possible members of the external committee. We are expecting from the internal 
group some recommendations shortly. I wouldn’t wish to give an indication of when we would be able 
to move on this but I would anticipate, subject to any comments that the Minister of Culture might have 
as to the likely rate of progress, that it would be a time measured in weeks and not in months. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — A supplementary question. Would the Minister or the Premier or the Deputy Minister 
of Youth and Culture maybe transmit this information to the Status of Women Committee here in 
Regina. 
 
Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski: — (Minister of Culture and Youth) Mr. Speaker, certainly I have spoken to 
Members of the Status of Women Steering Committee on a number of occasions about this and I 
certainly will be speaking to them again. 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2912 

Ward System of Urban Municipality Act 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, I have a question I should like to direct to the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood) or in his absence the Premier or any other Member of the front bench 
who would like to comment. 
 
I can understand why the Minster isn’t here this afternoon. After the unveiling in today’s Leader-Post of 
a deliberate, deceptive, deceitful and vicious plot of this Government opposite to interfere with the 
democratic rights of the citizens of Regina and Saskatoon; to interfere and manufacture phoney news 
releases, phoney, ‘phone calls and phoney committees and by every other devious means known only to 
the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier or the Minster ready to tear up that Ward Bill and 
burn it, withdraw it from the House? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know to what the Member opposite refers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Oh, oh! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The member opposite is required by the rules of this House to direct questions to the 
Government. If he is asking whether or not we are prepared to stop proceeding with the Urban 
Municipality Act and The Urban Municipal Elections Act, then the answer is no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — If he is asking whether the Government or any Members of the Government have 
been manufacturing news releases or otherwise, interfering with the processes of the news media, the 
answer is no. I am not aware of what else he may be referring to, but it he has nay particular points 
which he thinks the Government is acting upon in a way in which he believes are inappropriate, I would 
suggest that he might put his question in somewhat less colourful language. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, the only reason that I didn’t put a motion to adjourn the House and 
debate this was because this Bill was before the House and that is the only reason we didn’t debate this 
question in that manner. 
 
Now for the Premier’s information I will be prepared to hand over this morning’s copy of the 
Leader-Post to let him read the article. If he is happy with that and if he is convinced that they are doing 
nothing, well, Mr. Speaker, I am completely amazed at the Premier. Here, you can have a look at the 
article. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to make it clear that whatever the Leader-Post proposes 
to print, fine. I read the story and they attributed nothing so far as I could see to the Government. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Oh, oh! 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2913 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I say flatly that the Government is not involved in any of the allegations referred 
to by the former Minister of Municipal Affairs, the Member for Wilkie. 
 
Mr. C. P. Macdonald: — (Milestone) I should like to direct a question then to the Attorney General 
(Mr. Romanow). 
 
The threat of deliberate political blackmail by ‘phone calls threatening the mayor of the city of Regina 
and the aldermen of the city of Regina by NDPs, threatening their political support, is a disgrace to the 
democratic system in Regina. It now smacks of our own Watergate affair right here in the city of 
Regina. Now, the question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Attorney General a part of that plot as the report 
indicates the newspaper or is he willing to take action to protect the independence of local Government 
in Saskatchewan and have an immediate investigation? 
 
Hon. R. Romanow: — (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult to understand any questions 
that are asked by my learned friend from Milestone. It is generally typical of the Liberal front bench 
because I don’t think they know themselves precisely where they stand on particular public issues. If the 
member is talking about threatening ‘phone calls in the sense of threatening, improper, criminal ‘phone 
calls, we will take any steps that are open to him to report it to the police, and we will take any steps of 
the Department of the Attorney General that are within our purview to make sure that that is eliminated. 
If, however, he is talking about ‘phone calls that say that the mayor’s political future is threatened 
because of his obstinate refusal to enact a progressive piece of legislation, that is in the proper avenue 
and it is legal to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And you know something, I wouldn’t bet very much either for the political future of 
the mayor if he continues this approach of obstructionism to good positive legislation in this province. 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — (Milestone) Isn’t that just typical of the minister who dispenses justice in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. I want to read . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think we are getting all out of order on this because Beauschesne makes it 
quite clear that statements in newspapers cannot be read on which to preface questions. There is a Bill 
before the House, the Members will have ample time to express their feelings at that time. To read 
newspapers and so on and base a question on it, Beauschesne makes it quite clear that it is out of order. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — This question of newspapers. I should like to remind you that we had a special debate a 
year ago in this House when you quoted a newspaper article at that time as a basis for allowing the 
debate. I just want to remind you of that if you look back in the record you will find it. Secondly we are 
not 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2914 

attempting to debate the Bill, we’ll debate that in due course. We are attempting to ask the Government 
questions about a dirty little leak that came out of their Government about a scummy little act that has 
been condoned by the Attorney General and obviously by the Premier, that is what we are trying to ask. 
 
Mr.Speaker: — I think this can be debated when the Bill comes up. Our procedure has been to allow a 
question and a supplementary question and now we have had two questions and a supplementary on this 
same item which I think is not according to the rules. 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — (Milestone) I am asking a supplementary question, which is my privilege and it has 
nothing to do with the Bill involving the Ward System. I am asking about the integrity of this 
Legislature and the insult of your Attorney General to the mayor of the city of Regina and the aldermen 
of the city of Saskatoon. What this newspaper article says is that: 
 

A meeting called Monday night at which the Premier, Mr. Wood the Regina MLAs and Saskatoon 
MLAs were to attend along with Regina NDP executives. 

 
I want to ask the Premier if he was in attendance at that meeting and if so did he condone the actions and 
the decisions of that meeting? Also I would suggest that if any MLA did attend that meeting he should 
resign. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The Member asked, was I at the meeting. The answer is No. The member asked, by 
inference, whether I was aware of what went on at the meeting, the answer is No. I found out some 
reports later but I was not at the meeting. I had no prior knowledge of what was going on. Thirdly, I do 
not either condemn or condone what went on at that meeting. That’s the responsibility of the people who 
were at the meeting. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — He is not responsible for the actions of his Party, that’s nonsense. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in this Legislature I am responsible for what this Government does. I 
am not responsible for what the New Democratic party does, in this province or throughout the 
Dominion, any more than any Member on that side of the House is responsible for what the Liberal 
Party does in any of its many machinations all across this province and all across this Dominion. I speak 
for the Government of Saskatchewan, that is what I am required to speak for and that is what I propose 
to speak for. If you have quarrels with any other group, direct your questions there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I cannot allow this to continue. This is not a debate. 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — On a Point of Order, if you don’t mind. The Premier answered a question, then he 
got up and made a speech on his 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2915 

second reply. Certainly we should be permitted the same privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I should like to read the House, Beauschesne, page 151, Citation 177. 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — (Moose Jaw North) Take it as read. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Will the Hon. Members act accordingly when the Speaker is on his feet. Citation 177: 
 

Reading telegrams, letters or extracts from newspapers as an opening to a question when the Orders of 
the Day are called is an abuse of the rules of the House. It is not good parliamentary practice to 
communicate written allegations to the House and then ask Ministers either to confirm or deny them. 
It is a Member’s duty to ascertain the truth of any statement before he brings it to the attention of 
Parliament. This has been decided long ago in the United Kingdom, House of Commons. On the 14th 
of June, 1882, Mr. Speaker Brand in preventing a Member reading a telegram or a newspaper and 
founding a question on it, pointed out the extreme inconvenience of founding questions on every 
telegram and every newspaper. I am bound to say he added that it appears to me that before questions 
of such gravity are put an Hon. Member should take some measure to ascertain the truth of the 
telegram. 

 
RESOLUTIONS 

 
Resolution No. 20 — To Urge the Federal Government To Construct 

A New Runway at Regina Airport. 
 
Mr. K. R. Macleod — (Regina Albert Park) moved, seconded by Mr. McPherson (Lakeview): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government to construct anew main Northwest-Southeast 
runway at Regina Airport at least one mile south and west of the present main runway and that the 
present East-West runway be extended to the West, for the use of all jet and large aircraft. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the resolution which I propose today calls for a first step in a phased 
redevelopment of Regina airport. The present runways, particularly the main northwest-southeast 
runway create an unbearable noise hazard to large numbers of Regina people and more than $30 million 
of real estate is affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to allow the Members to have full appreciation of the situation as it presently exists and the 
result of the proposed changes, I have asked the pages to distribute some material to the Members which 
I would identify as follows: The main pieces are two maps. The larger map is a proposal drawn by a 
private organization in Regina for submission to the Minister of Transport and to the city of Regina. The 
smaller map is a part of a report which I refer to as the Grimble Report prepared for (it’s an independent 
study) the city of Regina. 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2916 

They are very similar but there are some slight differences. To begin with I would refer the Hon. 
Members to the larger map. 
 
The larger map shows the present situation at Regina airport with the main east-west runway and the 
northwest-southeast runway in place with the airport circled with a heavy dark circle. For those who are 
familiar with the airport you will observe that there is at the present time a button, at least that is what 
we refer to it, as a button on the east-west runway. It is proposed that an extension to the west of some 
2,000 feet be made to make that east-west runway a total runway of some 8,200 and that a brand new 
northwest-southeast runway of some 12,000 feet be created south and west and that is the very large 
runway which is drawn to the south and to the west of the present airport runway apparatus and the 
setup as it is now presently located. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that 12,000 foot runway would accommodate all jet aircraft and all jumbo aircraft of the 
size now manufactured for commercial use in the world. The essence of it is that if you produce that 
runway to the north and to the north-west and to the south-east you would observe that it does not cross 
any part of the city of Regina, the built-up area, and that the main noise levels would be substantially 
away from the present built up part of Regina. 
 
Now I refer to the smaller map, Mr. Speaker, because the Grimble Report has one or two slight changes 
and additions. If you look at the smaller map you will observe the present airport setup and then the 
proposed extension of the east-west runway is approximately 5,000 feet. It is a considerable extension 
beyond that which had originally been proposed. The Grimble Report actually proposes that the 
northwest-southeast runway intersects with the east and west runway and that they serve as taxi strips 
for each other. Consequently it is not necessary to build the type of taxi strip that is envisioned in the 
first or larger map. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, involved in the Grimble Report map you will observe some fancy wavy lines drawn 
around the new runways. These are the noise measurement indications and an extension will show that 
the all-dangerous levels of noise are away from the built–up parts of the city of Regina. None of the 
troubles which presently afflict large parts of Regina would actually occur to the citizens of Regina if 
the runways were built as indicated. The Grimble report, as I mentioned, was an independent report 
submitted to the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposal then is basically that not less than 2,000 feet be added to the present runway. 
If the Grimble Report is accepted it would come close to 5,000 feet. And secondly, that a brand new 
main runway of 10,000 or 12,000 feet be created on the northwest-southeast direction parallel to the first 
old main runway or the one which is presently in use and which causes such tremendous hazard to the 
city of Regina. 
 
The immediate cost of this proposal would be about $7 million. The main runway would cost something 
in the vicinity of $5 million — runways do not come cheap. If you look at the other makings on the 
Grimble map you will see heavy lines to the top left hand corner of it and that is the proposed future 
development that is possible, although not necessary. It is possible if it should be desired at some future 
date to replace the present terminal with a new terminal to the west. I might say 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2917 

that is not part of my recommendation or proposal. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there have been some alternate proposals and sometimes a few objections. One of 
the other suggestions is that a new airport should be constructed closer to the city of Moose Jaw. This 
may well be a future development. But it is a substantial time down the line. Any movement farther to 
the west would create serious air corridor conflicts with Moose Jaw. In fact, there is at present time, 
close to a conflict with Moose Jaw. This would not cause any difficulty. If the entire airport were picked 
up and moved to the west, 2, 5 or 10 miles it could be a cost of $50 million or more. It is not likely that 
$50 million or more could be paid out of the Federal Government at one time to create an entirely new 
airport 5 or 8 miles west of Regina. Consequently, it is better to suggest that a $7 million expenditure be 
made to resolve the problem that future developments be permitted to take place at an appropriate time. 
Instead of an airport 5, 8 or 10 miles west of Regina, the Ministry of Transport has, in fact, suggested 
that if an entire pick-up of the airport is to take place it should be taken north of Regina and that some 
central point be located between Regina and Saskatoon and that a major airport serve both cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon. I regard that suggestion, Mr. Speaker, as totally impractical and I would oppose 
that kind of a suggestion. But that is one suggestion that was made from the Ministry of Transport in 
reply to a suggestion that an entirely new airport be built west of Regina. 
 
The present solution, which I propose, has substantial support from citizens in Regina, from the city 
government and I hope will have the moral support of Members of this Legislature. To be effective this 
change in runway location would require that the city of Regina amend its bylaws to effect a sterilization 
of the area around the end of the glide path. It is no use moving the runway only to find that people 
again build underneath the glide path and thus create a renewal of the problem. The present runways, I 
might add, would be available for all small aircraft. The private aircraft and small aircraft don’t cause 
the kind of trouble that exists with the huge jets and consequently they would continue to use the present 
runway. 
 
This is not a wasteful proposal. The present heavy traffic causes runway deterioration and we are going 
to find ourselves replacing runways and making major improvements to runways periodically as heavy 
aircraft are employed on a regular basis by airlines. In fact, I am informed that whenever a large aircraft 
rests 39 times in front of the terminal building, the area must be inspected by the Department of 
Transport personnel. That is the result of those very heavy pieces of equipment that we are now flying 
around between our cities. So re-location of the main runway is consequently a most important feature 
of my proposal. It is the essence today of the proposal being made to the city of Regina by private 
proposals and by the Grimble Report. 
 
I might say that 85 per cent of all landings are on the main north-south runway. An extension of the 
east-west runway still causes slight, but very slight, problems to the city of Regina for that 15 per cent of 
the time when the aircraft need to cross over the city of Regina. I might also add that in thinking of 
changing the location of an airport and this has 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2918 

occurred, there are many people suggesting it, it is to be noted that 97 per cent of all loading in Regina 
come and originate in the city of Regina. It is to be admitted that this proposal is of immediate benefit to 
the citizens of the city of Regina. It may well be suggested that it is merely a local matter; it may be 
suggested that it ought not properly to come before the Legislature. I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is 
important to get the support of the Members of Regina and areas around Regina and the moral support 
of this Legislature to encourage the Department of Transport to go ahead with what I suggest is a very 
necessary change in the airport location and the runway location to benefit people, particularly in the 
southern part of Regina. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I have pleasure in moving this Resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. M. McPherson: — (Regina Lakeview) Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say a few words on this 
today. I want to compliment those who have worked so hard to prepare these maps and to give all the 
Members an indication of the effect it does have on certain areas of the city. The constituency of Regina 
Lakeview happens to be one of those along with Albert Park. As the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. 
Romanow) and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) know, who live in that great constituency of 
Regina Lakeview, they get awakened quite often with the planes, Mr. Speaker. They have been urging 
me to do something about it. I am certainly going to do something about it. 
 
The Member from Albert Park has indicated, toady, the things that can be done. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
plan that fits in with his. I would ask leave to adjourn the debate at this time, so that I can bring it 
up-to-date. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Final Report of the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor 
Regulations in Saskatchewan 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Faris (Arm River): That 
the Final report of the Special Committee on the Review of Liquor Regulations in Saskatchewan be now 
received. 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, before adjourning debate on this particular motion I had 
discussed the work of the Committee in general, the nature of the study and the extent of the study that 
was undertaken by the Committee. May I say, again, that I think it was a good Committee. It was a good 
use for the inter-sessional committee concept and I think it was a study that certainly will be of real 
value to this Government and any other Government that follows with respect to a blueprint insofar as 
action is concerned in this general field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take any particular extended time period on the report. I do want to 
comment on a few of the recommendations that I feel are a little bit difficult 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2919 

perhaps to implement, some that I don’t agree with completely, before adjourning debate. I think this is 
one aspect of the report that there are extensive recommendations in there. There are a number, I am 
sure, that I myself and other Members of the Committee don’t support wholeheartedly. But I think that 
is the value of the report. All of these various things were put out and put forth and they are there for 
discussion purposes and I just want to comment on a few of them. 
 
I think the Recommendation No. 10 on page 38 of the report on the surface, sounds fair and sounds 
reasonable. I suppose you can certainly argue for restricting advertising as far as liqueur is concerned. 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe it is a workable one, I don’t believe it is going to 
accomplish anything really, unless and until we can cut out movies, television, films and everything 
where there are all kinds of references to the use of liquor. So merely to implement a move in that 
respect, I don’t think will result in very much of an improvement in the present situation. I think it needs 
to be more extensive than that. I think, also, until we can shut out advertising by way of American 
magazines, other Canadian magazines and so on, that at the moment to penalise a few people in the 
province really is about all we are doing and we are not really stopping advertising. Mr. Speaker, I have 
been of different minds on this particular point on different occasions. I first felt that there is really 
nothing wrong with prevention of prohibition of advertising but I have looked at the present situation 
and have to feel that to move to prevent advertising, as we are suggesting, really isn’t very practical. I 
am not so sure it is going to accomplish what we want it to. Better controls and more restrictions 
perhaps, yes, that is one aspect, but not to shut it out completely. 
 
I should also like to urge the Government, Mr. Speaker, to move along fairly rapidly on those 
recommendations dealing with rehabilitation, those recommendations, for example, dealing with the 
industrial alcohol program with the better education type of program that is mentioned. In short, Mr. 
Speaker, to take what steps it can. This doesn’t necessarily mean spending a lot of money to develop 
improved attitudes to drinking and a greater awareness of the potential danger that is contained. I know 
it is going to be a slow process, it is going to be a continuing process and it isn’t going to be easy. I also 
hope, Mr. Speaker, that Government efforts in this regard will utilise community organizations be they 
service clubs or fraternal organizations, groups, for example, and I think the classic group in this respect 
is Alcoholics Anonymous and the various groups that hey have throughout the province. I would hope 
certainly Government efforts in this regard for prevention and better attitudes toward liquor and the 
handling of it will utilise fully the many people and many organizations throughout the province that are 
intersected and are concerned in this connection. I think Government must never give the impression 
that it alone is the chief agency or the main agency involved in this task. Because I think if it takes that 
approach the efforts of the Government will fail in this regard. I realise this is a difficult thing to ask the 
Government to do and at the same time not to become too directly involved, but to involve themselves 
to see that the work does get done. 
 
I think the Government has a real responsibility to spend what funds it requires to launch programs of a 
rehabilitative and preventative nature. If it is necessary to raise more money 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2920 

from the sale of liquor or the price to handle this, well I, for one, will certainly have no objection. 
 
Now the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson) in his remarks in this debate, Mr. Speaker, made some 
observations with respect to drinking in general versus excessive drinking. I think he pointed out that a 
bottle of beer in the home or in the car or at a picnic table is really no different, no matter where one 
chooses to have it. The problem is, and I say so very seriously, Mr. Speaker, we are not all as sensible as 
he is when it comes to handling liquor in that respect. Education programs, good as they are and the 
objectives that we all hold for them, I have a feeling are not going to solve all of the problems and it is 
going to take a good deal of time to bring this about. 
 
The native problem in Saskatchewan is one that is now, I think, deserving of a good deal of attention 
from the Government opposite. It is one, Mr. Speaker, that the native people themselves are concerning 
themselves with and involving themselves in. I believe the Native Alcohol Council is an example of the 
kind of agency involved here as one that should be assisted by the Government opposite. I am not 
thinking entirely of funds, I am thinking, for example, the provision of adequate training for staff 
personnel at some of the various centres that are now operating and others that they may well propose in 
future to operate. 
 
I think that the basic preventative program and the basic approaches as far as treatment and 
rehabilitation for the native people are concerned are no different than for any other group or any other 
group of citizens. There is no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that the people handling the programs for 
the native people should primarily be native people themselves. This is why I suggest to the Government 
that they make some assistance available to train people in this respect. 
 
I, again, express my hope that the Government will make available to the Alcoholism Commission 
adequate funds, whatever funds they may need to expand the rehabilitative and testament programs that 
they now operate. In general, along with that particular move, I would hope the Government would 
move along to implement the main 15 recommendations contained on page 46 of the report dealing with 
treatment and rehabilitation. 
 
There are a number of other provisions, Mr. Speaker, that I would hope the Government drags its feet on 
a bit. In fact there are a few that I would just as soon they forget. For example, the liquor in grocery 
stores. This is one move, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion that we simply don’t need. I am just not convinced 
that there is a need for this. I think, for example that the expansion of the present special liquor vendor 
outlets would accommodate any need in this respect and I am not convinced that beer in grocery stores 
is something we really need that badly. 
 
The question of drinking in cars as referred to by the member from Pelly and a few others on the 
surface, in theory, I suppose should be acceptable. You could argue that there is no reason why it 
shouldn’t be allowed but I think it is a theory that doesn’t really work and won’t work in my opinion, 
Mr. Speaker. I just don’t think it is workable. Stricter measures will need to be adopted and I think 
should be in any event with respect to the driver himself. Of course, on that 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2921 

theory, if there are penalties and greater restrictions be they .06 or .04 or 0, alcohol as far as the driver is 
concerned, the theory would have it that it wouldn’t matter what his passengers did but I don’t believe 
that we are ready to move in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think, also, another recommendation that we did make with respect to special licences to private halls. I 
am not really convinced that that will be a step in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. I can’t see it really 
benefiting very many people except the operators of the halls really. I just think that the policing and so 
on of this is going to prove a little bit difficult and I am not convinced we need it. I am not sure also, Mr. 
Speaker, whether we need to proceed with liquor at sporting events. I have had different opinions about 
this, but I am not really convinced that we need this provision. I am not convinced, for example, that the 
provision of liquor at the Roughrider games is necessarily that wise. Anybody who wants liquor is going 
to have a few before they go and many of them are going to take a little bit with them. I question the 
desirability of such a move and I question the desirability or the provision of beer at every county ball 
game or ball tournament. I am not convinced that is a step in the right direction. 
 
I think one recommendation that would help in this respect as far as rural Saskatchewan goes and that is 
recommendation number 42, on page 84, and that is the one that deals with the community event 
licence. From what we can learn in Alberta this seems to be a very popular kind of move and a popular 
measure. I think it is a kind of a compromise provisions to some of the others that are there, the 
community event licence which would be made available to agricultural societies, fairs and exhibition 
boards where perhaps major tournaments and so on would be held. That, I think, would be a good move, 
Mr. Speaker, and one the Government should certainly consider. 
 
There are other recommendations that I could comment on. I would hope the liquor board itself will 
brighten up their premises a little bit, will in one way or another improve the selection and the 
availability — when I say availability I am thinking of self-service, better displays and so on, 
particularly with respect to wines and that general category of liquor. I think this is a move that the 
Government should make, it is one they could make themselves and it is one that will help certainly 
from all of the reports and all of the studies that are done. The encouragement of wine with meals and 
better drinking habits is one area where the Government itself could make a move and make a 
beginning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W. E. Smishek: — (Minister of Health) Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few remarks on the report 
of the Committee. I want to at the outset say that I am not going to be stating any Government policy. 
What I have to say is the report of the Committee has yet to be considered by the Government, so nay 
views I express are my own observations and as Minister-in-Charge of the Alcoholism Commission. 
 
I should like to join with other Members in complimenting the Committee on its work and the report that 
they delivered to us. The report and recommendations are going to be very useful 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2922 

for the Government to come up with a new or better policy towards the particular problem that we are 
discussing. The final report has therefore several useful functions. It has drawn public attention to the 
seriousness of the alcohol problem in Saskatchewan, both in human and economic terms. It has offered 
some useful suggestions for dealing with this major health and social problem. Further the Committee 
has made some interesting legislative recommendations concerning specific changes to the liquor 
regulations in Saskatchewan. 
 
The report concentrates on two key issues. Firstly, that alcoholism is a major social and health problem 
to which we must be prepared to devote significant amounts of money and more staff. Secondly, that the 
existing regulations dealing with alcohol may need to be changed to meet the present day needs of our 
people. 
 
As Minister of Health responsible for the Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan, I want particularly 
to deal with recommendations relating to the prevention of alcoholism and treatment and rehabilitation 
of the disease in Chapters Three and Four of the report, as well as the observations of the Committee 
relating to the present program as noted on pages 42 and 43 of this report. The report is critical of the 
present Alcoholism Commission and its deficiencies. It quotes that the deficiencies listed in Culliton 
Report of 1967 and states that they are still relative today. It also describes that the Alcoholism 
Commission, quote: 
 

Lacking financial resources, overall direction and effective management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not accept this charge made by the Committee. Perhaps the Alcoholism Commission 
has not grown as quickly as many of us might have wanted but this program has developed into an 
effective operation in the last three years. 
 
Let me tell the House of the progress which has been made in the last few years. The amount of funds 
devoted to the Alcoholism Commission has grown at a faster pace than any other provincial program. In 
its first full year of operation the Alcoholism Commission had a budget of $468,722. It was increased by 
27 per cent in the fiscal year 1970-71 to a total of $594,638. In the fiscal year of 1971-72 the budget 
increased to $635,190. Since taking office, Mr. Speaker, under our administration the budget has 
increased even at a more rapid pace. In the coming fiscal year it will be increased to $1,071,740. This is 
an increase of 68 per cent in the last two years, Mr. Speaker. The Special Committee is talking about 
tripling the budget of the Alcoholism Commission, at the pace which our Government and the 
Alcoholism Commission have set in recent years, we may achieve this goal in a relatively short period 
of time. The increase in the Alcoholism budget has allowed the Commission to increase its permanent 
staff from 34 to 46 persons and the number of new patients entering the program was increased from 
858 in 1969-70 to 1,006 in 1971-72 and has increased sharply in the last year. I do not have the exact 
figures at the moment as the year-end has just come to a close a few days ago. 
 
Last year we opened an in-patient treatment centre in Saskatoon. We are now providing long-term 
in-patient rehabilitation to alcoholics at the Jack Calder Centre in Saskatoon and 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2923 

at St. Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan. Detoxification treatment is being given to alcoholics admitted to 
special wards at the University hospital in Saskatoon and Regina General Hospital and at the Weyburn 
Psychiatric Centre. The opening of the Jack Calder Centre in Saskatoon will allow us to operate a total 
immersion and social rehabilitation program for the patient. The increased emphases on rehabilitation is 
only one are of the Alcoholism Commission expanded scope of operation. 
 
The education division through the medium of seminars, workshops and public meetings reached over 
5,000 persons in 1971-72. Figures for 1972-73 are expected to show a sharp increase over the year 
previous. Last year the research division of the Commission focused attention on an evaluation of our 
rehabilitation program, the purpose of the evaluation was an assessment of the effectiveness of the 
existing treatment of alcoholics and their families. A comprehensive evaluation of a sample of 
discharged patients from the Regina and Saskatoon Centres was carried out. Copies of this report were 
released to the general public. Early indications suggest that the success ratio of our rehabilitation 
program in Saskatchewan is comparable with other programs in Canada. Knowledge gained from this 
evaluation will provide a base for the development and expansion of our future rehabilitation programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to correct the impression that the Alcoholism Commission lacks financial resources, 
overall direction and effective management. The Commission has strong financial support from the 
Government and has carried out evaluation programs which will assist future programs. It has hired the 
services of many capable treatment counsellors and hired the services of many capable treatment 
counsellors and managers in recent years. Mr. Speaker, I might point out to the Members of the House 
that in the last few months we have enlarged the Commission to the full complement of 12 people. We 
have tried to get broad representation from various interested groups and those who are working with 
people who may be affected. We have a labour representative, we have an employer representative. On 
the Commission we have a teacher, we have a Metis person, we have an Indian person, a clergyman, a 
couple of doctors. There are also people from the Departments of Health and Social Services as well as 
from the University. I believe we have structured the Commission to try, to reach the total community 
and be able to work with people who are in various organizations, to try to get the broadest input into the 
Commission. 
 
There is a problem for the Commission of being able to recruit skilled personnel. This is a problem that 
not only exists in Saskatchewan, it is a problem that is universal. Alcoholism, finally, in recent years has 
been recognized as a sickness and the number of medical people as well as lay people who are trained 
and have any skills to deal with this particular problem are relatively few. The truth of the matter is that 
every province is now trying to steal from the other province any skilled people they may have. This is 
an unfortunate situation. In some cases what is happening is the provinces are outbidding the other to try 
and steal the most capable people that the other province may have. I have written to Mr. Lalonde 
Minister of National Health and Welfare, after his announcement that the Federal Government proposes 
to get into the field of developing a program for treatment and rehabilitation of alcoholics and have 
suggested that perhaps the area that the Government of Canada can provide the most useful service for 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2924 

all the provinces, is to develop an effective education and training program of staff that is needed. 
Because only through the national level can we, it seems to me, develop any effective training program 
for the provinces. At the present time each province is on its own and each province is trying to steal the 
skilled people from the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the key achievements of our Alcohol Program is the extension of our services to the 
native people of Saskatchewan. I wish that the Hon. Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac), who made 
reference to this, was here, because perhaps he is not familiar, not aware, of what has been done in the 
last 12 months. 
 
For the first time in the history of alcoholism programming in Saskatchewan, the Provincial Government 
has made available through the Alcoholism Commission, funds for persons of native ancestry to set up 
and administer their own programs of alcoholism. In 1072-73 their grants and contributions reached 
$214,700. In the current fiscal year these grants will increase to $249,280 almost one-quarter of a 
million, that we have made available to the Indian and Metis people to develop their programs for the 
treatment and rehabilitation of their people. 
 
The native programs are co-ordinated with those of the Alcoholism Commission and are administered 
by the Metis Society of Saskatchewan and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. 
 
The Commission continues, of course, to make their own facilities and resources available to native 
persons who require it. They give consultations and assistance to the native programs as well. 
 
I think it is important that Members be aware and be familiar with what we have done in the first 12 
months to try and tailor a program for the Indian and Metis people. 
 
Let me return to the recommendations of the report, Mr. Speaker. There is a great deal of merit in 
broadening the name of the Alcoholism Commission to include other drug dependencies. The 
Commission, I am pleased to say, has itself recognized the need to broaden its terms of reference in its 
existing educational and prevention programs. A change in name in terms of reference will be in 
keeping with our increased knowledge of the health needs of our people. Later on in the report it is 
recommended that the same Minister be responsible for the Liquor Board, the Liquor Licensing 
Commission and the proposed Alcoholism and Drug Dependency Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this it seems to me, would place the Minister responsible in a position of conflicting 
interests. The implications of this recommendation suggest that the basic review of the Government 
philosophy regarding alcoholic beverages might be in order. I really question that particular 
recommendation of the Committee for reasons that I have already said, that there may be conflict of 
interest. 
 
I am unable to agree with the recommendations regarding drinking in automobiles and the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in grocery stores. We know this, that alcohol is now perhaps readily available to all 
kinds of people. It would be my guess that by having alcoholic beverages sold in grocery stores would 
make it perhaps even easier for youngsters to purchase alcohol. 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2925 

It seems that even now they are able to get access to alcohol even though there is an age limitation. 
 
It would seem to me that grocery stores would have a very difficult time of being able to determine the 
age limits of people who might want to buy alcoholic beverages. It seems to me that these steps would 
only increase the problems of drinking and d riving and increase consumption. 
 
I want to say a few words about the concept of social health pricing policy, I do not wish to quarrel with 
the Committee’s economic findings but I would personally have serious doubts about the results of this 
kind of policy, There are too many unknowns in this area and it will certainly require additional study, It 
has been my observation that past increase in the cost of liquor has done little to dampen the demand for 
the products. 
 
Many people place a very high value in the enjoyment gained at the club functions or the entertainment 
bars where alcohol is sold. Working people respond to increases in the price of liquor as if it were an 
increase to income tax, regressive tax at that. Some social drinkers, after many years of consumption, 
have become attached to a particular brand with a given alcoholic content. It may be extremely difficult 
to persuade such a person that price increases especially in say the price of beer, are protecting his 
health. 
 
I suggest that a social health pricing policy will touch the tip of the iceberg. It is ten times more 
important that we persuade the Federal Government to first establish a more equitable tax structure to 
provide more assistance to the family of persons who are handicapped by the alcohol problem. 
 
Since we are talking about prices, I was also surprised by the recommendation regarding the allocation 
of at least 10 per cent of the revenue derived from alcoholic taxation to the work of the Alcoholic 
Commission. If we follow through on this recommendation to allocate more resources to both education 
and prevention and treatment and rehabilitation, it is going to cost the Government a great deal more 
money. 
 
The implication resulting from this recommendation on a fixed percentage funding allocation to the 
Alcohol Commission would seem to be that increased consumption and revenue from the sale of 
alcoholic beverages should be encouraged so that more money can be allocated to treatment and 
rehabilitation. This leads to a situation of the dog being wagged by its tail and sets extremely dangerous 
precedents for the Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of tax policies if related to other areas, say if we allocate a percentage of the 
liquor profits for treatment, I suppose you should then allocate a certain percentage of an individual tax 
to particular programs. It seems to me that this is somewhat contradictory to the general principles of our 
system of Government budgeting and Government responsibility for funding of programs. Because 10 
per cent in some cases, or even in this case, in time to come may not be enough and thereafter it would 
be difficult trying to persuade governments to provide more, if that were needed. 
 
I contend that the Alcoholism Commission budget should not be related to the alcohol taxation as has 
been suggested. In 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2926 

response to the recommendation on increased Federal co-operation in fighting alcoholism, I have 
already written to Mr. Marc Lalonde, Feral Minister of Health and Welfare, on this subject, We will be 
making special application to Ottawa for more financial assistance for the alcohol program, or some 
financial assistance, and I hope to discuss this matter with Mr. Lalonde in Ottawa next month. We intend 
to follow though on many of the recommendations of the Committee. However, our enthusiasm for 
dealing with this major health problem, alcoholism, must be balanced with a broad perception of the 
public interest. 
 
I make reference to the recommendation to extend the definition of approved facilities under the Mental 
Health Act, to include rehabilitation centres and holding units of Alcoholism Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would personally not like to see people being committed to rehabilitation centres against 
their will. Further regulatory authority of this kind might serve to discourage people from coming 
forward for rehabilitative treatment and care. We are not going to be successful with the shock tactics to 
reduce alcoholism. We must concentrate on prevention, education and reasonable methods of 
rehabilitation to achieve our goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before closing may I, again, congratulate the Committee for their hard work. I believe that 
they have put the problem of alcoholism abuse and alcoholism prevention clearly before this House and 
before the people of Saskatchewan. They have made concrete proposals on many ways and means of 
showing society how to change its attitude towards alcoholism and how to handle this particular 
problem. 
 
At the same time you will notice that there are some recommendations that the Committee has made that 
I question their validity and, indeed, as a Member of the Government I will be giving more attention to 
the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. H. Lange: — (Assiniboia-Bengough) Mr. Speaker, on speaking to the Liquor Committee 
Report, and as a member of the Committee, I should like to say that during the past year I enjoyed very 
much sitting as a member of the Committee and as a result of our deliberations in our travels and in our 
investigations I learned several things. Perhaps the most important of all these, is that two political 
parties with opposing ideologies can work together towards a common end. And this, of course, raises in 
my mind some obvious questions about the party system within politics and the waste of both money 
and energy, which this system engenders. Moreover, I learned that man, indeed, does not live by bread 
alone. 
 
The report in itself is without a doubt the most progressive report in North America. But in spite of that 
it is not by any means adequate. If it is implemented it will not change the dialectic of history as far as 
the alcoholism problem is concerned. 
 
And although I unequivocally support the report, I think it makes little difference whether it is or 
whether it is not implemented. Committee investigations show that alcoholism is 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2927 

a far, far deeper problem than the terms of reference of the Committee’s jurisdiction would allow us to 
investigate. 
 
The magnitude of the alcoholism problem is apparent to anyone if he simply walks into an airport. The 
most obvious essentials are depicted to us in sign language. They are the food centres, the restroom 
centres and, of course, the alcohol centres. There is an international symbol to indicate where alcohol 
can be found. 
 
Alcoholism to my mind is merely a superficial symptom of a serious social problem which exists the 
world over, but primarily in North American society. The root of the problem does not lie with 
legislation or with laws but it lies with the individual. 
 
I think it is interesting to note that there is fundamental difference between the attitude of Europeans and 
the attitude of North Americans regarding alcoholism. Europeans and the attitude North Americans 
regarding alcoholism. Europeans use alcoholism as part of their life style and North Americans use 
alcoholism to get away from their life style. 
 
In order to exemplify this I should like to postulate what I consider to be one of North America’s gravest 
social problems. I call it the problem of alienation. The word alienation was introduced by Hegel, who 
was a 19th century German philosopher. He used it to detect the schism between man and God. 
 
I should like to use it in a more general term. Whether psychological, sociological, metaphysical, 
alienation describes anxiety, apprehension, apathy, despair, depersonalisation, chronic loneliness, 
powerlessness, loss of beliefs or loss of values, all problems which are inherent within the alcoholic. 
 
Whatever the ramifications basic to the concept of alienation, is that man has ruptured, lost or 
dissociated relations with the world about him, with his environment, with other people, with art and 
culture and ultimately with himself. 
 
Many examples of alienation exist within our society. A man who identifies himself through his clothes, 
his car, his house, rather than through his personality, is experiencing alienation. The shallow television 
shows and commercials which depict good things in life to be money, social status, beautiful bodies and 
personality manipulation, rather than warm fellowship, wholesome honesty or genuine charm are 
examples of a society which is alienated from intrinsic values. 
 
But perhaps the most blatant example of alienation can be observed in our attitude toward liquor. 
Nowhere in our social structure is there an element of society which has not been influenced by alcohol. 
 
In order to exemplify alienation, which I consider to be the basis in this context, and to relate it to 
alcoholism from liquor, and ultimately to the contents of the Liquor Report I would ask that you bear 
with me while I give a bit of background to show how alienation has developed within our society. 
 
The basis for alienation is mechanisation and as mechanisation has taken place over the last 150 years, 
man has been forced to become less and less involved with the means and the end of production. As the 
factor of production advanced, the role of the worker was reduced to handling only small segment 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2928 

of production, rather than seeing the production processed through from beginning to end. No longer 
does he make a whole chair in a furniture factory, instead perhaps, he is responsible for only fitting the 
legs into the bottom portion of it. Or instead of making a whole piece of pottery, he now is perhaps 
responsible for only firing the kiln. 
 
What has this segmenting and division done to the lives of man? It means that the significance of a 
workman, the significance that a workman confers on an object, becomes something outside of himself, 
something alien from him. Rather than seeing himself reflected in his environment by virtue of his 
creative work, the environment becomes foreign, incomprehensible, and this in turn evolves a different 
personality necessary to cope with the situation. 
 
The way that North American man has learned to cope with his situation is through alcohol. The worker 
becomes a commodity himself to be bought, sold or traded in a market place as a thing and not to be 
valued as a whole human being, rather as an object valued for its ability to fit into the work process. 
 
The work process itself is also alienating. The workman is in bondage to a system in which he must 
participate in order to subsist. His work is not part of himself, it is not satisfaction of a creative urge. He 
doesn’t develop physical and mental abilities, but instead he becomes physically and mentally 
exhausted. Alcohol is his only readily available relief. The only relief because society has not taught him 
any alternatives such as meditation, exercise, or forms of relaxation. 
 
During this period of exhaustion, the individual is again subjected to pressures, which coerce him to 
consume useless products of society. Man consumes with no relatedness to that which he consumes. He 
doesn’t value an object for the intrinsic worth of the object, but only for the purpose of having the object 
— he consumes a fantasized facsimile of the object. 
 
The playboy, for instance, with his finely tuned Jaguar coupe, is not driving a machine which he respects 
and understand for its inherent qualities of precision and performance. He is driving an ostentatious 
hunk of metal, which, in his mind comes equipped with a naked centre fold-out girl wrapped in mink. 
 
Given a situation where man produces and consumes with no relatedness to himself, how can he use 
leisure properly. As would be expected, leisure too becomes an alienating process. In leisure man 
becomes a consumer. He buys his entertainment, consumes sports as a spectator, goes to the movies 
classified good or bad according to their market potential. He walks into his home, turns on a television 
or entertains useless chatter in order to escape from being alone. 
 
Mass advertising monopolizes upon this and forever drives him to search for contentment and 
satisfaction in leisure by consumption. But always something is missing. And the cycle continues. 
 
And what of the salesman who must promote this sort of a society? He must have a psychological 
condition which remains at a high energy level in order to maintain his power to sell. He must not forget 
that he has to sell to collect a commission 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2929 

to live. Nothing in his life can be allowed to interact with this state of mind. 
 
The only solution for a salesman to obtain relaxation is go to a nightclub and down several drinks in an 
evening. Here he can surround himself with people who will not make him question the values of his 
goal. He can escape to the possibility of a euphoria in liquor and the blaring electronic music, which will 
drown the possibility of a psychological low and its inevitable counterpart for him — no sales. Here he 
can fantasize and drool after the painted women and express what he would do if he could get his hands 
on one of them. He continues to sell a version of himself. He emanates an aura of confidence and 
success as he struts around in his fancy pants and buys drinks for the whole table. Doing this, he is not 
convincing others as much as himself, that his life and work are indeed worthwhile. 
 
Or think of the high school student or the university student who goes to the car with the boys, because 
perhaps they are all lonely or looking for excitement. In the bar he feels that to-night he will meet the 
girl of his dreams. He thinks that everything he ever wanted in a woman will by chance occasion happen 
to sit beside him. And, if, in spite of chance, she does sit beside him he will be so inhibited that he won’t 
be able to make an advance until he drinks enough to make a fool of himself. And so week after week he 
is an obvious victim of his own inability to cope with his serious social problem. 
 
In this manner man tends to be alienated in his work. In his consumption and in his leisure. And 
ultimately alienated in his personality. He is alienated from the world about him, from art and culture, 
from people and from himself. 
 
Here is where the roots of the alcohol problem lie. In North America, liquor is a relief from problems 
which are inherent within society. Problems of alienation, alienated work, alienated consumption, 
alienated leisure, all of these problems can be manifested by the superficial bar room syndrome. 
 
In my opinion it makes little difference except in economic terms whether the contents of this liquor 
report are implemented or not, because the problem does not lie with laws and with legislation. 
 
I believe that as legislators we will not write the mores, customs or social norms of society. I think 
liquor laws which infer or establish values are inane and useless. Furthermore they are a burden on our 
social structure because they create, in their turn, alienated responsibility for law offices. 
 
However, liquor laws which protect innocent people who are affected by those who use alcohol are 
absolutely mandatory. 
 
This report contains both types of laws. But the responsibility for consuming alcohol, drugs, stimulants, 
depressants, has, done and always will rest only with the individual. 
 
Where and when we sell is really immaterial because it is the individual who will buy. Where and when 
we drink is also immaterial because it is the individual who will drink. Liquor 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2930 

has been with man since time immemorial. And if it hasn’t been alcohol it has been some other form of 
depressant or stimulant. And if all of the religions in the world haven’t solved the alcoholism problem, 
then we can hardly expect legislation to solve it. The only hope that I can see out of this report will be 
that of its educational features. Perhaps through education we can instil other types of values within 
society. And certainly if we can’t instil them within society; by proper counter-advertising through 
education we can certainly compete with coercive forces which promote alcohol in society. 
 
In spite of the obvious futility of solving the alcoholism problem, governments must still try. And this 
Committee has made an excellent attempt at trying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, I wanted to report of the Special Committee on the 
Review of Liquor Regulations. I want to sketch in as bit of the background to that report. 
 
On August 9, 1971 the Assembly passed a resolution constituting a Special Committee of the 
Legislature. The purpose of the Committee was to conduct an inquiry into all aspects relating to the sale, 
advertising and distribution of alcoholic beverages in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Committee decided that they would accumulate some facts concerning specific problems and they 
would consider the attitude of the people of Saskatchewan towards the legislation, particularly The 
Liquor Act and the Liquor Licensing Commission. They would seek views from other jurisdiction, 
particularly as expressed in the laws and administration of the other jurisdictions. They would consider 
the problem of alcohol abuse and alcoholism. They would consider the problem of drinking and driving. 
And then they would, having done that, present a report to the Legislature outlining their findings and 
recommendations. 
 
Members will see that the Committee’s study was broad in its scope and that the final report deals 
thoroughly with the problems associated with the use alcoholic beverages. 
 
You will be aware that on March 22, 1972, the Committee’s interim report was tabled in this 
Legislature. On April 7, 1972, the interim report was concurred in by the Legislative Assembly and you 
will recall also that legislation was introduced dealing very largely with those recommendations in the 
interim report which required legislation. 
 
We, therefore, saw the interim report dealt with expeditiously, the Committee having during the period 
from August 1971 until March, 1972 identified a number of matters which in their judgement required 
relatively rapid action. 
 
The Committee then continued its work and I want now to turn to the final report and the 
recommendations. I think that each of us is aware of the social and economic costs associated with the 
abuse of alcoholic beverages. With this in mind I 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2931 

should like to congratulate the members of the Committee for their concern in this area and for their 
in-depth study of the problem. 
 
It is generally accepted that to curb alcoholism the following steps must be adopted. There are two, 
possibly three. These include firstly, the reduction of the consumption of alcoholic beverages. This is 
essentially a preventive measure. The development of an advanced educational program to bring about a 
social awareness of the effects of the abusive use of alcohol. This is essentially an educational program. 
The second step is the development of a program of rehabilitation and research. 
 
The Committee looked at the various means of reducing consumption and made the following 
recommendations. They suggested a social health pricing policy. Under this policy the price of alcoholic 
beverages must relate to the alcoholic content and secondly the relative price per unit of alcohol must be 
such as to reduce the level of consumption. 
 
They recommended a low alcoholic content beverage in the hope that this type of beverage would 
decrease the absolute amount of pure alcohol consumed. They recommend a vigorous program of 
education, rehabilitation and research. 
 
As Minister-in-Charge of the Liquor Board and the Liquor Licensing Commission I endorse the 
Committee’s objectives to bring about a reduction in the consumption of alcohol and above all a 
reduction in the abuses associated with the excessive use of alcohol. 
 
The view is rather widely held that if there is an increase in the accessibility of alcoholic beverages that 
it will necessarily follow that the amount consumed will be increased. Others dispute that proposition. 
 
The Government intends to look closely and critically at the desirability of increasing the number of 
liquor outlets and hence the accessibility. We intend to look at this closely and critically before 
implementing any recommendations which would in effect increase the number of liquor outlets. 
 
Before turning to the specific recommendations as I relate to the Liquor Board and Liquor Licensing 
Commission, I wish generally to concur with the Committee’s recommendations that more of the 
revenue received by the Government from the sale of alcoholic beverages should be made available for 
educational rehabilitation and research programs. 
 
We have observed that the revenue from alcoholic beverages in the last 12 or 15 years has increased 
very rapidly from $10, $12, $13 million a year to upwards of $30 million a year. 
 
The amount spent on the Alcoholism Commission has increased from in 1969-70 of $470,000 to this 
year’s estimates of to something over double that — $1,071,000. In addiction, the province covers the 
cost of medical services and hospital care for alcoholics of the order of $600,000 or $700,000. My 
figures indicate $653,312. 
 
It is certainly true that the amount being spent on rehabilitation is rising rapidly. The question arises 
however, as 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2932 

to whether we are still doing enough. 
 
I wish now to turn to the specific recommendations as they relate to The Liquor Act and The Liquor 
Licensing Act. The Members will note that there are some 45 recommendations. In reviewing these 
recommendations I think one must attempt to relate them to the general objectives of the Committee, 
that is to reduce the total consumption of alcoholic beverages on a per person basis and hence reduce the 
problems associated with excessive use of alcohol. 
 
Here are a number of recommendations made by the Committee, and if the House will beat with me I 
propose to mention a number of them and comment on them. 
 
One recommendation was that the Saskatchewan Liquor Licensing Commission, in its discretion, allows 
the sale and consumption of beer at sports events at special designated areas. Another that legislation be 
amended to allow the consumption of beverage alcohol in a vehicle by individuals other than the driver. 
A third that legislation be amended to allow the consumption of beverage alcohol with food at a park 
campsite or picnic site. 
 
All of these in a sense are directed to making alcohol more accessible. Certainly to those who have 
experienced the problems resulting form the use of alcoholic beverages, any increase in accessibility is 
not readily welcomed. 
 
It will be the task of the Government before considering whether or not to bring in further changes in 
liquor legislation, to attempt to determine the likely results of any such changes. 
 
This will not be an easy task. One theory states that if alcoholic beverages are more accessible then less 
abuse will arise. Because people will consume the alcohol under conditions which lead to more 
moderate consumption. 
 
The second theory in essence says that the more available we make alcoholic beverages the greater will 
be the amount that will be consumed. And the more consumption, the more abuse. That argument runs 
in a simple, almost arithmetic progression. If you make it more available, more will be consumed. If 
more is consumed, more of it will be consumed in an abusive way. And if more of it is consumed in an 
abusive way, the problems of the abusive use of alcohol will increase. 
 
I want to deal now with a number of the recommendations and to indicate some of the problems that I 
see would arise as a result of introducing the specific recommendations. 
 
One deals with the sale of beer and wine in grocery stores. The major objection to implementing this 
provision would be that it would further remove the Government’s direct control over the sale and 
distribution of alcoholic beverages. This control is now primarily vested with the Liquor Board. More 
over we should consider the fact that many of our small communities now have this service provided 
through special liquor outlets and the position of special liquor outlets would clearly be prejudiced. The 
Government has reached no conclusion with respect to this recommendation. I express a personal view 
in saying that I am not at all impressed with it. 
 
Special liquor vendors. That there be additional 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2933 

appointments of special liquor vendors if required. And that the number of appointments be the 
responsibility of the Liquor Board. This would require certain changes in the legislation. The present 
statutory limit is 135. We do not intend to act upon this recommendation at this Session. We will 
consider the matter further. It will not be dealt with at this Session. 
 
Live entertainment in hotels. The recommendation is that live entertainment be permitted in licensed 
premises with the opportunity of patrons to sing and that dancing to live entertainment or juke boxes be 
allowed. It also recommends that live entertainment be permitted in private clubs and that licensed 
premises be extended to allow sidewalk cafes and patios. 
 
Clearly, I think, there is nothing inherently wrong with live entertainment in licensed premises. This 
would require some changes in legislation. Live entertainment is now permitted n private clubs. There 
are some practical business problems so far as the hotel industry is concerned. Particularly those hotels 
which operate in smaller centres. We are conscious of this. We have had some discussions with the hotel 
industry and with others who are concerned. There will not be action at this Session on that 
recommendation. 
 
A further recommendation is that all licensed beverage rooms and cocktail lounges and dining rooms be 
allowed off sale of wine and spirits during regular hours. The present Section 101(a) of the Liquor Act 
permits the holder of a dining room licence, during regular hours, to sell liquor by the glass but not by 
the bottle. This recommendation we can look at. If it would not open the door to abuse by persons 
representing themselves as bona fide guests, there is clearly not the level of objection to this 
recommendation that there might be to some others. 
 
Recommendation 20 deals with married minors and says that present legislation be amended to allow 
legally married persons under legal age to consume liquor in licensed premises when in the company of 
their spouse who is of legal age. Presumably this would operate in beverage rooms, ding rooms, licensed 
restaurants, cocktail lounges. I would think that particularly with respect to beverage rooms and cocktail 
lounges it would create more difficulty for the proprietor to screen out minors. Our administration now 
is being tough with the hotels on the matter of age. We think that this was implicit in the amendments 
made last year and discussed with the hotel industry. We have had occasion to close down hotels for 
short periods and it is a pretty serious matter for a hotel to close down for a week on this matter of age. 
We are asking the hotel people to be very, very vigilant in this regard; we are assisting them with the 
voluntary I.D. card; we think that the adoption of this recommendation would simply increase their 
problems and ours in dealing with them. You would not only have to deal with age, but they would have 
to come to grips with the question of whether or not the person before them, who might obviously be a 
minor or appear to be a minor, was, in fact, legally married to the person who was accompanying him or 
her and that is clearly an extra burden. 
 
Recommendation 22 deals with licensed outlets at university campuses. There are a good number of 
pros and cons to the idea of having a licensed outlet operated by the Students’ Unions of Saskatoon and 
Regina campuses. We are not ready to act on this 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2934 

recommendations one-way or the other. We think it requires some further study. 
 
Recommendation 23 is that the Saskatchewan Liquor Licensing Commission, in its discretion, allows 
the sale and consumption of beer at sports events at special designated areas. I have referred to that 
briefly. This recommendation proposes that beer is allowed to be sold and consumed at sports events in 
designated areas. Before any such recommendations can be considered some criteria would have to be 
established to select and determine what sports events would qualify. While there may be not great 
objection to having beer available at the games, let us sway of the Saskatchewan Roughriders, the way 
that it’s available frequently at baseball games in the United States or at football games in Winnipeg, 
other considerations might well arise if we are taking about sports events in smaller centres where 
families with children are frequently in attendance as families. I think that serious questions arise as to 
what sports events would qualify and we have not yet had an opportunity to reach any conclusions with 
respect to that matter. 
 
Recommendation 34 deals with the transportation and consumption of beverage alcohol in vehicles 
other than by the driver. No recommendation made by the Committee has received more adverse 
comment than this one. During the past year the accidents on our highways have increased at an 
alarming rate. Many of the accidents can be attributed, at least in part, to drinking drivers. The 
Committee’s aim in the report is to reduce the consumption and where there is consumption to have it 
take place in an atmosphere where drinking will be done with moderation. That’s the overall aim of the 
Committee. I can’t accept the idea that adopting the recommendation that liquor can be consumed in 
cars will help either to reduce consumption or to ensure that consumption take place in a place where it 
will be done in moderation. Again, I have to state the position of the Government that we have not taken 
a position on this matter. I state my own position in saying that I personally and firmly oppose this 
recommendation. 
 
Time does not permit me to deal with all of the recommendations set out in the report. I congratulate the 
Committee again for the thoroughness of their report. As will have been indicated by my previous 
remarks it is the Government’s position to receive the report but not be bound to implement the 
recommendations contained therein. 
 
We do not intend to introduce any amendments to The Liquor Act or The Liquor Licensing Commission 
Act at this Session that would have the effect of making alcoholic barrages more accessible to the 
general public. Quite frankly, in my judgement, some of the proposals will not be acted on by this 
Government either now or later. We want, however, to take more time to study the report in detail and to 
consider the reasons put forward by the Committee for some of the recommendations before either 
agreeing or prematurely discarding some of the recommendations which — at least on the surface — do 
not appear attractive. 
 
The policy of the Government with respect to this report therefore, may be stated in one word — 
“caution.” We do not propose to introduce at this Session any legislation which will make liquor more 
accessible. We believe that great caution must be used before deciding what further changes, if any, are 
to be made in our liquor legislation. Personally, I am far from 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2935 

convinced that we should move in some of the directions indicated. For example, and to suggest only a 
few areas: I am not convinced that we should permit any consumption of alcoholic beverages in cars; I 
am not convinced that persons under 18 years of age should be permitted to consume alcohol in licensed 
premises. On the other hand, the Government is prepared to endorse the recommendations that further 
revenue received by the Government from the sale of alcoholic beverages be made available to the 
Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan, or other organizations with similar aims to develop programs 
to combat alcoholism. I do not believe that education and rehabilitation are going to solve all, or most of 
the problems of alcoholism. I do, however, believe that it is incumbent upon us as a society to devote 
more of our resources to the treatment and prevention of the disease of alcoholism and to seek new 
knowledge, through research, in coping with those problems. 
 
We are prepared, also, to endorse and act upon the recommendation to establish a highway safety 
committee which we will ask to explore every possible way of dealing effectively with the problem of 
the drinking driver. 
 
Our general approach, as a Government, is that we must learn more about handling the alcohol problem 
we have with us. I suggest that as a Legislature it must be our number one priority to learn more about 
handling the alcohol problem what we have with us now. That must be our number one priority in the 
field of liquor legislation. That, it seems to me, is the appropriate response to the report of the 
Committee on Liquor Regulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. L. Faris: — (Arm River) Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Members of the Assembly for the 
debate which has taken place on this report. I think it has been a very worthwhile exercise. I feel that the 
Members have exercised good taste and made intelligent and worthwhile comments in regard to it. I am 
very pleased that the Government has chosen to give the Legislature and the public of this province a 
very good deal of time in order to study this report and to respond to it. I understand that there are 
something like 4,500 copies of the report which have been sent out from the office of the Clerk. I would 
not doubt at all that by the time these public discussions are over there will be something like 5,000 
copies out in the province and I know that they are being very thoroughly studied both by in individuals 
and by groups. At this time, I, and I am sure other members of the Committee, are receiving some very 
intelligent comments from the public in regard to this report and a good many of those comments are 
including thanks to the Government and to the Committee for this opportunity to express their opinions. 
 
I understand that most reports of the Legislature are sent out in approximate numbers of 400 or 500. 
Five thousand is probably the most that has ever been requested of any report. I can assure you that the 
mail which I have received has been considerable. Most of it has been — I may say quite frankly — 
concerned about further liberalizations of liquor laws, but I am sure that the indication from the Premier 
that the Government does not intend to act hastily in regard to changes in liquor laws will be well 
received by the public if the response I have received concerning the report, is any indication 
whatsoever. 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2936 

I was very pleased, indeed, by the comments from the Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) 
because it indicates that he’s got both an intelligent grasp of the points that we are trying to make in the 
report and has been struggling, as we are trying to make in the report and has been struggling, as we did 
as a Committee, with these very difficult issues. I want to express once again my thanks to the Members 
on both sides of the House for their intelligent and courteous behaviour in this debate. I want to thank 
Members on both sides of the House who were members of the Committee for throughout making it a 
pleasure to work with them. 
 
It is with pleasure that I support the motion that this report be received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Report of Committee on Public Accounts 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. McPherson (Regina 
Lakeview): That the First Report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing be 
now concurred in. 
 
Hon. K. Thorson: — (Minister of Industry and Commerce) Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on the Motion 
proposed by the Member for Regina Lakeview that the first Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
be concurred in and I do so because of the statements which were made by the Member for Albert Park 
(Mr. McLeod) in the course of the debate on this Resolution. 
 
Now it is true that others in the Opposition associated themselves with those remarks, particularly the 
Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy), who treated it in his own clown-like fashion as something out of 
which he should give a fictional account of imaginary telephone conversations which he says in this 
Legislature that I made. But there is no basis whatever for the statements he made or the versions he 
gave of telephone calls, which he says, I made to people in the Public Service, or in the Service Printing 
Company. 
 
That fictionalized account, of course, was reported in the Press as though there were some substance to 
it. I want to say categorically that there is no substance to it whatever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — As I say, the Member for Athabasca has so thoroughly discredited himself with that 
fictionalised account that I am not going to take any more time to deal with what he had to say. 
 
The Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) also associated himself with the remarks, Mr. Speaker. All I can 
say about that is — and I have read through the transcript of Proceedings of the Public Accounts 
Committee — dealing with myself and dealings with the Department of Industry and Commerce and I 
can say about the Member for Wilkie is that he didn’t take the time or the trouble to examine the facts 
that were before him and to get behind the allegations which were made by the Member for Albert Park. 
I am not going to say any more about what he had to say 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2937 

in this debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me begin, Mr. Speaker, by reminding the House of the people who are accused of wrongdoing by 
the Member for Albert Park. First of all he accuses me — then he accuses my colleagues in the 
Government, the Members of the Cabinet. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, he accuses officials in three 
Government agencies who were invoiced in the transaction which is the subject matter of paragraph 8 of 
the Committee’s report. Those officials are in the office of the Queen’s Printer, they are in the 
Department of Industry and Commerce and they are in the Department of Finance. 
 
According to the Member for Albert Park these are at least three people who make accusations and I 
want to refer the Members to a report which appeared in the Leader-Post and so I will add that name, the 
Leader-Post, as a fourth party which are making accusations relative to the subject matter of paragraph 8 
of the Committee’s report. 
 
First of all, according to the Member for Albert Park, is the Provincial Auditor, who is making 
accusations of wrongdoing. 
 
Secondly, according to the Member for Albert Park and his version, it is the Public Accounts Committee 
which is making accusations of wrongdoing and, of course, the third one is the Member for Albert Park 
himself and I am going to deal at some length with his accusations. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Then, of course, there is the published account which appeared in the Leader-Post. 
What are these accusations, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well, first of all, what are the accusations of the Provincial Auditor? I refer the Assembly to page 10 of 
the report of the Provincial Auditor for the year ending March 31, 1972, and in particular to the last 
paragraph of the Auditor’s comments about the Department of Industry and Commerce. And in that 
paragraph the Provincial Auditor says in reference to an advance payment on a printing order and 
contract; he says the following in effect: “There was no evidence of a formal contract.” And his last 
sentence reads as follows: “Therefore, it would appear that the payment of $12,000 was made without 
proper authority.” 
 
Now let me refer the Members of the House to the report of the Public Accounts Committee, page 2 of 
their report, paragraph 8. And I say frankly, Mr. Speaker, that I am disappointed in the draftsmanship of 
this report because it clearly misquotes the Provincial Auditor and therefore distorts the meaning of his 
words. The Provincial Auditor says because he believed there was no evidence of a formal contract that 
it would therefore appear that a payment was made without authority, but in the draftsmanship of the 
Committee’s report which we are considering we find these words: 
 

In item 10 (iv) of the Provincial Auditor’s report, it was reported that an advance payment of $12,000 
was made without proper authority. 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2938 

Now by taking out the words of the Provincial Auditor they changed the meaning. Now instead of the 
Provincial Auditor saying that it would appear that there was a payment made without proper authority, 
now we have the drafted report of the Committee saying the payment was made without authority. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Oh, oh! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Now there is nothing wrong, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, and I will come to that in what the 
Provincial Auditor said, but it is wrong, I submit, for the Committee to misquote the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Then, Mr. Speaker, we have the accusations of the Member from Albert Park (Mr. 
McLeod). 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh, terrible! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I have read through what he had to say a week ago in this debate. I find that in the 
course of his remarks in reference to this advance payment he used the term “illegal” or “illegality” ten 
times. You know, it was after all nothing more than an argument of assertion. He had no basis or 
substance for his argument. He asserted that it was illegal or that there was illegality. And in one 
occasion, the 11th time, he said it was completely illegal. But, Mr. Speaker, he went further, he went 
further than that. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Shame! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — To say that something is illegal suggests that it is wrong which the law recognizes 
such as breach of contract for which damage ought to be paid or some injury was done to someone and 
the law recognizes that those responsible for the injury should pay damages. That’s a civil wrong. And 
to say something is illegal suggests in most people’s minds a civil wrong. But the Member for Albert 
Park, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly went much further than that. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — I hope so. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — He went much further than that, Mr. Speaker. He was not content to make unfounded 
allegations of civil wrong. He made an allegation of criminal conduct. Let me refer to the words he used. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Will the Members let the Hon. Member do the speaking. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Here are the words that the Member for Albert Park used in his speech. He called it, 
and I quote: “Open-handed banditry.” He said the Government was guilty of, and again I quote him, “A 
flagrant violation of all honest treatment of the moneys of the Province of Saskatchewan.” 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2939 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — He said, “This Government is simply and deliberately stealing money from people of 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh, resign, boy. Resign before the day is out. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, what are the accusations contained in the report by the Leader-Post? 
Well, I have here a clipping out of the Leader-Post for April 18, 1973, and taking their cue from the 
Member from Albert Park there are a couple of headlines, one of them reads: “Payment to Service 
Printers Termed Illegal.” The other larger headline reads: “Government Accused of Stealing”. Then, Mr. 
Speaker, let me quote the last paragraph in this published report in the Leader-Post to see how far 
editorial licence can carry some people. The last paragraph and the last sentence says, and I quote it 
from the Leader-Post of April 18, 1973: 

 
Mr. Thorson is the first Cabinet Minister of the Blakeney Government to be condemned by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Now I say editorial licence, Mr. Speaker, I take it that the inference is that somehow 
there’s a long line-up and I am just at the head of it. And the reporters and the Members of the 
Opposition are just waiting for more Members to appear in the line behind me. But the real licence is in 
saying that Mr. Thorson is condemned by the Provincial Auditor. No one can find that in the report of 
the Provincial Auditor. No one can find that in the draft report of the Public Accounts Committee which 
we are now considering under this motion. That existed only in the imagination of the reporter for the 
Leader-Post. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — But he published it as though it was a statement by the Provincial Auditor or as though 
it could be inferred from the statements of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I am going to say something more about the Leader-Post and the 
people who are in it. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Pulpits for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what are the facts in relation to this particular advance payment on 
a printing order? I am going to point out some transactions of the former administration a little later on. I 
hope the Members will be around long enough to hear it. But let me state, briefly, the facts in this 
particular case. 
 
In the fall of 1971 the Tourist Branch of the Department of Industry and Commerce determined that it 
wished to have printed some Travel Guides for the following year. Accordingly, 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2940 

as is customary in these matters by all departments of the Government, the appropriate requisition was 
sent over to the Queen’s Printer. And on October 22, 1971, the Queen’s Printer placed a purchase order 
with Service Printers for the required printing. And as a matter of fact, the Members of the Public 
Accounts Committee afford themselves the opportunity to look at the purchase orders and the vouchers 
and the intern bill and the final bill and the final voucher in connection with that order. And so those 
members of the Committee who did make that examination will have some idea of the dates we are 
dealing with and printing order we are dealing with. Now is was contemplated at the time the order was 
placed that the delivery of the completed order would be made by the end of 1971 or early 1972 or at the 
very lest it would be not more than four weeks after delivery to the Department of the final approved 
copy for printing. And, of course, that is after the type has been set, after galley proofs have been run, 
after they have been proof-read by the printer, after they have been proof read by the people in the 
Tourist Branch and it is approved as a final form for the printing order then it was thought that there 
would be not more than four weeks after that to simple run the presses and have the order delivered and 
payment would be made. 

 
As a matter of fact the purchase order is silent as to the time for payment. And in the ordinary course of 
events it would be expected that payment would be made on delivery of the completed order. However, 
by the end of January, about a month after it was contemplated order would be that most of the delay in 
that period of time had to do with supply of copy material by Tourist Branch to the printer and was not 
in any way the fault of the printer. In that period of time, from October 22, 1971 until the end of January 
1972, the supplier, the printer, had, of course, incurred expense. And as members of the Public Accounts 
Committee will know, because they looked at the interim bill which the printer submitted, first to the 
Queen’s Printer and then it was routed over to the Department of Industry and Commerce and which 
was dated at the end of January in 1972, the printer in his bill of January 28, 1972 says, “interim 
payment on account re stock, typesetting, wages,” and asks for a payment of $12,000. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we could spend a lot of time if we wanted to, as the Member for Albert Park did, 
reviewing what happens to the bill and how the vouchers are prepared, through whose hands these 
documents pass. But let me just summarize it by saying that when the bill reached the Queen’s Printer, it 
was sent to the Tourist Branch, Mr. C. Springstein, signed approval for payment on the bill. It was then 
sent back to the Queen’s Printer and there, again, it was endorsed as approved for payment. It was then 
sent back to department of Finance. And it was there, Mr. Speaker, according to the information I have 
and according to information supplied to the Committee, the Public Accounts Committee, that a 
memorandum was prepared by myself and signed by myself and delivered to the Director of 
Administration for the Department of Industry and Commerce. And I want to come back to that 
memorandum which the member for Albert Park so very carefully avoided presenting to the Members of 
the House. I want to come back to that in a little while. 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2941 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, the voucher and the bill went to the Department of Finance and there the 
payment was made. On February 1, 1972 the voucher and the bill was delivered to the Department of 
Finance and, of course, those who read from the transcript of the Public Accounts Committee report and 
those who heard the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) speak the other day in this debate, know that 
the controller, Mr, Kerr, in the department of Finance, indicated that the cheque was mailed from the 
Department of Finance to the supplier of printing on the third of February 1972. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am quite content to take the statement of facts as being accurate insofar as they deal 
with all of the fats. And I may say that it is an abbreviated and limited version, but it is a statement of 
facts contained in the Provincial Auditor’s report. It is found on page 10 of his report and I refer the 
Members to that report and I read it all because I find that no exception can be taken to that statement of 
facts. This is what he says: 

 
On February 3, 1972 an advance payment of $12,000 was made by the Department of Industry and 
Commerce on account of a printing order for 250,000 Travel Guides 1972. According to the invoice 
submitted to the Department the $12,000 represented an interim billing to cover stock, typesetting and 
wages. There was no provision for any advance payment in the order placed with the supplier. The 
goods ordered had not been received by the Department of Industry and Commerce up to the date of 
the advance payment although they were subsequently received on March 22, 1972 when the final 
payment of $16,894.32 was made. 

 
That’s the end of the Provincial Auditor’s statement of the facts which caused him to raise the questions 
which he did in his report to the Legislature. And, as I say, Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with that 
statement of facts as they occurred. 
 
Now what was the question that was raised by the Provincial Auditor in his report to the Legislature? 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor was not objecting to the substance of the transaction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — He never, so far as I am aware, and I say I have read his report to the Assembly, I 
have read the transcript of the Public Accounts Committee meeting, but the Provincial Auditor so far as 
I am aware never at any time or in any place said or even suggested that the supplier of printing was 
paid out too much or paid for something that was not supplied. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — The Provincial Auditor’s comments, Mr. Speaker, on page 10 of his report to the 
Assembly are presented in three parts. First, the Provincial Auditor quotes verbatim, Section 58 of the 
Department of Finance Act, which was The Department of Treasury Act. Secondly, he devotes one 
paragraph to a statement of facts, that’s the paragraph I have just read. The third part, his last paragraph 
is in two sentences. He says in 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2942 

the first sentence that there was no evidence of formal contract. In the second sentence based on what he 
had already said in the first, he says, “It would appear the advance payment was made without proper 
authority.” Now, Mr. Speaker, what does the Provincial Auditor mean by that term he uses in his report, 
‘formal contract’. Well, as I say, I have read through the transcript of the Committee’s report and as far 
as I can determine no member of the Committee, no one asked him that question. No one asked him if 
he meant by using that term to imply that there was any difference between a contract and a formal 
contract. No one asked him if there was any evidence of a contract as distinct from a formal contract. No 
one asked him if the Government was found in contract to make payment. No one asked the Provincial 
Auditor what he thought the terms of that payment should be. Mr. Speaker, I submit there was ample 
evidence of a contract, a binding contract, which obliged the printer to supply and the Government to 
pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I am going to deal a little later with the timing of the payment as a term of that 
contract. However, Mr. Speaker, it is clear, if one reads the report of the Provincial Auditor, that he 
addressed himself to the form of the contract and he did not address himself in his published report or 
his statements before the Public Accounts Committee either to the terms of the contract such as times for 
payment, and he did not address himself to the substance of the contract such as the quality or the value 
of the goods to be delivered under the contract. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the minutes or the transcript of the proceedings of the Public 
Accounts Committee for March 21, 1973, contained some statements by the Provincial Auditor which 
confirmed that his only question, his only concern, was with the formalities. And again I noticed the 
Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) carefully avoided any reference to that. 
 
Let me direct his attention to page 140 of the Committee’s meeting and the minutes of that meeting. 
Here at the bottom of page 140, and I quote it exactly, we find the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Lutz, making 
a statement. This is what it says: 
 

Under Section 58 of The Treasury Department Act an advance payment is not legal. 
 
Mr. Engel is reported as saying, “If it is not a contract.” Mr.Lutz says, “That’s right.” Mr.Engel: “If 
there is a contract involved then it is, is this right” Mr. Lutz: “Yes.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Now, it is clear as I say, Mr. Speaker, that an advance payment under a contract, in the 
view of the Provincial Auditor, is perfectly legal and perfectly valid. 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2943 

Let me take the Assembly over to page 141 of the Minutes of the Public Accounts Committee Meeting. 
Here we find the Member for Albert Park says this: 
 

If there had been a written contract which called for an advance payment of $12,000, would the 
Provincial Auditor have commented on this item at all. 

 
Mr. Lutz, in reply says: “If there had been a formal contract as we normally accept a contract under the 
laws of contract, no.” Not I offer that, Mr. Speaker, to show that the Provincial Auditor was concerned 
about the formality and the form of the contract. He never, for a moment, suggested that there was 
anything amiss about the substance of the contract. It was only the Member for Albert Park who tried to 
leave that impression in his statement in this Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me say something about the memorandum which the Member for Albert Park, not 
having had apparently any opportunity to say anything about it before he spoke in this debate, which the 
Member for Albert Park announced that I had prepared and delivered. He announced it in these terms. I 
noticed Mr. Speaker, that there is nothing in the Committee’s report about that. There is nothing in the 
Provincial Auditor’s report about that. There was nothing in the statements of the mover of the motion, 
the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. McPherson) but here are the words used by the Member for 
Albert Park in referring to my memorandum. He says, and I quote him: 
 

In any event on the 1st of February, 1972, in response to the requirements of the Director of 
Administration Branch, Kim Thorson, the Minister of Industry and Information . . . 

 
The error in the title, Mr. Speaker, is his not mine. 
 

. . . Prepared and sent a memorandum authoring this payment. 
 

Well, I am sure, Mr. Speaker, when the Member for Albert Park said that, all of us waited for him to 
produce the memorandum. But he failed to do that and I can understand why he did fail to do that, 
because had he produced it, it would have destroyed his whole argument. But, Mr. Speaker, I am glad to 
fill the breach. I have enough copies here of my memorandum for every Member of the Assembly and 
some left over for the members of the Press gallery. So I should now like to lay on the table one of these 
copies and I hand to the page enough other copies so that they can be distributed to every Member and 
to the Press gallery. I hope that will be done as quickly as possible. 
 
Now, I don’t want to go on, Mr. Speaker, until the Members have the photocopy of my memorandum 
before them so they can read it and, indeed, I should like to be sure that all the members of the Press 
gallery are able to read it for themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — This is what it says: It is in the usual Government of the Province of Saskatchewan 
form and it indicates at the top that it is Department Memo. It is dated February 1, 1972 and it is from 
myself to Mr. Switzer the Director of the 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2944 

Administration Branch and the substance of the memorandum reads as follows: 
 

Re Service Printing Company. Invoice for Travel Guide. This is to advise you that I approve the 
$12,000 advance payment on the contract of Service Printing Company in this connection as 
requested. 

 
I have put my initials to it above the designation Minister of Industry and Commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very clear from reading my memorandum that id did not, as the Member for Albert 
Park would have us believe, authorize this payment. He was very careful not to use the words I used. He 
wanted to use his own words in order to leave the false impression that he tried to leave with the House. 
I did not authorize the payment. I did not direct the payment to be made. I said in my memorandum and 
I quote, “ that I approved the $12,000 advance payment on the contract.” I did not approve the $12,000 
advance payment on the contract.” I did not approve of an advance payment except on the contract so 
when the Member for Albert Park tries to hurl the mud and the false accusation at me and the Members 
of the Cabinet, he ought to have taken a look at the basis of that accusation. Because, Mr. Speaker, if 
there was on contract on which an advance payment could be made no one could read my memorandum 
as saying that a payment should be made even if there was no contract. No one could read it that way. If 
there was no contract then clearly my memorandum is not authority to make a payment. On the contrary 
my memorandum contemplates the existence of a contract and no one can possibly read it any other 
way. That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why the Member for Albert Park refused to table the 
memorandum in this House so everybody could see it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — It was clear, Mr. Speaker, it was clear in his false accusations that he did not want the 
truth to be known. Now, Mr. Speaker, if this advance payment was illegal as he alleges, if it was made 
without the benefit of a contract, then no one, Mr. Speaker, can hide behind my memorandum which 
approves payment only n the contract. So if there are any accusations and there certainly were by the 
Member for Albert Park — of illegality, of stealing, then they land on all of the people that I mentioned 
when I first began to speak: On my colleagues in the Cabinet, on the members of the public service in 
the Queen’s Printers office, in the Department of Industry and Commerce and in the Department of 
Finance. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Start reading from where . . . 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Oh, you want me to start reading from where Mr. Switzer says, “If you call it a 
contract.” No formal contract, that’s what he the auditor said to the Legislature, Mr. Speaker, the 
Member said there was stealing, there was illegality. He didn’t content himself with the words of the 
Provincial Auditor that there was no formal contract. 
 
Now let’s address ourselves to the question of whether or not there was a contract. Let’s just take a look 
at the question of whether there was or was not a contract, Mr. Speaker. I 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2945 

submit, as I have said earlier, that there was a contract and I say that, Mr. Speaker, because it is quite 
clear that all of the essentials of the contract can be clearly identified in this transaction. We can identify 
who the parties were and we can identify the property, the subject matter of the contract, and we can 
identify the terms of payment. 
 
In fact, it is only the terms of payment, which require any consideration at all. There is no doubt about 
who was obliged to supply goods. There is no doubt about who was to pay for goods and there is no 
doubt about what was to be aid for. The terms of payment, Mr. Speaker, are the subject matter of the 
Auditor’s report and which we have to consider. Now, as I said at the outset, the parties contemplated 
the situation in which the completed printing order would be paid for in full at the time of the delivery of 
that completed order. Subsequently and before the deliver, the parties both consented to a change in the 
time for payment. Both agreed to amend the contract so that there would be an interim payment before 
final completion. 
 
At that time, Mr. Speaker, the supplier had incurred expense as he sets out clearly in his interim bill: for 
stock, for type setting, for wages. And he had incurred that expense in pursuance of his obligation under 
the contract and for the benefit of the purchaser. There was no doubt about what was happening and 
anyone who examines the documents, the purchase order, the interim bill, the final bill and the vouchers 
can readily determine what the terms of the payment were as agreed upon by the parties to the contract. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if it was not a contract, what was it? The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) 
repeats the criminal accusation. Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts are that no payment was made as a gift. 
Payments were made for benefits conferred by the supplier. No payment was made illegally. All 
payments were made by virtue of the law which binds the purchaser under a contract with his supplier. 
If that were not so, Mr. Speaker, the Government would have the right to recover the money paid. No 
one has ever suggested that, not even the Member for Albert Park. No one can possibly believe that the 
money was paid except in accordance with the contract. Therefore, the payments, both the interim and 
the final, were properly made insofar as substance of the transaction is concerned. No one, Mr. Speaker, 
no one, not my colleagues, not myself, no one in the Public Service is guilty of any illegality or of any 
theft of money. 
 
I have addressed myself and I ask the Members of the Assembly to address themselves to the substance 
of the contract. The Provincial Auditor dealt with the form of the contract. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am quite 
prepared to follow the Provincial Auditor in the matter he dealt with. All persons in the Government 
should do the same, do that the form of the contract like its substance, cannot be the subject for 
questioning by the Provincial Auditor or by anyone else. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I urge that in these 
matters all of us should observe the proper formalities. I have no quarrel with the Provincial Auditor in 
raising it in that context. But, Mr. Speaker, I submit that the Members of the Legislative Assembly have 
a higher duty than the duty of the Provincial Auditor. The Members of the Legislative Assembly cannot 
escape the responsibility for dealing with the substance of contracts entered into by the Government 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2946 

with various suppliers. The Committee on Public Accounts, for whatever reason, chose not to address 
itself to the substance of this contract but, like the Provincial Auditor, to deal only with the form of it. 
Unlike the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, in the drafting of their report, they do not confine 
themselves to the terms used by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
But let’s take a look at the substance of a couple of contracts entered into when my friends in the 
Opposition were in Government in this province just a few short months ago. Now, Mr. Speaker, in that 
seven years that the Liberal Party was in office in Saskatchewan in the 1960’s and up until June 23, 
1971, many unfortunate things happened to the public service of this province. And it may well be, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor of the day was not as vigilant as the Provincial Auditor of 1972 and 
1973. Because, Mr. Speaker, I am informed and I am now going to document a case which is identical to 
the one which is the subject matter of the Provincial Auditor’s report and which is the subject matter of 
the Public Accounts Committee report we are dealing with now. A case which goes back to 1969, Mr. 
Speaker, a contract for printing, in which there was a purchase order issued by the Queen’s Printer 
which was silent as to the time of payment, a contract under which an advance or interim payment was 
made before the delivery of the goods. Let me just refer the Members of the Assembly to this. I am sure 
that I wouldn’t need to tell those Members who were in the Government of that day about it. I am sure 
they are thoroughly familiar with it. But the Member for Albert Park was not in Government at that time 
so it is worthwhile that he learn about it and I am very glad to present this information to him. 
 
Here in the early part of 1969, the Department of Industry and Commerce, the Tourist Branch, under the 
signature of Mr. Springstein, who was the director of the Branch, indicated that certain printing was 
needed. That is 500,000 copies of a park folder, five different folders but 500,000 in total. So he sent 
that over to the Queen’s Printer, who in turn, under the date of February 24th, 1969, the Queen’s Printer 
issued a purchase order to Midwest litho, 221 Somerset Block of Regina, asking for the 500,000 copies 
of park folders, five sets, estimating the cost at $15,578.33. That, Mr. Speaker, was on February 24th, 
1969, the purchase order went over. Midwest Litho, on March 26th, 1969 submitted a bill to the Queen’s 
Printer and it is addressed to the office of the Queen’s Printer at the Legislative building and it says: 
 

18 sets of separation negatives for park folders, 135,000 sheets of satin coat offset. 
 

The total for this with the education tax added was $7,296.98. Now Mr. Speaker, at that time nothing 
had been delivered by Midwest Litho to any agency of the Government under this contract but they 
submitted an interim bill notwithstanding the fact that they ad delivered nothing. That, Mr. Speaker, was 
on the 26th of March, 1969. On the very same day a voucher for payment was prepared and I see 
according to the stamp of the Treasury Department of that day, on March 31, 1969 the payment was 
made. It was paid to Midwest Litho, the suppliers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in this particular case the final invoices were not rendered until May 30th, 1969. In 
total those final bills represented a request for payment of $9,268.78. A voucher was prepared on June 
6th, 1969. The total cost, including 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2947 

the interim payment, in March of 1969 of over $7000 and including the final payment in June, 1969 of 
over $9,000, came to $16,565.76. Mr. Speaker, there isn’t the slightest bit of difference between the case 
with Midwest Litho, In 1969 and the case in 1971-72 with the Service Printing Company. Not the 
slightest but of difference. Purchase order sent out and nothing said about the time for payment. Interim 
bill rendered, agreed it should be paid, because after all the printer at that time has incurred expense for 
stock and supplies and for setting type, for other materials and for wages he has paid to people for doing 
work in pursuance of completion of the contract. The interim payment asked for in 1968, without the 
benefit of any formal contract whatever. Interim payment made by the Liberal Government of the day. 
And it apparently, as I say, did not occur to the Provincial Auditor of that day that that should be the 
subject of any comment. 
 
I, frankly, welcome the fact that in 1973 the Provincial Auditor has made that kind of formality the 
subject of comment. I agree that the form as well as the substance of all contracts by the Government 
ought to be in order and I am glad to see that the Provincial Auditor is vigilant to see that that is done. 
But that is no support for the Member for Albert Park who ties to find in those two factual situations, 
one he know about and one he didn’t know about, he tires to find in those factual situations something 
illegal, something that would give the Government apparently the right to get money back or worse still, 
as he suggests and accuses us, something criminal, some theft going on. Does he suggest for a moment 
that Midwest Litho was stealing money from the Government in that situation. How could that possibly 
be? 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, let me take you to another time in 1969 and this story is going to take a little 
longer because it unfolds over four months and it isn’t completed until just before the election in 1971. 
Now this is a situation involving the Department of Industry and Commerce requesting a film to be 
made by an outside supplier. This story begins, Mr. Speaker, with the preparation of a document, which 
I suppose some people might call a formal contract. This transaction I may say, for the benefit of the 
Members of the Assembly, is the subject matter of Questions and Answers in this Session No. 310, 311, 
312. Those questions were answered just a week ago today on April 17th. 
 
Now, in 1969, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Government of the day, or at least the Deputy Minister of 
Industry of the Liberal Government of the day, signed a document dated May 23rd, 1969 which is 
headed ‘Agreement’ and says that this will constitute an agreement between Armadale Productions and 
the Saskatchewan Department of Industry and Commerce. It goes on to talk about a film, which is to be 
produced of approximately 25 to 30 minutes. It says the production cost to the client, that is the 
Department, is not to be less than $25,000 and not to be more than $30,000. That’s on May 23rd, 1969. 
Now in this document there is a provision, Mr. Speaker, in this formal document, for interim payments 
and it says: “That upon the client’s — that’s the Department of Industry and Commerce — authorizing 
the producer — that’s Armadale Productions — to proceed the producer is to be paid $5,000. Upon 
approval of the script another $10,000. The remainder upon delivery and approval of answer print.” 
Now I want to point out to the Assembly just how far over those several months up to the time just 
before the election 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2948 

of 1971, I want to point out just how far the Government of that day strayed from the terms of this 
so-called formal contract. Remember that the contract contemplates the production of a film of 25 to 30 
minutes. It, of course, provides that upon authorization to proceed $5,000 is to be paid. Well, as a matter 
of fact the contract was signed apparently on the 23rd of May 1969; an invoice for the $5,000 was 
rendered on May 27th, a voucher was prepared on June 18th and a payment of $5,000 was made on the 
25th of June, 1969. Then, apparently on August 31st, 1969 there must have been a script which 
somebody approved of and so on that date, August 31st, Armadale Productions rendered another 
account and a voucher was prepared on September 19th and payment was made on September 23rd. I 
hope the Member for Albert Park will notice that between the date of the voucher and the date of the 
payment four days elapsed and it was $10,000 that was paid. 
 
Now it is true that it was in complete conformity apparently with the formal contract. Nothing wrong 
with the form of the contract and nothing wrong with the payment according to the form of the contract. 
I don’t know about the substance of the contract. I don’t know what script was approved at what time 
and in fact I am sure no one knows what script was approved because it never saw the light of any 
television screen or of any screen so far as a script for a single film was concerned. 
 
Well, just to show you what happened, Mr. Speaker, let me quote from a memorandum prepared by Mr. 
Switzer who was then Director of Administrative Services in the Department. The memorandum was 
dated December 10th, 1970 and directed to the Hon. Mr. Estey, then the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce. A little later I am going to quote from a letter dated February 12th, 1971, signed apparently 
by on Bruce Cowie who identifies himself in the letter as Marketing Manager for Armadale Productions. 
 
Perhaps it is important, Mr. Speaker, for the Members to know at this time just who Armadale 
Productions are. I understand, Mr. Speaker, that on March 24th, 1969, according to the records in the 
Provincial Secretary’s office of the Registrar of Companies, on March 24th, 1969 a company called 
Phoenix Management Limited was registered here in the Province of Saskatchewan. The company 
didn’t file an annual return for 1969 but on May 8th, 1970, Phoenix Management Limited changed its 
name to Armadale Enterprises Limited and Armadale Productions is the registered trade name of 
Armadale Enterprises Limited. I notice apparently the attorney who was acting on behalf of that 
company which changed its name and adopted a trade name, the attorney was one L. Robert Pierce. 
Members of the Assembly may be familiar with that attorney, that practitioner of law here in Regina. 
 
According to the information available in the Registrar of Companies’ offices, the shareholders of 
Armadale Enterprises Limited are Clifford Sifton of Toronto, Michael Sifton of Crombie, Ontario and T. 
A. Cookson, also of Toronto. According to the Returns they have the same directors in 1971, 1972 and 
1973. Now I have had a look at the Directory of Directors for 1971 published by the Financial Post and I 
find that Mr. Clifford Sifton is chairman of a board of a company called Armadale Company Limited. 
He is chairman of the board of Armadale Publishers Limited, which publishes the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix. He is chairman of the board of Armadale Enterprises Limited, the company I just talked 
about that has been operating under the 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2949 

name of Armadale Productions. He is chairman of the board of Armadale Communications Limited, 
which operates the television station in Regina, the radio station in Regina, another radio station in 
Winnipeg and another one in Hamilton. Of course, he is also chairman of the Leader-Post Limited, 
which publishes the Leader-Post. The other Director of this company, Mr. Michael Sifton, is president 
of all of those companies that I have listed. That includes, as I say, the Star-Phoenix, the Leader-Post, 
CKCK-TV, CKCK radio. But here now starting in 1968, just a couple of months before this contract is 
entered into the Department of Industry and Commerce, just a couple of months before that, the contract 
is signed, this new operation is organized and registered which becomes known as Armadale 
Productions. 
 
Here is what happened to the film that was the subject matter of the contract. According to Mr. Switzer’s 
memo dated December 10th, 1970 he refers to industry colour film and sets out the paragraphs in 
numbers: 
 

1. The Department entered into an agreement with Armadale Productions on May 23, 1969 to 
produce a full sound and colour film on industrial development and tourism in the province. Film 
approximately 28 minute in length at a cost between $25,000 and $30,000. 

 
Paragraph 2: 
 

Payment totalling $15,000 has been paid to Armadale up to the present time. 
 
And he records payment in June of $5,000 in 1969 and a September payment of $10,000. And then he 
says, “Remainder is due in this fiscal year,” and he is writing on December 10, 1970. In the meantime 
apparently the Deputy Minister who had signed the agreement resigned. Mr. Switzer goes on his report, 
Paragraph 3: 
 

In June of 1970 the Department had certain reservations relating to the production of the film. 
 
The reasons: 
 

(a) We had no ministerial authority to sign the contract. 
(b) We had no approved funds in our Estimates other than approval to produce a black and white one 
half hour film at $5,000 
(c) It was felt that the story line in the previous approved script placed too much emphasis on 
departmental staff and its work rather than developing a picture of industrial progress and the benefits 
and amenities resulting from diversification. 
(d) The length of the film 28 minutes was too long. 

 
Mr. Switzer goes on to report, under the heading, “Action”. 
 

(a) We wanted the producer to cancel the contract and produce a short 15 minute or less film to fit into 
the amount of money already paid, $15,000. 
(b) The producer advised that they would not allow us to cancel the contract. 
(c) It was then agreed: (i) we would get two films, 15 to 18 minute film on industrial development, a 
12 minute film 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2950 

on tourism; (ii) a new script would be written for both films. 
 
Nothing said about that in the formal contract signed on the 23rd of May 1969 by the then deputy 
minister 
 

I go on and quote from Mr. Switzer’s memo: 
 
(d) A departmental film advisory committee was set up and recommendations made to the producer. 
(e) A new script was approved for the industrial film. 
(f) A script for the tourism film was developed. 
Results to date: (and he lists them): 

 
(a) The answer print for the industrial development film will be ready for review before Christmas. 
(b) The answer print for the tourist film will not be ready until after the Winter Games, each of the 
games to be included. 
(c) Const of the two films will be $30,000 — estimated $18,000 for the industrial film and $12,000 for 
the tourist film. 

 
Then under “Problems” he lists: 
 

(a) We did not budget for the $15,000 expenditure for this year. 
(b) We did not budget for any kind of exposure for next year. 

 
Then he goes on with his recommendations: 
 

We tried to absorb costs this year by reducing expenditures approved for other projects. Virement or 
transfer of funds from one sub-vote or branch may be necessary. 
 
For your information. 

 
He signs it with his own signature. 
 
Now, I promised the Members, and I know they wouldn’t want to go to supper without hearing this, I 
promised the Members that I would read them something from the letter dated February 12, 1971 of the 
marketing manager of Armadale Productions, one Bruce Cowie. He writes to Mr. Switzer under that 
date. I won’t quote all of the letter but there are a couple parts of the second paragraph that are very 
interesting. He said: 
 

For your information may I recap our financial arrangement as it affects both films. The total cost of 
both productions is $30,000. We have billed the entire amount as of December 31, 1970. 

 
Mr. Lane: — . . . was a contract! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Well, that’s right there was a contract. According to the contract the remainder of the 
payment was to be made upon delivery and approval of the answer print. But Mr. Cowie goes on in his 
letter and he said this: 
 

The above figures include one approved release print per film. If it was the desire of your department 
to effect 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2951 

a pay-out prior to receipt of the tourist film answer print, we would be prepared to accept the payment 
as the project is very near to completion. The total price for the two films . . . 

 
He goes on and repeats the figures I have given. Now he is billing December 31, 1970 the whole 
amount. On February 12, 1971: 
 

We are very near to completing the contact and making the delivery of the prints, but if you would like 
to pay us now we would be very glad to receive the payment. 

 
No one apparently concerned in those days about contacts or what the terms were or what the budgets 
were. Now let me just recap what actually happened in terms of these payments. I have already set out 
that $5,000 was paid in June of 1969; $10,000 was paid in September of 1969. Now we go down to 
October 26, 1970. Another invoice is sent, voucher prepared, on that one, not until March 29, 1971. On 
March 31st of 1971 the payment is made of $3,250. On December 31, 1970 another bill was rendered, at 
that time in the amount of $10,500, but the voucher is not prepared until March 31, 1971. The payment 
is made on March 31, 1971 for $10,500. The final invoice, Mr. Speaker, is rendered on April 30, 1971, 
the voucher was prepared on June 1, 1971, the payment was made on June 4, 1971 for $1,297.30. 
Making a total payment, Mr. Speaker, of $30,047.30. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened to these films? Well, if you will take a look at the answers to the questions 
I referred to earlier you will see the fate of the films. One of the films, called the Challenge of Change, 
the so-called industrial film, was used in the election campaign of the Government in 1971 to bolster its 
faltering image on the question of industrial development. The tourist film, Mr. Speaker, has never been 
televised. We don’t know what happened to that one. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a little more to say and I particularly want to have something to say about the 
Member for Albert Park, but I see it is 5:30. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 o’clock p.m. until 7:00 o’clock. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I had dealt at some length with the subject matter of the Public Accounts 
Committee report as it relates to the Department of Industry and Commerce. I dealt at some length with 
the statements made by the Provincial Auditor in his report. I have set out as clearly as I can the reasons 
why I say that when the advance payment which is subject matter of both reports was made the people 
responsible believe there was a valid and binding contract consented to and agreed to by the supplier and 
by the Government to pay for the goods. We believe that both the interim payment and the final 
payment were properly made. The Provincial Auditor has said there was, in his words, “no evidence of a 
formal contract.” In that sense there was no proper authority apparently to make the payment. 
 
I have pointed out and I am going to come back to that before I sit down that the draft report of the 
Public Accounts Committee does not accurately re-state the words of the Provincial Auditor in his 
report. 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2952 

As I said when I began the only reason I have had to enter this debate at all and to deal with these 
matters at such length is because of the false accusations of the Member for Albert Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Albert Park by these false statements has done great 
damage. He has slandered me, he has slandered my colleagues in the Cabinet, he has slandered the 
members of the Public Service in the three agencies of the Government concerned with this transaction. 
He has made false statements to the discredit of all of us, Mr. Speaker, he has had to make the 
statements he made here which are false. 
 
The Member for Albert Park is not like a bull in china shop, some people might suggest he is, but I 
suggest he is not like a bull in a china shop. Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing about a bull in a china shop is 
that he does physical damage and that’s all the damage he does. Not so with the Member for Albert 
Park. One thing about a bull in a china shop is that kind of an animal is mature, is bold, is strong, acts 
openly. Not so, the Member for Albert Park. Where maturity is called for he is petty. Where boldness 
would be commendable he is cowardly. Where strength is needed he seeks to take an unfair advantage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Where he ought to act openly and aboveboard he acts sneakily behind the closed doors 
of the Public Accounts Committee when he had an opportunity, if he had the courage or the courtesy to 
go into these matters thoroughly, he does not. The reason he does not is because he wants to wait his 
opportunity so that in the sanctity of this Chamber, where he will be free from any legal consequences, 
he wants to make false statements to the discredit of myself, the Cabinet and the members of the Public 
Service. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, he lacks maturity. How he is a new Member of the Assembly. There are new 
Members of this Assembly such as the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross), the Member for 
Assiniboia (Mr. Lange). They don’t have as many years as the Member for Albert Park, but his extra 
years, Mr. Speaker, have done nothing for him. These younger men stand like giants compared to him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I said, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Albert Park is cowardly. Had he wanted the truth 
and all the facts he could have had me called by the Public Accounts Committee. He could have allowed 
me to face accusers, he could have let me cross-examine everyone who could shed any light on the 
questions raised by the Provincial Auditor’s report. But if he had one that, Mr. Speaker, he would have 
been prevented from making this cowardly attack in this Chamber. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2953 

Mr. Thorson: — I said he was weak in his conduct here. He makes accusations, Mr. Speaker, which 
have no basis in fact and no basis in law. One could perhaps excuse him if he did not claim to be a 
lawyer, but no self-respecting counsel worthy of that designation would, in arguing a case, ignore 
pertinent facts and distort other facts for the purpose of trying to make a case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Then he goes on from ignoring facts and distorting facts to making a legally 
indefensible accusation of civil wrong, of criminal conduct. I said he acted sneakily. He was careful in 
his statements in this debate to avoid quoting from my memorandum. I remind the Members again the 
memorandum said that I approved of a payment, an advance payment, and I emphasize the following 
words ‘on the contract’. It is a memorandum prepared and executed because I believed there was a 
contract just as the other members of the Public Service believed there was a contract. But apparently he 
hoped, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Albert Park, that he would not be detected in his deceit and his 
deception. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I haven’t any great pleasure in having to say this about another Member of Legislature. I 
said that he has done great damage and he has, by his slanderous statements, false statements to discredit 
of members of the Public Service, to the discredit of Members of Cabinet, to the discredit of myself. But 
more than that, Mr. Speaker, he has done damage to the traditions of British Parliaments by resorting to 
this kind of false, cowardly attack on public servants, on Members of Cabinet. He slanders men without 
respect, not even with regard for the truth. He does it by deceit and by distortion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our language has a rich heritage of good literature, I wish I could express the depth of my 
conviction that the Member for Albert Park has done a great discredit to this province and to this 
Legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — But perhaps I can call upon someone who is more eloquent than I am. Here is William 
Shakespeare in the play Othello. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Is he NDP? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Let me quote what he says which applies to the Member for Albert Park and to this 
situation. He says: 
 

Good name in man and woman, dear my Lord, 
Is the immediate jewel of their souls; 
Who steals my purse, steals trash; ‘tis something, nothing; 
‘Twas mine, ‘tis his, and has been slave to thousands; 
But he that filches from me my good name 
Robs me of that which not enriches him, 
And make me poor indeed. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Albert Park had to resort to falsehood and to deceit, made 
unfounded allegations of wrong 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2954 

doing, of illegality; went further, made unfounded allegations of criminal conduct when he must have 
known that all of that was false. He could not, Mr. Speaker, have done it carelessly but did it 
deliberately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the Assembly for giving me so much time to review in such considerable detail all 
of the pertinent facts surrounding this draft report of the Committee. I must say, while I endorse and 
support the Provincial Auditor’s report on the basis on which he made it, I cannot support the 
Committee in misstating the words of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I remind the House, again, that the Provincial Auditor was concerned about the 
formalities of the contract, about the technical form of the written documents. He never, for one 
moment, suggested that there was anything amiss about the substance of the contract. In the technical 
sense that there was something to be desired about the form of the contract, he made the statement that 
apparently an advance payment was made without proper authority. Unfortunately, the draft report of 
the Committee, which we are now considering, leaves out the full wording contained in the Provincial 
Auditor’s report and says as though it were a fact stated by the Provincial Auditor, which it was not, that 
the payment was made without proper authority. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Committee is of that opinion then they could have said so in their draft report 
but that is not what the draft report says. The draft report of the Committee which we are now 
considering, purports to say that the Provincial Auditor said that the payment had been made without 
lawful authority. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it seems quite clear that this Assembly should not concur in 
the report of the Committee on Public Accounts for that particular reason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I emphasize again that I support the Provincial Auditor in his questioning of the 
technicalities and the formalities of contracts and calls for members of the Public Service to adhere to 
the technical requirements of the legislation in the Department of Finance Act. No one quarrels with that 
and if the Committee does say that it wants to see that kind of control followed, I agree with that. But no 
Members of the Assembly can agree with the misstatement of the Provincial Auditor’s report as 
contained in the draft report of the Committee. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
Mr. Thorson: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to move, seconded by the Hon. the Attorney General 
(Mr. Romanow): 

 
That the words “concurred in” be deleted and the word “received” substituted therefor. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. Macdonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, I have never heard 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2955 

such unmitigated tripe in this House as I have heard in the last two hours. Mr. Speaker, the Member 
from Souris-Estevan quoted some poetry. I want to quote a little. 
 

To be or not to be, that is the question, 
Whether ‘tis nobler in mind to suffer 
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune 
Or to take up arms against a sea of troubles 

 
And then the most important one: 
 

Me thinketh he protesteth too much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have never seen an occasion of a Member to attempt to whitewash an unanimous report, 
a report that was not signed by the Members on this side of the House. The Member who signed it and 
agreed to this unanimously was the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) and all the Members on that 
side of the House. Let me say, I want to see how the Members on the Public Accounts Committee stand 
up on that side of the House and support that particular amendment in an attempt to whitewash the thing. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, what he did to defend the actions was to take an attack against my 
colleague, the Member from Albert Park (Mr. McLeod). He said he was a sneak. Mr. Speaker, let me 
ask you, why did not the Member from Touchwood, why did not any of the other Members on that 
Committee stand up and invite the Minister of Industry to come to the Public Accounts and defend his 
position. And I’ll tell you why. Because they were ashamed, they were ashamed of what he did, and they 
knew exactly what he did was wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Industry and Commerce can stand up and make all the two-hour tripey 
speeches that he wants and there is no way he can whitewash the NDP preferential treatment to the NDP 
with public funds of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, he said it did a damage to the British 
Parliamentary System. The only damage to the British Parliamentary System is a political party that will 
use public funds to promote their own self-interest. And that’s the damage to the British Parliamentary 
System, and don’t ever kid yourself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the issue here? The issue in this House tonight is whether or not the Government of 
Saskatchewan should use its power as the Government of this province to give preferential treatment to 
a printing press that is owned by their own political party to finance their own political machine at the 
expense of taxpayers and that’s the issue here. Mr. Speaker, he talks about what it is. I want to tell you 
what it is. The reason that this particular thing is so important. I have here the printing orders received 
1972-73 — $39,730 was given to Service Printers without tender, Mr. Speaker, without tender. In 1971 
–72 — $54,580 and two of those out of about 25 without tender. And they turn around, Mr. Speaker, and 
they the Minister of Industry and Commerce stands up . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I must insist on a little more quiet. This talking across the floor and 
pointing fingers is not conducive to a good conduct of debate and I must ask Members to desist. 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2956 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Minister of Justice, of all people, the Minister of Justice defending the 
Minister and seconding the motion to whitewash the NDP from a political scandal. And when my 
colleague from Albert Park says a theft, I say it’s a theft of taxpayers’ money, not by the Minister of 
Industry, but by the NDP and the NDP Government. A real theft, Mr. Speaker. Now he turns around, 
Mr. Speaker, and he says, “Well, let me ask you . . . 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. The Hon. Member accused the Government and all 
Members on this side of theft. And unless the Hon. Member can prove theft then I suggest that he 
withdraw that statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what you call theft, but when you turn around . . . 
 
Mr. Smishek: — On a Point of Order again, to ask the Member to withdraw his allegation, an allegation 
which is unparliamentary accusation accusing everybody on this side of the House of theft. 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — The Member for Milestone made the accusation against the NDP. According to the 
Premier, this afternoon, the NDP doesn’t exist in this Assembly so the Minister of Health shouldn’t have 
to worry. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Absolutely! This afternoon, when placed in another compromising position, Mr. 
Speaker, where they had a deliberate plot and scheme, a nefarious scheme to distort the will of the 
people to elect a local government of the city of Regina, the Premier stood up . . . 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I ask you to make a ruling on that particular point that I raised. To 
accuse the Government and all the Members of this side of the House of theft and whether this is the 
parliamentary way of conducting business in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! If I recall right, the Member said that he accused the NDP and the Members on 
that side of the House of theft. Will the Hon. Member sit down while I am speaking or I will adjourn the 
House until tomorrow. As I recall it, the Hon. Member said he accused the NDP and Members on that 
side of the House of theft. It is true that the parties can be stated but not Members and if the Hon. 
Member made that statement I wish he would withdraw it and continue with his debate. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, there is no way that I would want to go against your ruling and I 
withdraw the Members of the House and just say the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, there is just no question 
about it. When they turn around and deliberately channel almost $100,000 to the Service Printing and 
then have the Minister of Industry get up here for two hours of tripe and justify it because of some 
apparent illegalities, I want to tell him there are probably hundreds of them but in this particular case the 



 
April 24, 1973 

 

 
2957 

Provincial Auditor pointed one out. And don’t suggest that they are identical. A payment to an 
independent company and printer, a Saskatchewan company, a Regina firm which has done business and 
established a reputation of honesty and integrity in this province for years and say that’s the same as 
channelling money into your own political pockets for your own re-election. Mr. Speaker, that is not the 
same. I say it was a shameful performance, a shameful performance to stand up here, not so much to 
stand up and defend the Minister of Industry because he’s only the mouth-piece, he is only the 
spokesman, he is only the instrument of the whole Government. The NDP have stood up in this House 
for years and defended the channelling of public funds into the Commonwealth newspaper, they 
defended the channelling of public funds into Service Printing and now they stand up here, today, and 
channel a question of an illegal payment, an advance payment to look after the political necessities of 
the NDP. I say that is illegal, I say it is wrong. I say it is morally wrong and I say the people of 
Saskatchewan will judge you for it. And don’t point the finger at the Member for Albert Park because he 
has a responsibility of bringing that to your attention and to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What is the responsibility of the Public Accounts Committee? When the Auditor says, and let me quote. 
He says, you know, that was a formal contract. Let me quote: 
 

And that appeared in this instance, Mr. MacLeod said. And you sent that requisition to the Queen’s 
Printer which is in the Department of Government Services and the Department of Government 
Services, through the Queen’s Printer, the agency of the Queen’s Printer, then looked around and 
selected a company to do the job. Is that correct? 

 
Mr. Switzer said: 
 

Yes. 
 
Then Mr. MacLeod said: 
 

And they got a price on it. Did they then submit it to you before you made your final approval of the 
contract, if you call it a contract? 

 
And then the Minister stands up here and says: “In my memo I mentioned the contract.” And that’s the 
very thing, even his own civil servant, his own administrative officer challenges his opinion of a 
contract. Where is the contract? Why don’t you table it in the Legislative Assembly instead of talking 
about a formal contract? There was no formal contract and that was the responsibility of the Auditor of 
the Legislative Assembly in the Province of Saskatchewan to point that out that it was a wrongdoing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was only a technicality and I am the first to admit it. If it hadn’t been that it was the NDP 
political machine, the NDP Service Printers, where they took $100,000 in the last two years and then 
they turn around and do you know what they do? They bring in a Bill, The Election Expenses Act, and 
they say that the Liberal Party, the Opposition in this province can only spend $50,000 on an election 
platform and they channel $100,000 in two years to their own political machine. And then 



 
April 24, 1973 
 

 
2958 

they stand up here and say morally and say that the Member is a sneak for bringing it to the public’s 
attention, and saying that’s a terrible thing. I say, Mr. Speaker, that I have seen some dishonesty. I have 
seen some political dishonesty and I say the offence of this afternoon and the offence of last night and 
the offence of this morning where they turn around and have a political, if you want to call it the 
Watergate Affair, I say this is far worse than the Watergate because it is a deliberate attempt not 
between political parties but by subterfuge to turn around and intimidate the mayor and the local council 
of the city of Regina, intimidation by organized phone calls of political hacks, and then they turn around 
and justify this standing up in this Assembly. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s nonsense. We should like to examine and take the record of the Minister of 
Industry and what he had to say about the past records today and, therefore, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Additional House Sittings 
 
Mr. Romanow: — (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by the Minister of 
Health (Mr. Smishek): 
 

That on Wednesday, April 25, 1973, and on each Wednesday until the end of the Session, Rule 3(3) be 
suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 o’clock p.m. until 9:30 
o’clock p.m. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek): 
 

That on Friday, April 27, 1973, and on each Friday until the end of the Session, Rule 3(3) be 
suspended so that sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 o’clock p.m. until 9:30 o’clock 
p.m. 

 
Further: 
 

Notwithstanding Rule 3(4), on Saturday, April 28, 1973, and on each Saturday until the end of the 
Session, the Assembly shall meet at 10:00 o’clock a.m. until 5:30 o’clock p.m.; that there shall be a 
recess of two hours at 12:30 o’clock p.m; and that the Order of Business shall be the same as on 
Thursday. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:34 o’clock p.m. 


