
























































Hansard: April 23, 1973


2892 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session – Seventeenth Legislature 

62nd Day 
Monday, April 23, 1973. 

 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. A. Taylor: — (Minister of Social Services) Before the Orders of the Day I should like to inform 
the Assembly that his Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor having been informed of the subject matter of 
the following resolution recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. By leave of the Assembly 
I would move, seconded by Mr. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the Hon. Member for Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) on and from 
Tuesday, April 24th, 1973 until Monday, April 30th, 1973, to attend on behalf of this Assembly 
a Federal-Provincial Welfare Ministers’ conference at Ottawa, and that the Hon. Member be 
reimbursed for air fare and out-of-pocket expenses in attending this said conference. 
 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, just before the resolution is voted on, I should just 
like to say a word. First of all the Opposition has agreed, but I would like to point out the original 
resolution passed by the Welfare Committee requested that the chairman and the vice-chairman 
extended an invitation to attend if it was found desirable that both the chairman and the vice-chairman 
accompany the Minister of this trip to Ottawa to this particular conference, because it has some far 
reaching implications. There was a strong feeling among the Committee that if one side went the other 
side should go so that both would have an opportunity for the benefit. The Government did not see fit to 
send the vice-chairman, the Member from Morse (Mr. Weibe) and decided only to send the Member 
from Hanley, or the chairman of the Committee. We regret that the Government has taken this attitude. 
We would have hoped that this Committee was a non-partisan Committee, that if there was in going that 
both sides of the House should have had the opportunity, particularly at the public expenditure. We are 
now here asked to vote that the Member for Hanley’s expenses be paid. We felt that if this was 
desirable, certainly it was desirable to send both of them. However, the Committee did agree in this 
regard. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Protection of Japan’s Agricultural Industry from Imports 
 
Mr. T. M. Weatherald: — (Cannington) Mr.Speaker, before the 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2893 

Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the Minster of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). Is the 
Minister of Agriculture aware that in a recent newspaper the Prime Minister of Japan is now receiving 
accolades for acting to protect Japan’s agricultural industry from imports, including such items as 
Canadian pork? Apparently, Mr. Speaker, the Japanese Agricultural Minister as well as the Prime 
Minister of Japan has recently said: 
 

The Government intends to maintain a protectionist policy for agricultural imports. 
 
And with this they claim is one of the reasons why Canadian exporters of pork products are now not 
receiving orders from Japan. In quoting, Mr. Speaker, from the Financial Post of April 21st, 1973, I now 
ask the Minister of Agriculture if he is aware of this situation and if he is now prepared to look at the 
tie-in for exporting pork to Japan that has been recently announced in Manitoba? 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker, I am aware of the situation but I have not 
seen the newspaper report that the Member for Cannington referred to. It is one more reason why we 
should have been signing contracts some months ago rather than delaying the Natural Products 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. The article I quote from is from the 
Financial Post and it says that the price started falling some months ago before the price in Canada 
started to fall. The article is entitled: “Okagi Protectionism Lowers out Pork Prices”, which goes on to 
tell us, Mr. Speaker, what I previously said – With the severity of this I now suggest strongly to the 
Minister of Agriculture . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where’s the question? 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — I now ask the Minister of Agriculture if he is prepared to tell the farmers of 
Saskatchewan what the price of pork will be before he signs the contract with Japan? 
 
Mr. Messer: — I will take the Member’s recommendation into consideration, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Prices of Pork in a Contract by Manitoba 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct 
another question to the Minister of Agriculture. I have here a copy of the Globe and Mail which outlines 
in some detail the price of pork in a contract recently signed by the Manitoba Hog Producers’ marketing 
Association. It works out to about 37 or 38 cents. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Shame, shame! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — I wonder, is this the kind of bonanza the Minister has in 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2894 

mind for Saskatchewan farmers? Secondly, will the new Sask. Expork, or whatever it is called, Expork 
Canada West, will we be sharing Manitoba’s good fortune to the tune of an 8 cent reduction in pork 
from our own Saskatchewan hog producers? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, the relationship between former Manitoba agreements whatever they may 
be, has no relationship to Expork Canada West Limited. The Hon. Members opposite should wait and 
see and give Expork Canada Limited an opportunity to negotiate contracts at fair prices. They are trying 
to undermine it the same as they were other progressive steps taken by this Government 
 

Joint Agency to Determine Production Quotas 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Agriculture. I have in my hand a Press report from the Minster of Agriculture 
in Manitoba. “Mr. Uskiw said that the joint agency will determine production quotas in each of the 
provinces”. In my left hand I have a letter that was sent out by the Minister of Agriculture in 
Saskatchewan to tall of the farmers in the province and he said: 
 

It is not the intention of the Hog marketing Commissions to control the producer’s production 
decisions. 

 
To back that up, incidentally, I have a letter here also written by the Member for Cut Knife (Mr. 
Kwasnica) where he has underlined this part in his letter: 
 

. . . does not have the power to control the number of hogs you, the farmer, can raise. 
 
Really, my question is this, is the Minister of Agriculture in Manitoba right in saying that there will be 
production quota in each province or is the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan right and the 
Member from Cut Knife in saying that there will be no production quotas or no production controls? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, my first suggestion to the Member from Moosomin is that he ask the 
Agriculture Minister in Manitoba in regard to the statements that he makes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in regard to his general . . . 
 
Mr. Stewart: — What . . . 
 
Mr. Messer: — . . . Mr. Speaker, may I answer the question. The Leader of the Opposition has 
obviously had a bad weekend again visiting the general public of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
Members opposite are well aware that Expork Canada West Limited, in no way has powers to limit the 
production of hogs either in Saskatchewan or Manitoba and it is not the intention of the Department of 
Agriculture, The Hog marketing Commission or Expork Canada West Limited to limit the production of 
hogs in Saskatchewan in any way. It is to do exactly the opposite to encourage and expand the 
production of hogs at stable prices. 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2895 

Mr. Gardner: — A supplementary question, would the Minister then contact the Minister of 
Agriculture in Manitoba and have him withdraw these remarks because they have caused considerable 
concern in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
I think the questions are getting way from what is intended on Orders of the Day when we are talking 
about Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, surely on a Point of Order in the question period. How can you say that 
the questions are getting away when the whole point of the question we are talking about is the price of 
hogs and statements made by the Minister in Manitoba that are printed in the Saskatoon paper? Surely 
we have got the right to question the Minister to find out if he has made some secret deal, whether he is 
lying or the Minister of Manitoba is lying. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I suggest that Ministers of the Crown here are not responsible for the 
statements made by the Ministers of Manitoba. They are responsible for statements they make 
themselves but we cannot ask Ministers here to justify statements made by Ministers in Manitoba. 
That’s my suggestion to the Members. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, just on that point I beg to differ somewhat. The Agriculture Minister of 
Manitoba was speaking for the joint Saskatchewan-Manitoba corporation. So surely in that case, when 
he is talking for us, out only other channel is though the other partner in this great export agency right 
across the floor. Where else could we go? 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minster of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 118 — An Act respecting 
The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I wish in speaking to this amendment to The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Act, 
to point out that the amendment provides for another change in the crop insurance program in 
Saskatchewan which will further reduce the premium paid by farmers for the protection that is provided 
under The Crop Insurance Act. Legislation has been tabled in the House of Commons to amend the 
Federal Crop Insurance Act. This legislation provides for the Federal Government to increase its 
contribution to the premium from the present 25 per cent to 50 per cent with the province paying all of 
the administration costs. Under the present legislation the Federal Government now pays 50 per vent of 
the administration costs and the province pays 50 percent of the administration costs. The possibility for 
this change in cost-sharing arrangement under the Act first arose at the Federal-Provincial Conference of 
Ministers of Agriculture in July, 1971. That, incidentally, Mr. Speaker, was the first conference that I 
had the opportunity of attending as the Minister of Agriculture of the Province of 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2896 

Saskatchewan. It was promoted by ourselves in our time that a change would increase both the Federal 
and Provincial contribution to make the program more effective to farmers, particularly in 
Saskatchewan. Our proposal at that time, and has been since that time, that Saskatchewan carry the full 
administrative cost and that the federal Government increase its share of premium to 50 per cent. Both 
levels of Government would increase assistance to farmers so that farmers’ contributions are reduced 
from 75 per cent to 50 per cent of the premium necessary to cover the indemnities. 
 
The Federal Government has finally agreed in principle at least to this position and we are pleased to 
co-operate with the Federal Government in providing a reduced premium rate to farmers. However, the 
necessary legislation is still to be passed at the Federal level. 
 
The amendment to The Federal Crop Insurance Act for some reasons has been delayed. The 
Saskatchewan Government is now undertaking to put new cost-sharing arrangements into effect and has 
in fact committed itself to the resulting new premium structure regardless of what the Federal 
Government does. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, means that not only will we be paying the full administrative cost but if the Federal 
legislation for some reason continues to be delayed and cannot be passed previous to our having to pay 
the money on behalf of the farmers, it means that the Province of Saskatchewan is also paying the 50 per 
cent that the Federal Government would be contributing to premiums. The Government of 
Saskatchewan has taken the initiative by guaranteeing not only the administrative costs but the premium 
costs for 1973. Increased Government contribution by the two top levels of Government has our 
endorsement since crop failure not only affects individual farmers but entire communities. The resulting 
lack of purchasing power due to crop failures in such basic industries as agriculture can have 
repercussions throughout our economy. Consequently we agree that the general public should share in a 
substantial part of the cost involved at both Federal and Provincial level if this is possible. 
 
With the implementation of this legislation and the previous changes that were made, the crop insurance 
program has been greatly expanded and improved over the last year and one half. It now offers a greatly 
enhanced degree of protection against crop loss. The additional features included in the crop insurance 
program together with this reduced premium now provides Saskatchewan farmers with a comprehensive 
plan of crop insurance protection at a very, very reasonable cost. The program is much more attractive 
now from a cost point of view. 
 
With the expanded effort being carried out to explain the advantages and operation of The Crop 
Insurance Program I can see the majority of farmers using the program in the near future and benefiting 
from the stability of income that it provides. It is in keeping with our emphasis on development in 
association with stability in returns. Another example, Mr. Speaker, of what this Government is doing to 
stabilize the agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having made these few brief remarks in regard to the amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Act I move second reading. 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2897 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, we are certainly pleased to see the Bill before us 
today. We were aware that the Federal Government had recently announced some changes whereby they 
were increasing their contribution to the crop insurance fund and we are happy to see that the province is 
co-operating and that the farmers will benefit from this reduction in premiums. We are particularly 
pleased because throughout some areas of the province this year it appears that it may be a dry year and 
there may be more people thinking about crop insurance. We realize their time is rather short to make 
their application, we don’t want unduly to hold up the Bill for that reason. I believe April 30th is the 
closing date for applications for crop insurance. We would hope that this is passed and that the farmers 
are made aware of the increased benefits to them so that more of them can take advantage of it. 
 
With those few words, Mr. Speaker, we will be supporting the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
Hon. A. Taylor (Minister of Social Services) moved second reading of Bill No. 113 — An Act to amend 
The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am very happy at this time to be able to introduce a Bill which will provide 
amendments to the Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act for second reading. There are two 
separate sources of amendment which are embodied in this particular Bill based on principles our 
Government believes should be major objectives in all superannuation plans. 
 
The first principle is that of portability. The right of every man to have his pension rights transferred 
with him when he changes jobs and changes employers. 
 
The second principle is protection from inflation. I suppose that no one is affected more by the steady 
and constant increase in the cost of living than is the individual on a fixed pension. Some means of 
alleviating or compensating for this factor has to be found. In order to better cope with these and many 
other areas relating to superannuation, established during this Session was a special committee to study 
the superannuation program of the Provincial Government and related Crown agencies. Members will 
remember my announcement of this some time ago. In the meantime, however, the necessity of some 
form of interim measures to broaden the scope of the present Act becomes readily apparent. These 
amendments to The Superannuation Supplementary Benefits Act are, therefore intended as an interim 
measure pending the results of the study that have already been instituted. 
 
First of all the Act provides for inclusion of the University of Saskatchewan in the definition of public 
service employers. 
 
This has been done so that the Government of Saskatchewan can enter into reciprocal agreements with 
the University and vice versa on pensions. It applies to the five superannuation plans involved in this 
Act. 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2898 

There is presently a reciprocal agreement between the Public Service of Saskatchewan and the 
University itself. 
 
This amendment will provide machinery for the introduction of similar agreements between Sask Tel, 
Sask Power, Liquor Board or Workmens’ Compensation Board and the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am certain that all the Members of the House will support this particular move which will mean that 
one other deterrent to the free flow of human resources within the province will be removed. 
 
I don’t need to stress the importance of superannuation and other benefits in acting as a means of 
deterring individuals from moving from one employer to another. By allowing the establishment of 
reciprocal agreements with the University we widen the range of occupational opportunities available to 
individuals without loss of benefits and simultaneously allow for a free inter-change and exchange of 
people. This exchange can do nothing, I think, but up-grade the standards of both sides. 
 
With regard to the problems associated with the cost of living, the Government has established, as an 
interim measure, a cost of living adjustment for this year for all pensions established prior to December 
31, 1972 and presently in effect ranging from 22 per cent for those pensioners who retired in 1952 or 
earlier down to 2 per cent for those pensioners who retired in 1972. 
 
This increase, Mr. Speaker, includes increases for widows or dependants. 
 
All pensions presently being paid will benefit from the adjustments proposed with the older pensions 
receiving the higher adjustments. 
 
Similar adjustments for those pensioners receiving lower pensions have been made before. Indeed, I 
suppose, Mr. Speaker, that every government, whether our own or previous administrations, have had to 
face the same difficulty in the cost of living increasing and pensions just not keeping pace. There have 
been a number of interim measures introduced to provide some sort of immediate relief. 
 
However, in making a total adjustment for all pensioners, the Government is taking a step towards 
recognition of the principle that erosion of pension benefits by chronic inflation affects all people on 
fixed incomes. And that we do have responsibility not just as a Government but also as employers to 
account for this in our superannuation benefits. The adjustments to be made this year is based on 2 per 
cent for 1972 and moving backward at 1 per cent a year to 1952 in order to provide those who have 
suffered most from the inflationary spiral with the largest increase. 
 
It should also provide a reasonable starting point for whatever recommendations the Special Committee 
might take into account for increases and rises of cost of living when it has completed its study. 
 
It should like to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that this is an 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2899 

interim measure to provide some immediate relief and that it ought to be a base on which further 
changes can be built when this Special Committee has completed its study of the plants. 
 
If one looks then at the amendments as I do and as the Government does as providing a starting point for 
much wider review of the superannuation systems in Government, I think we have to acknowledge that 
they are important principles and I am sure that all Members of the House will support them. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 113 — An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, a few comments on Bill No. 113. And the simplest and 
most direct comment that can be made I think, is that it is a complete disaster and a failure on the part of 
the NDP Government to recognize the erosion of the pension dollar due to inflation. And especially so 
since the Minister pointed out himself that this is one of the great concerns of this humanitarian 
Government opposite. They were going to rectify any and all injustices in this regard, going to straighten 
out everything and going to make all things right for all people. 
 
Now they have had two years to do something about pensions that have been eroded due to inflation. 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, does not in any way solve the problem insofar as the erosion of the pension 
dollar is concerned. 
 
I point out that the Minister himself mentioned this goes back 1 per cent per year. I think it was in 
British Columbia their own colleagues a few months ago or less boosted pensions retroactively to 
teachers and others to the tune of 3 per cent a year. And the best this Government can come up with is 1 
per cent. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, the other point made by the Minister that this is an interim measure and that there is a 
great study going on is just pure hogwash. They don’t need to undertake any great study to determine 
the amount of inflation and erosion that has happened as a result of that over the last number of years. 
One phone to DBS, one phone call to his own Department will tell him just how much the dollar has 
shrunk due to inflation since 1952. It doesn’t take a one-year study and then two years to do something. 
I regret that the Government hasn’t taken the kind of action that they promised everybody they were 
going to take in this regard. 
 
As far as the portability features are concerned, portability isn’t really new. I am not sure and I will have 
questions for the Minister in Committee on this aspect. But I don’t really follow his comments in that 
regard as to where the portability is expanded in this Bill before us. 
 
Now they added the University as being another Government agency. I don’t know whether that was 
related to another Bill that was before us here, Mr. Speaker, to make the University a part of the 
Government or not. But there has also been reciprocity between the various agencies and the various 
corporations so there is really nothing new here. 
 
The whole pension portability Bill — Pension Benefits Act 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2900 

was brought in by the Liberal Government a few years ago, making portable pensions available to all 
concerned so there is nothing really new here. 
 
Again, I can only express regret that the Government opposite hasn’t taken the kind of action that they 
are pledged to take under the New Deal for People, and they are using as an excuse a committee to 
determine the degree of inflation that we have had in the last 20 years. I haven’t heard of a weaker 
excuse since this House started, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. W. E. Smishek: — (Minister of Public Health) Mr. Speaker, I am surprised at the remarks of the 
Hon. Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac). If he is now trying to lecture us for not going far enough, I 
would invite him to take a look at the Liberal Government’s record for a period of seven years. They 
have virtually done nothing about improving Civil Service pensions. 
 
In the last two years more has been done about improving Civil Service pensions than they did in a 
period of seven years. Because the truth is that they did nothing about them. 
 
Let me remind the Member that in the area of ceilings, despite the fact that numerous representations 
had been made by the Government Employees Association and by civil servants generally, what did the 
Liberal Government do? It was not until the dying days of their administration that they made an 
amendment to raise the ceiling up to $16,000. Since we have taken office, last year as a temporary 
measure, we raised the ceiling to $18,000 and this year the Minister has brought in a Bill to remove the 
ceiling completely. 
 
Last year we made amendments to adjust and make provision for more adequate pensions than existed 
last year and the previous years. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. The Minister is talking about a Bill that was 
debated here last week. He is not talking about the Bill that is before us at all. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to 
call the Minister to order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — As I understand it, the Minister is attempting to answer statements made by the Hon. 
Member who just preceded him on the pension plans. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, to a Bill we debated last week, raising the ceilings of pensions. This Bill 
deals only with the inflationary factor and adjustment of the cost of living. 
 
Mr. Smishek: — It is pretty obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member has a thin skin. I touched a 
sensitive nerve to which he is beginning to respond and he feels guilty about the Liberal record. The 
Liberals have every reason to feel guilty about their record in terms of improving pensions for civil 
servants and other employees of the Government, such as Crown corporations because for 7 years they 
sat on their fannies doing nothing 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2901 

about improving pensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recommendations brought in by the Minister of Social Services and the Minister in 
charge of the Public Service Commission and Superannuation go a long way to try and meet the 
problem. It is true and I will concede that this Bill doesn’t meet the problem. It is true and I will concede 
that this Bill doesn’t meet the total problem. But to say that this can be done overnight without a study is 
something that obviously the Hon. Member doesn’t understand. Actuarial studies to find out what costs 
need to be undertaken and to determine how much money is involved are necessary. This is precisely 
what is being done by the present administration. Certainly the measures don’t go far enough but at least 
they go part of the way, a long way further than the Liberal administration did at any time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. C. P. Macdonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but respond to the Minister of Health 
(Mr. Smishek). 
 
You know what the maximum pension was for civil servants in the Province of Saskatchewan? $6,000. 
That was when the NDP left the Government of Saskatchewan. That was what the maximum pension 
benefit was. When we left the Government of Saskatchewan in 1971, it was $16,000. We raised the 
pension benefits three times when we became the Government and the Minister says we did nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we brought in the Pension Benefits Act in 1966 to guarantee portability. Mr. Speaker, in 
those seven years there was more done for pension benefits than any other thing and don’t let the 
Minister of Public Health try to come to the Minister’s defence and try and justify the hopelessly 
inadequate measures of this particular Bill. 
 
The erosion of the pension dollar has been a significant factor right across Canada and governments 
right across Canada are recognizing this, the last two or three years particularly. And governments from 
British Columbia to Ontario, right across this nation have recognized that the erosion of the pension 
dollar has become very drastic and pension benefits, particularly for retired civil servants and teachers of 
many years ago, are hopelessly inadequate. 
 
Now all governments are making special provision to make up for that. Except the NDP in the Province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And let us not let the Minister of Health confuse the issue. Let’s not let 
him talk about what the Liberal Government did. It is his responsibility and their responsibility to bring 
forth adequate pensions to retired civil servants who are on very low income and have had their dollar 
eroded. 
 
Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Milestone would 
rather be wrong than quiet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2902 

Mr. Robbins: — He made a comment about a $6,000 pension when the New Democrats left office and 
he talked about $16,000 when the Liberals left office. He is comparing two things that are totally 
different. One is a pension, an actual pension payment, the other is the ceiling on which contributions 
can be made for pensions. Two totally different things. 
 
The maximum pension in terms of The Public Service Act is now at $7,000. If you are going to compare 
the two you had better start comparing things that are comparable. 
 
Frankly, one of the real difficulties we have in pensions is that most people really do not have much 
understanding concerning them. The Members opposite are clearly indicating that they are in that 
category. 
 
I agree with certain measures of the Bill as an interim measure. I agree with them on this basis. It will 
increase portability to some extent and at the risk of boring the House I must repeat that we are not 
going to get portability in pensions until we get vesting and lock-in, which will solve the problem. If we 
do not do that we can talk about portability from now until the year 2000 and will simply not accomplish 
it. 
 
There are 16,137 pension plans in Canada. There are 2,882,000 people covered under the latest 
statistical data available and it is obvious that we are not going to secure portability between those 
pension plans other than through an Act like The Pension Benefits Act which was introduced originally 
in Ontario. It was copied eventually by Alberta, Saskatchewan and also in Quebec. The remainder of the 
Provinces of Canada do not even have a Pension Benefits Act at the present time. 
 
I want again, at the risk of boring the House, to ask Members to face up to some facts. 
 
Currently we have a pension plan which simply says that we will pay 2 per cent of the five or six best 
earning years, times will pay 2 per cent of the five or six best earning years, times the total years of 
service when that person becomes pensionable. 
 
I will give you an example to illustrate how ridiculous this situation can be. Let’s assume that an 
individual had an average earning of $5,000 a year over a 30-year period. That is not impossible when 
you go back into the past when wages were relatively low. Let’s assume that individual ended up with 
his last five or six earning years with an average salary of $12,000. If you take 2 per cent of $12,000 you 
get $240 and you multiply by the 35 years you have got a pension of $8,4000. But the individual’s 
average income over his working years was $6,200. He will have an annual pension $2,200 higher that 
his average salary. A totally impossible situation because it is simply not reasonable to assume that the 
total contributions that he made and his employer made on his behalf will come anywhere near paying 
that pension. He is being heavily subsidized. Where? He is being heavily subsidized by the fact that 
numerous people, the vast majority of people who participate in that pension plan never get to pension. 
They terminate employment. They lose their vesting rights in terms of the employer’s contributions. In 9 
instances out of 10 the employees’ contributions are paid out and the money is spent for something else. 
A totally incorrect approach. 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2903 

We are going to have very seriously to look at this final earnings period. We are going to have lots of 
opposition from some people who feel that their own personal benefits are being hurt at that particular 
time. But this will not be solved until we get vesting and lock-in and the individual gets the pension for 
his period of service with his employer irrespective of the fact that he does not stay with that employer 
until he retires. 
 
I should like to say that the escalator clause obviously will be of some benefit to people. If you assume 
an individual had a pension of $200 per month and was retired in the year ’52 he is going to get a $44 
per month increase. We all know that there are real problems for people on pensions for a long period of 
time because their pensions were based on very low salaries and inflation destroys their purchasing 
power. Pensions will not basically solve that problem. The real problem lies in the field of inflation. The 
real problem lies at the national and inter-national levels. As long as that inflationary factor is there and 
it is very severe at the present time, people on pensions are going to be hurt. However, if we could get to 
the stage where we instituted some protection against the inflationary factor through an escalator clause 
and a person received the pension, which he had earned, we would achieve a realistic approach to 
pensions. An escalator clause gives some benefit in relation to the rising cost of living. In this way we 
will effect something which is useful. 
 
We must take a very hard look at pensions. I support the pension commission approach. I don’t think it 
will come up with all the answers but in any event at least we have some hope of making some progress 
in this regard. 
 
Insofar as Bill No, 113 is concerned obviously anything it does to improve portability, and this is a very 
limited factor, is beneficial. The major factor is the escalator clause. Members of the Opposition point to 
British Columbia and say why don’t you do the same as British Columbia – 3 per cent. They know 
perfectly well that the financial capabilities of this province are not in the same category as British 
Columbia. They know that British Columbia is one of the “have” provinces of Canada. They know that 
we are in the category of seven provinces, we are no different than those other six provinces, which fall 
below the national average line. British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario are above. 
 
Perhaps I should answer the Member for Wilkie with respect to The Pensions Benefits Act. He said this 
had created portability for all. In a very, very limited way. It does invoke vesting and lock-in to a very 
limited degree. Insofar as it does, it improves portability indirectly, but it’s only scratching the surface. It 
is quite obvious that unless some major changes are made in this respect, we will not solve the problems 
in relation to pensions. 
 
I support Bill 113 despite the fact that as the Minister has stated, it is a temporary solution only. 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, one cannot help but feel that the Member 
who just spoke has neglected to consider the real importance of 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2904 

the Bill to the various people who actually receive money. Now he’s talked about all sorts of fancy 
solutions to future problems and maybe even to current problems but this Bill neglects to deal with 
people who today have a very serious problem. A person who retired in 1952 drawing a pension at that 
time of $200 which would have been a good pension now finds that he is able to get the magnificent 
amount of $244 per month. That, Mr. Speaker, is entirely inadequate. A person who retired in 1952, if 
he were 65 at that time, would find that he is now in his 86th year and while he must express a great deal 
of pleasure at the people who might someday benefit from the studies and delays and all the rest of it, 
that may produce a better Bill, he himself at age 86, with $244 per month, can hardly be satisfied with 
the amount of money that this generous Government is offering to him. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another difficulty with this kind of a Bill is that $200 back in 1952 was not a bad 
pension. It wasn’t a good pension, but it wasn’t a bad pension. But over the years it got worse and 
worse. Other pensions were added to the stock of pensions available to the citizens. Some of these are 
more punitive than they are beneficial and the problem with this kind of small, niggardly increase is that 
it is no inducement at all to save. A man nowadays getting $244 after 35 years of saving and effort on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan finds that he is losing out on his Federal supplementary pension 
and for the Province of Saskatchewan to give him such a niggardly amount of money is to say to him, 
“You’re better off to have been wasteful during your life, you’ll earn almost as much money though the 
Federal pension plan than if you were thrifty and saving and attempted to provide for your own well 
being after you retire”. It doesn’t take any actuarial study, Mr. Speaker, to determine that the 
Government is, in fact, falling far short of what is the necessary, having regard to the change in the cost 
of living. Over the past 21 years it has averaged something in the order of five per cent per year. The 
Federal Government generally accepts something beyond four per cent as not unreasonable inflation. 
This Government falls short at least by half of the moneys which it ought to be providing to the 
superannuates of Saskatchewan. A person who in 1952 was earning $200 per month as a pension should 
today get not less than $300 per month. That doesn’t do anything more – it does nothing more at all – 
than keep pace with the cost of living. To suggest that we are not in the position of a Government like 
British Columbia is, of course, trite. We know that, we’ve had too many years of NDP-CCF 
Government to be in the position of British Columbia. 
 
And I might suggest that we have a lot of disjointed arguments coming from the Government side. 
When they increase the taxes upon the waitresses and the bartenders and the ordinary working people of 
the province, they tell us that this is a tax shift. They then come to a Bill like this and they say that we 
cannot afford to add to the old age pensioner and our superannuates. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
tax shift in favor of these people, and the working man, the wage earners of Saskatchewan are being 
taxed at a rate higher than any time in history in Saskatchewan but none of these moneys are going to 
the people who so desperately need an increase. I’m sure that this 86 year old man must feel some but of 
pride that he himself is making a sacrifice so that the businessman can have a larger share of the 
Property Improvement Grant. That is the kind of approach that this Government is now taking and it 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2905 

certainly isn’t the kind of thing that the people of Saskatchewan were led to expect in 1971 when they 
went to the polls. 
 
There are more things to be said about this, Mr. Speaker, and I beg leave to adjourn to debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 103 — An Act to 
Amend the School Act. 
 
He said: Three amendments to The School Act, none of which are of a controversial nature. Two of the 
amendments deal with elections, one, pressure coming from the trustees with respect to assigning of 
expenses in an election in a subunit and in section 4 provisions, since we no longer hold elections 
annually. 
 
The other one is of more significance in nature and deals with provisions for boards to set their own 
remuneration, their own per diem, their own travel allowance and it’s in line with the amendments to 
The Larger Units Act which provided that sort of possibility to school unit trustees. There has been a 
good deal of pressure coming from boards particularly under $100,000 expenditure and we are very 
pleased to provide this amendment for these people in these districts as well as those over the $100,000 
and I think it will be welcomed by trustees in this level. I move second reading of amendments to The 
School Act. 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, I have no comments on this Bill. This Bill follows 
the previous amendments in the other Act. There are three substantial principles involved here. One is 
the payment of election expenses, the second is remuneration to the board members, and the third, of 
course, is to submit application for debentures other than the year of the election. I think the 
amendments are certainly of a housekeeping nature and we’re led to the opportunity for school boards to 
look after their own financial affairs. We will certainly support these amendments. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. MacMurchy moved second reading of Bill No. 91 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act, 1970. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading of Bill 91 I wasn’t to outline briefly some of the main 
points. Section 28A brings in a fairly substantial pension increase ranging from $16 to $32 per month. 
The increase is directed to those at the low end of the scale and the total amount of new money involved 
comes to some $210,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not a huge new input but it is significant and it is the 
second year in a row that we have provided more for superannuated teachers. Also the size of the 
increase is greater than last year. Last year the total amount of the new money provided was $130,000. 
This year as I said, it’s up anther $210,000. In two years, Mr. Speaker, the NDP Government has 
provided teacher pension increases up to $340,000. This averages out to $170,000 per year. 
 
This new Bill also makes early retirement more attractive 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2906 

to our senior teachers. The age and service requirements are again scaled down. This is the second year 
in a row that this has been done. A teacher who is now 60 and has 20 year service background will now 
be able to retire on the single condition that he or she has ten consecutive years of service prior to this 
retirement date. 
 
Another provision allows teachers to pay into the fund beyond 35 years in order to raise their pensions to 
the maximum. Previously there was a deadline of June 30, 1973 on this option. It is now going to be 
removed and the option continued. However, those who have stopped contributions will not be allowed 
to resume those contributions. 
 
We’ve also taken off the deadline for paying contributions on war service. Last year, Mr. Speaker, we 
brought in a measure to allow teachers to superannuate at 55 if they had paid into the fund for 35 years. 
This 35 year total includes war service. But with the old deadline of July 1, 1971 some teachers could 
not take advantage of this change. We are removing the deadline and these teachers will be able to retire 
at full pension. 
 
One of the highlights of this Bill is found in section 43 of the amended Act. Under existing legislation 
the surviving husband or wife receives half of the pension. This new clause will pay anther 10 per cent 
of the pension for every dependent child up to an extra 25 per cent of the total. This means that a 
teacher’s widow or widower will be able to receive 25 per cent of the full pension. I think this is a 
progressive step. It will help make The Superannuation Act a little more humane and better equipped to 
help out with people’s problems. 
 
One last point, Mr. Speaker. This is probably the last Bill on superannuation before the pension plan 
becomes a negotiable item under the new bargaining Act. From now on most the changes or most of the 
amendments will originate from the free collective bargaining process. 
 
I am pleased to move that Bill No. 91 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. C. P. Macdonald: — Mr. Speaker, once again I want to say that the Members of the Opposition are 
extremely disappointed in Bill No. 91. And I would suppose, Mr. Speaker, that in all of the Bills that 
have come before this House, certainly for retired pensioners, and particularly superannuates of the 
teaching profession, this Bill has been waited for with great anticipation and expectation. I want to say 
this has been awaited by superannuates and their dependants and I think Members of both sides of the 
House, because no particular group has come and visited Members of the Legislature and put their case 
before us as often as these people, the superannuates in the teaching profession. I have had 
correspondence from them and from everybody concerned expressing their sincere regret at the 
inadequacy of the provisions of this Act. There are some amendments that have some good parts to them 
certainly, but on the whole it is a real disappointment. It does not look after the erosion of the pension 
dollar as did the previous Act introduced by the Minister of Public Service. One of the other things is 
that the Bill completely fails to take in any recommendation of the Superannuated Teachers’ 
Association. And I have a copy of a letter sent to the Minister of Education: 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2907 

 
The Saskatchewan Superannuated Teachers’ Association Saskatoon Chapter, meeting in session 
on April 11 to study Bill 91 note with great regret that the presentation made by our group to the 
Minister has been virtually ignored. 

 
And this group of pensioners or superannuates went to a great deal of time and effort. I should like to 
briefly outline some of their requests. 
 
It’s another example, Mr. Speaker, of the Government’s failure to listen to those concerned, the 
superannuated teachers. This Bill, I think, has three very serious deficiencies. The first one, there is no 
escalation clause. Once again, the superannuates next year will have to come ‘hat in hand’. It has been a 
humiliating experience, Mr. Speaker, over the year to watch the superannuated teachers come time and 
time again with hat in hand, people who have spent their life in dedication to the education of the 
Province of Saskatchewan and come year after year and beg the Minister of Education and the 
Government of Saskatchewan to grant an increase in order to look after the erosion of their pension 
dollar. They have one serious request, that we put into this Bill an escalation clause that would relate to 
the cost of living index and that we remove once and for all the need of these people to come hat in hand 
year after year. I do admit there is a provision in the Bill which will make it possible by 
Order-In-Council but there is no guarantee and no legislation itself. 
 
The second, of course, is the fact that the increases provided in the Bill, are hopelessly inadequate. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to refer to the section of the Bill. It starts off July 2, 1963 to July 1, 1972 — $16 per 
month. It goes back to July 1951 — $32 per month. I have here a copy of the changes in the pension 
legislation for teachers in the Province of British Colombia. My colleague mentioned it in the discussion 
of the last Bill. It starts off with a three per cent increase and it goes back to 1950 with a 66 per cent 
increase in teachers’ pension benefits. It starts in 1971 with three per cent; 1970 – six per cent; 1969 – 
nine per cent; and it goes right back to 1950 to 66 per cent. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind 
of an increase that is warranted by the superannuated teachers. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think every Member of this Legislature has been sympathetic to 
the superannuates’ cause and the Government has failed to listen not to the superannuates themselves 
but to the Members of the Legislature on both sides of the House. 
 
I just want to summarize again some of the requests of the superannuates and the justification for them. 
First of all, they asked a floor of $10 a month for each year of teaching. In other words if they taught for 
40 years there would be a minimum of $4,000 pension and what is the justification for this, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, for example, if you go back to the changes brought in by the Minister, there is absolutely no 
allowance for service. If you received a pension prior to July 1951 and you’ve taught for 25 years you 
got $32 and if you’ve taught for 45 years you get $32. And certainly service has always been an 
important feature in any pension program. 
 
The second request was that you recalculate all existing 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2908 

pensions on the basis of the formula used today over a single life plan, which would mean bringing 
uniformity to the pensions for all superannuated teachers. 
 
The third one is the escalation clause and I already discussed that where it would once again remove the 
humiliating experience of superannuated teachers coming back year after year. 
 
The fourth thing that the superannuates ask and I think it’s something that the Minister and the 
Government should give very serious consideration to, matching amounts of teacher contribution by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Now I am not saying that the Government of Saskatchewan has to match 
per dollar the amount of money put into the teachers’ superannuation fund, it may not be necessary to 
match but certainly I think it is significant and important that the Government recognize that they had 
better start putting in a substantial portion into this superannuation fund because ten years down the road 
it could amount to withdrawal from the consolidated fund of ten to fifteen million dollars a year. It could 
have a very serious impact on future programs and the budget of the Province of Saskatchewan when 
year by year they are going to have to take out such a substantial amount to pay teachers’ pension 
benefits. 
 
I think the Minister is aware that a few years ago there was no requirement to put any revenues from the 
consolidated fund into The Superannuation Act. Now there is a requirement to put in a certain small 
portion, but ten or fifteen years down the road this is going to become a very substantial amount of 
money out of the consolidated revenue, and it certainly makes good common sense for the Government 
now to start contributing and, perhaps not matching the contributions of the teachers but certainly to put 
in a substantial portion each year so that that particular fund will be built up. 
 
Now the third defect, Mr. Speaker relates to the pensions of toady and to those teachers who are still 
teaching and nearing superannuation age. And that, of course, relates to the right to contribute on a 
higher salary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate thing is that the Government of Saskatchewan has already made 
amendments to existing pension plans. For example, the Public Service Plan, the Power Corporation 
Plan, the Workmen’s Compensation Plan, the Liquor Board Plan, Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Plan, whereby it has made possible for members of these unions and these particular Crown corporations 
to now contribute on a higher salary, for example, if they are receiving $18,000 by going back and 
paying the interest that they can turn around and pay on an $18,000 pension instead of a $10,000, 
$9,000, $12,000 or whatever their salary was at that particular time. I cannot understand why the 
Minister of Education is discriminating against the teaching profession when all other employees 
covered by the pension plans of the Government have been provided this particular clause to contribute 
on a higher salary were eligible and yet he has ignored this request from the Saskatchewan Teacher’s 
Federation. He has ignored the request of teachers who are now drawing close to retirement. 
 
Certainly if this particular benefit was put in it would discourage teachers from teaching after reaching 
pensionable age. 



 
April 23, 1973 

 
 

 
2909 

Now there is one other clause and it is a rather technical clause and once again it is a request of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and I think the Minister of Education should look at it. And that is 
the Section 2 of Bill 91 be deleted. Of course, this is the section that defines widows and widowers. The 
reason is because in the present Act there is discrimination against a widower, by the fact that the 
widower must be a dependent widower in order for any pension benefits to be received if the widow 
dies. 
 
For example, a male teacher with 10 years or more of service, his widow receives an allowance and 
there is no re-marriage restriction. The female teacher with 10 years service, the widower receives an 
allowance only if he is dependent. For example, Mr. Speaker, we will say that it is one-half of the earned 
formula. If a teacher, for example, taught for 20 years his average salary was $8,000, the formula now is 
2 x $8,000 x 20 or $3,200 would b his pension. One half of that would be $1,600, which certainly isn’t 
very much. But the teachers have requested for years that this discrimination factor be taken out. I would 
hope that the Minister would have a good look at that. 
 
The reason, of course, for the teachers requesting that is, the Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) has 
brought this up in the House on many occasions, that a pension is an earned pension. It is related to his 
contributions, it is related to his years of service and certainly if it is an earned pension then there should 
be no discrimination against a widower. I want to say that the Minister is going against the trend in 
Canada at this time. British Columbia has just removed this restriction. Ontario has already done this. 
The trend, of course, is away from this kind of restriction. 
 
The other reason that the Teachers’ Federation is so concerned about these particular definitions is they 
feel that there is a conflict and it is not consistent with the other parts of the Act. However, I shall leave 
that to the Minister. 
 
I should like to ask the Minister if he would consider particularly the clause relating to the amendment 
which would bring the teachers’ plan in line with other plans and would permit teaches to contribute on 
a higher salary in certain cases. 
 
I want to repeat, Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition is completely disappointed in this Bill. It is 
disappointed for three reasons. 
 

1. There is no escalation clause which will, once included, eliminate the necessity of teachers 
from having to come and beg for an increase in pension benefits. 
 
2. Because it is hopelessly inadequate – in no way does it look after the erosion of the pension 
dollar and this is, no one will deny, significantly more than it has been it the past. 

 
However, the escalation and the cost of living is rising faster than it ever has before and some of these 
pensioners 80 and 85 years of age, who have taught all of those years, certainly require it. 



 
April 23, 1973 
 

 
2910 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this Bill is rather important. Some of my colleagues want to say a few words on 
it. We have no intention of delaying this Bill very long, but I would beg to leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


	QUESTIONS
	Protection of Japan’s Agricultural Industry from Imports

