



















































Hansard: March 12, 1973


1553 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

33rd Day 

 

Monday, March 12, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you, Sir, and through you to 

the Members of the House a group of seven Grade Twelve students from the school at Lipton. They are 

accompanied by their teacher Harvey Riffel. I haven’t met them yet I hope to meet them later this day. 

We hope they have an educational afternoon, an enjoyable one and a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a word of welcome to the Lipton 

students. That was my home town where I was born and raised, and had the privilege of attending public 

and high school there. So may I also sincerely welcome them here today. And I hope that our 

deliberations will be fruitful and they will gain much in watching the proceedings. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask you and other Members of the House 

to welcome two groups of students from the Milestone constituency. First there is a group of some 16 

Grade Twelve students from the community of Yellow Grass. They are accompanied by their principal, 

Mr. Al Wagner and their driver Mr. Jack Winters. Also we have a group of Grade Nine students from 

the community of Gray. They are accompanied by their principal, Mrs. Doris Kelly and their driver Mr. 

Lawrence Bush. I should like to ask you to join with me in best wishes that they will enjoy the 

proceedings of the day and that their stay in the Legislature will be both educational and interesting. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon-Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Member from Nutana 

South, Mr. Rolfes, who is unavoidably detained today, I want to take this opportunity to introduce a 

group of students from John Lake School in Nutana South. I understand there are 67 of them. I gather 

they are located in the west gallery. It is my understanding that they are accompanied today by Miss 

Schultz and Mrs. Bock, their teachers. I am sure all Members will join with me in wishing them an 

interesting day in the Legislative Chamber and a safe trip back to Nutana South. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1554 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Brier Championship Won By Saskatchewan Foursome 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, under Orders of the Day it is a 

great pleasure for me to take this opportunity to extend a very hearty and a heartfelt congratulation to the 

winner of the 1973 Canadian Curling Championship which was held in Edmonton last week. 

 

The 44th Annual Canadian Men’s Brier Curling Championship was won by the Saskatchewan foursome 

of skip, Harvey Mazinke and his team mates Bill Martin, George Achtymichuk and Dan Klippenstein. 

The Canadian champions and winners of the Brier tankard are members of the Regina Curling Club. I 

am sure that Regina residents are particularly proud of the Mazinke rink but all of Saskatchewan is 

proud and happy that the Canadian Curling Championship has come back to Saskatchewan after an 

absence of some nine years. 

 

The Ernie Richardson Rink last won the championship honors in 1963. I think it is worth quoting a few 

lines out of a sports column of one of our dailies which describes the type of representation our province 

had in the Brier. 

 

In addition to displaying top notch curling the Saskatchewan foursome easily won the most friends 

here (meaning Edmonton) with quiet sportsmanship and dedication. 

 

It is especially exciting to have the Mazinke rink win the Brier because of the fact that the Silver Broom 

Competitions will be held right here in Regina this year. All of Saskatchewan as well, I am sure, as all 

the Members of this Assembly I know extend our congratulations to our Saskatchewan Canadian 

Champions. We are honored and pleased to have such able representation in the World Curling 

Championships. I know all of Saskatchewan as well as all the Members here wish the Saskatchewan 

rink every success in the Silver Broom Playdowns which are soon to begin here in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod (Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, we should like to add our congratulations to the Mazinke 

rink for its fine showing up in Edmonton. It is worth noting that the Mazinke rink is of course composed 

of Messrs. Martin, Achtymichuk and Klippenstein. We are little surprised that the Hon. Minister has 

difficulty in pronouncing the name of the second man on the team. A fellow like Tchorzewski would 

have a lot of difficulty with Achtymichuk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that the demonstration of pressure curling is something which will lead the 

Mazinke rink on to the World Championship which fortunately will be held here in Regina where the 

citizens of Saskatchewan will have a close hand look at the way curling is really supposed to be played. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1555 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Mr. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day it is with some regret that 

I advise the House of the passing of Mr. H.C. (Cliff) Dunfield. Mr. Dunfield represented the Meadow 

Lake constituency in this House from 1952 to 1956. I just heard of it before the sitting. I understand the 

funeral is on Wednesday. I am sure the House will join with me in extending our deepest sympathy to 

the bereaved family. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I know that all Members on this side of the Assembly 

would want to associate themselves with the remarks from the Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. 

Coupland). We will look for an opportunity more formally to convey our respects and condolences to 

the Dunfield family. But I would want at this time to join the Member for Meadow Lake in extending 

our sympathy to the Dunfield family. Many of us had an opportunity to know Cliff Dunfield. I knew him 

not when I was an elected Member of this Legislature but when I was a public servant working with 

legislative committees and when he was a Member here from 1952 until 1956. 

 

He has had a distinguished public career in the field of not only provincial politics but local politics as 

well. He was a member of a number of lodges and he was very active in the life of his community of 

Meadow Lake. I believe he was mayor and he was certainly on the town council. He had been president 

of the Board of Trade. He was active in senior citizens’ organizations and generally played a very, very 

active and vital part in the life of that community. I know that all Members will look for the opportunity 

in a more formal way to pay their respects. I join with the Member from Meadow Lake on behalf of the 

Members on this side of the House in conveying our sympathy to the Dunfield family. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Unemployment Level in Saskatchewan as of May 1, 1973 
 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day in the absence of the Minister of 

Finance (Mr. Cowley) I should like to direct a question to the Premier. 

 

On the 2nd day of March the Minister of Finance advised this House that he first of all had estimates as 

to the employment or unemployment level in Saskatchewan. He also stated that given the state of the 

economy now and the prospects for the summer, I think that the employment prospects in Saskatchewan 

for this summer are encouraging. Now the Minister of Finance also advised at that time that, he said and 

I quote: 

 

I hope that the Hon. Member (referring to myself) is not laboring under the delusion that the solutions 

to Saskatchewan’s employment problems are solely in the field of fiscal measures. 

 

So, for this reason I direct the question to the Premier. Now, using the words of the Minister of Finance, 

given the state of the economy today and the prospects for the summer, what as at this time does the 

Premier estimate the unemployment level will 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1556 

be in Saskatchewan on May 1, 1973? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, there is no way I think that anyone can estimate the 

unemployment level at any future time in this province or in this country. If one wished to have us 

estimate the number of jobs that would be available, that is something which very frequently can be 

estimated with some measure of accuracy. But what affects the unemployment rates is not only the 

number of jobs but the number of people who are seeking jobs, who are registering themselves for 

employment. All Members will know that during the year 1972 in Saskatchewan we saw a very, very 

dramatic change. It is reported by some that the population of Saskatchewan did not increase in 1972 

and this is probably true. In fact, it probably slipped a little. Notwithstanding that, notwithstanding the 

fact that the population of Saskatchewan probably slipped a little and the population of Canada 

undoubtedly went up, the number of people offering for jobs went up more rapidly in Saskatchewan 

than elsewhere in Canada. That is a very interesting phenomenon. In the year 1972 the number of jobs 

available in Canada went up by 3.4 per cent. I want the Member for Lumsden to listen to these figures. 

The number of jobs in Canada went up 3.4 per cent with a rising population. And the number of jobs in 

Saskatchewan, the number of people offering for jobs, the labor force, went up 4.5 per cent, even with a 

smaller population. Now this can only mean that a very much larger number of people were offering 

themselves for employment. This meant spectacularly by a figure of 12,000 to 15,000 jobs last year the 

number of people who are apparently unemployed also went up. We have no way of knowing whether 

people who were discouraged in past years and who had given up looking for jobs are now going to 

continue to come out and offer themselves for employment as they did in record numbers in 1972. We 

hope they do. We hope this spirit of optimism continues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — It will mean that many, many more people are working, as is true now 

compared with one year ago. But it also might mean that the unemployment rate appears to be high. 

Accordingly there is no way that we can estimate the unemployment rate. We are however, very 

optimistic that the number of jobs will continue to rise as it has very sharply in the last five or six 

months and that we shall see more and more people in Saskatchewan working at more and more jobs at 

higher and higher wages. 

 

List of Grants for Schools 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, just a rather routine question and a very general one to the Minister 

of Education. Normally before Estimates for the Department of Education are commenced in the House, 

the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) through courtesy tables a list of grants for all schools in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I should like to ask the Minister when this list of grants will be made 

available. Also there are two very important pieces of legislation coming up in the field of education. 

One relates to The Teachers Salary Negotiation Act and the second relates to the amendments to The 

University Act. Can the Minister give us any indication when these three very 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1557 

important matters will be put before the Assembly. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Member for Milestone with 

respect to grants and legislation. I have been busy since Saturday night deciding whether I should go to 

the New York Islanders or to the Vancouver Canucks. However, in all honesty with respect to grants the 

information is just going out to school boards at the present time. Since the Department is busy getting 

out the information to the boards, as soon as they complete that work it will be available to all Members. 

With respect to the legislation, I indicated a couple of weeks ago that I would hope to have it in the 

House within three weeks. I still have that hope although it is getting a bit crowded. But as soon as we 

possibly can we will have the two major pieces of legislation before the House. And as I have said many 

times it is important that we have them here in time for sufficient and adequate debate. 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Change of Member on Public Accounts Committee 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to move 

seconded by the Premier, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

that the name of Mr. Owens be substituted for that of Mr. Hanson on the list of Members comprising 

the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing. 

 

Office of Ombusdman 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier) moved, seconded by Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor recommending to His 

Honour Ernest Carl Boychuk of the city of Saskatoon in the Province of Saskatchewan, be appointed 

Ombudsman under Section 3 of The Ombudsman Act, 1972 being Chapter 87 of the Statutes of 

Saskatchewan, 1972. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very satisfying day for me. This day represents the 

culmination of lengthy efforts to have appointed in Saskatchewan an Ombudsman or Legislative 

Commissioner who would provide ordinary people with direct and easy access to a type of appeal from 

administrative decisions which the citizen may think are arbitrary or unjust. 

 

This story is a long one, Mr. Speaker. In 1964 the Speech from the Throne suggested that a special 

committee of the Legislature be asked to enquire into the best means of providing access to appeal along 

the lines of the measures in force in the Scandinavian countries and in New Zealand. In New Zealand 

they call their person the Legislative Commissioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was in 1964. In 1965 a resolution to the same effect was introduced by me and was 

debated at length in this Assembly. In 1966 I introduced a similar resolution. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1558 

In 1967 and 1968 similar resolutions were introduced by my colleagues; in 1967 by Mr. Willis the 

former Member for Melfort-Tisdale, and in 1968 my colleague Mr. Romanow the then Member for 

Riversdale and now Attorney General. 

 

The arguments in favor of establishing the office of Ombudsman are as sound today as they were in 

1964. 

 

There has been a good deal of interest in recent years in the appointment of Legislative Commissioners 

or Ombudsmen to act on behalf of members of the public in following up complaints with respect to 

dealings which members of the public may have with various agencies of government. 

 

This interest has not been confined to Canada but has been evidenced throughout most of the western 

world except those areas whose law is based upon Roman law. In those parts of the world where their 

law is based upon Roman law they have developed a system of administrative courts with a relatively 

elaborate system of appeals which has worked pretty well. 

 

In countries where their law was based upon the English common law or basically the old Germanic 

law, these devices did not develop and interest has been high in establishing the office of Ombudsman or 

Legislative Commissioner. This has been particularly true in the Scandinavian countries, in Britain, in 

the United States and in certain countries of the Commonwealth. 

 

There is no mystery about why there has been renewed interest in the office of Ombudsman in the last 

ten years. There has been in the last few decades, and particularly since World War II, a tremendous 

expansion in the functions which governments have been called upon to play in the lives of ordinary 

men and women. 

 

Legislatures have enacted many laws which involved activity by government agencies on behalf of 

citizens and complex administrative agencies have been created to carry out these programs. Our 

executive and administrative arms of government have been given wide authority and power to carry on 

these new ventures. Not only has there been a great increase in the scope of these executive and 

administrative activities, there has as well, been a great increase in the authority exercised by these 

executive and administrative agencies on the lives of ordinary citizens. This authority is exercised by 

people in administrative capacities from Cabinet Minister almost down to file clerk and by a host of 

tribunals of a quasi-judicial nature which have been erected to make the many decisions necessary to 

carry out these programs. I think that in general terms these executive and administrative agencies have 

carried out their work with efficiency and to the general satisfaction of citizens. 

 

We have had remarkably few complaints about how programs like the hospital plan or the medical care 

plan have been carried out insofar as they relate to giving to citizens their rights under these programs. 

However in the course of administering these programs there are many decisions to be made, decisions 

which are frequently of a discretionary nature. These decisions sometimes have a profound effect on the 

life of an individual citizen and accordingly it is not surprising, I think it is rather inevitable, that many 

of these decisions will be subject to complaints by citizens. But such is the complexity of modern 

government that a citizen who feels aggrieved, even when he may 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1559 

have a very legitimate complaint, often finds himself in a position of not knowing to whom to complain 

and sometimes in the position of not having anybody to whom he can effectively complain. 

 

The general situation which I have outlined has caused a number of students of our parliamentary 

institutions to propose that in these situations a Legislative Commissioner or Ombudsman could be a 

useful addition to our government. I don’t mean to suggest that an Ombudsman will solve all the 

problems or most of the problems which confront citizens in dealing with the modern bureaucracy 

surrounding a 20th century government. We will need to be vigilant on all fronts and a Legislative 

Commissioner is one of the ways to be vigilant. I do not need to remind Members of this House that we 

have made some progress in Saskatchewan in the direction of protecting the citizen, probably more 

progress than in any other province of Canada. 

 

I should like very briefly to remind the House of some of the steps that have been taken. I was amused 

when I was in Alberta a few months ago to see the large advertisements advertising a new Bill of Rights, 

the first Bill of Rights in a Canadian province according to the advertisement of the Alberta 

Government. I should like to remind them and this House, that the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights indeed 

Canada’s first Bill of Rights, Federal or Provincial, was passed in this province in 1947. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The Fair Accommodation Practices Act was passed in 1956; The fair 

Employment Practices Act was passed in 1956; The Regulations Act passed about 1963 or 1964, was 

passed to assist the Legislature in controlling delegated legislation; The Proceedings Against the Crown 

Act was passed many years ago — back in the 1940s — which permitted a citizen to sue the Crown 

without the permission of the Crown. It is interesting to know that at least until very recently that they 

didn’t have such an Act in British Columbia. A relatively well developed system of magistrate’s courts 

with well trained personnel provides some measure of protection for the citizen against arbitrary action 

in that area. 

 

We have had other steps taken. I don’t mean to suggest that the steps I have identified have been all of 

the ways in which citizens have been provided with methods of protecting themselves against arbitrary 

bureaucratic action. But in my view these safeguards are by no means enough. They are added to the list 

that I have given and I could have added more, Expropriation Procedures Acts and others. There is very 

good reason for believing that in a country with a British Parliamentary form of government and 

particularly in Canada, the need for protection of the citizen is perhaps greater than in most countries of 

the world. 

 

In this connection, I should like to refer Hon. Members to a book entitled “The Ombudsman-Citizen’s 

Defender”, published in 1967 and edited by Professor Donald C. Rowat. He then was at Carlton 

University, He has since gone to Australia. The book consists of some 29 contributions on the general 

subject of Ombudsman. One of the articles deals with the Canadian position. At the outset it mentions 

some of the main features of our 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1560 

parliamentary system, features which suggest that Canadians are very much in need of the services of an 

Ombudsman. Features referred to in some of these articles are as follows: 

 

 (1) The fact that there is a union of executive and legislative powers in a politically dominant Cabinet. 

This is true in any provincial cabinet whatever its political stripe. 

 (2) The fact that by reason of the single-member, single-vote electoral system governments frequently 

have very large parliamentary majorities supported by a powerful Cabinet. That is the situation here in 

Saskatchewan at this time. We have a large parliamentary majority supported by what we hope is a 

powerful Cabinet. 

 (3) The fact that we have a tradition of secrecy that permeates the whole administrative structure and 

makes it very difficult to obtain information about how and by whom governmental decisions are made. 

We call it ministerial responsibility, we call it the minister taking responsibility for the acts of his public 

servants and being responsible for them. That is true and that is good, but one of the effects is that there 

is a large amount of secrecy. 

 (4) The fact that there are severely limited opportunities for the appeal or judicial review of 

administrative decisions. 

 

The above features are true in most parliamentary systems, but there are further features which underline 

the desirability of an Ombudsman in Canada. 

 

Some of the special things which are true in Canada and may not be true elsewhere are: 

 (5) The fact that our constitution has no Bill of Rights in the United States sense; no provision 

whereby the liberties of the subject are enshrined in a written constitution. True, we have Bill of Rights 

that are statutes at the Federal level and the Provincial level, but these can be over-ridden by any Act of 

Parliament at Ottawa or of this Legislature. 

 (6) We have rather fewer administrative tribunals than some countries and there is no council of 

administrative tribunals or no general act whereby the administrative tribunals which operate in our 

jurisdiction are subject to some review or supervision. 

 (7) We have no general administrative rules which prescribe the area of operation of boards and 

commissions. 

 (8) We still in Canada (fortunately few in Saskatchewan) have some antiquated rules on Crown 

privileges and Crown liabilities. Indeed there are still some in Saskatchewan, although we have whittled 

away almost all of these antiquated rules. 

 (9) We have relatively poor arrangements for free legal aid to needy persons, so that courts are 

frequently not open to aggrieved citizens. I am not now speaking of the courts being open to citizens 

who are charged with crimes. I am talking about courts being opened to citizens who may feel that they 

have been aggrieved by a particular administrative decision. 

 (10) The fact that we have a federal system creates some additional administrative confusion with 

difficulty in pinning down just who is responsible for some decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could spend more time outlining the many circumstances which create difficulty for the 

citizen in dealing with administrative agencies of government. However, I think that there will be 

general agreement that such difficulties exist and that the citizen, unaided, is relatively powerless 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1561 

to overcome these difficulties. 

 

When there is a dispute as to whether or not an Ombudsman would be a useful addition to our 

governmental structure, the dispute is usually not over whether citizens are encountering difficulty — 

not whether citizens somehow get wound up in the administrative coils and have difficulty dealing with 

government — but rather on whether or not our existing agencies can effectively deal with the problems 

of the citizen or on whether or not the Ombudsman would be a useful addition to the agencies which 

might assist the citizen. 

 

One of the arguments used in opposition to the idea of an Ombudsman is that an Ombudsman could do 

little or nothing which an MLA can not now do. The argument runs that an MLA is elected to pursue 

complaints on behalf of his constituents and that if he does his job well and effectively no Ombudsman 

is necessary. I am not very impressed with that argument. As I see it, Members of the Legislature have 

neither the knowledge or the facilities to follow up in any detailed way on many complaints which a 

citizen might lodge with them. Certainly we all try to be diligent in following up complaints which are 

lodged with us, but it is simply not possible for an MLA who is frequently a part-time person and who in 

most cases does not live in or near the capital city to do a satisfactory job of follow-up on behalf of the 

constituent. The chief reason for this is that he must accept the view of the facts given to him by the 

administrative agency, or by the Minister in charge. He has no real access to the documents or other 

material which might challenge the approach taken by the senior official or the Minister. I have been on 

the Opposition side of this House for seven years, I have been on the Government side of the House for 

five or six years — indeed I may cross again — 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Maybe 20 years from now! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I have been in the relatively favorable position of Minister of the Crown and I 

have never felt that I could do a 100 per cent satisfactory job of investigating all complaints on behalf of 

constituents unless the complaint happened to fall into the area of administration where I was a Minister 

of the Crown. In the latter position, I could call for the file and review it and get to the root of the 

problem. And if there was a public servant who I felt was stonewalling me, I could soon have that put to 

rights. But there were some real problems in areas when I was a backbencher on the Opposition side — I 

never really was a backbencher, or at least was not sitting in a Cabinet seat. I don’t feel that anyone who 

is looking at this problem realistically could say that an Opposition MLA or a Government MLA can get 

to the root of every problem unless he happens to be the Minister of the department concerned or unless 

he happens to be the Premier. Therefore I think that more needs to be done to protect the citizen’s rights 

in respect of possible administrative abuse. I don’t want to create the impression that there are a lot of 

administrative abuses. I don’t mean to create the impression that under this Government or the previous 

Government there were a lot of them. But I feel this, that I have been a public servant and I have a great 

admiration for the public service, I feel there will be fewer administrative abuses if there is an 

Ombudsman looking over the shoulders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1562 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Nor am I very impressed with the idea that the prerogatives of an MLA would 

be interfered with. Most MLAs I know would be only too glad to have an official to whom a complaint 

could be referred where the MLA had not got a satisfactory answer in the full knowledge that that 

official could call for the files, could question the public servants and could investigate the complaint 

fully and impartially. 

 

Nor should it be supposed that if an Ombudsman is created he would necessarily look after all or indeed 

most of the complaints which an MLA is called upon to deal with. Many of these complaints deal with 

not administrative decisions but government policy. The Ombudsman would not ordinarily have power 

to review government policies, that is our job, not his. The MLA would still have the job of urging 

changes in policy where the existing policy works a hardship on a particular group of people or class of 

people. I don’t think that MLAs need to worry about being relegated to the ranks of the unemployed if 

an Ombudsman is created. 

 

I turn now to another point which is sometimes disputed whether or not an Ombudsman would in fact be 

useful in dealing with the admitted difficulties which citizens encounter. I tried to show that I think there 

is a job to be done. The next questions to be asked: Can the Ombudsman do the job? Before discussing 

this it might be helpful to refresh our memories on the precise functions of an Ombudsman. 

 

When I refer to an Ombudsman I am thinking of the office largely in terms of the New Zealand 

experience. Broadly speaking, an Ombudsman keeps watch over the way in which government officials 

apply the laws and regulations to the public. He investigates complaints of private citizens with respect 

to the action of these officials. He does not have power to overrule an official, but he is in a strong 

position to suggest that an injustice be corrected. His only power is to report to the Legislature where he 

thinks an injustice has been done. Ordinarily he will report to the Legislature annually in any case. He 

would be a person who would have security of tenure of office, a person of high personal reputation and 

considerable skills. He would be given powers to investigate matters similar to those powers given to a 

Commissioner under The Public Enquiries Act. 

 

I will not take the time of the House to give a detailed review of the very interesting history of this 

office. I refer Hon. Members to the debates of the House in 1965, 1966, 1967 and 1968. Generally 

speaking the office evolved in Sweden in the 18th Century and found its way into the Swedish 

Constitution early in the 19th Century, in 1809. Finland introduced the office in 1919, Denmark in 1955, 

and Norway in 1962. New Zealand passed legislation providing for an Ombudsman in 1962 — I think 

the first time in a British Parliamentary country and the Ombudsman there has actually been carrying out 

his duties for about 10 years. I have had an opportunity to read the reports of the Ombudsman in New 

Zealand a number of times and have been impressed by the number of problems that he has tackled on 

behalf of citizens of New Zealand. I have been impressed by the very beneficial results which he has 

achieved. Since that time interest has grown in Canada and the United Kingdom. The office of 

Ombudsman has been created in the United Kingdom and now it has been created in the provinces of 

Alberta, 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1563 

New Brunswick, Manitoba, Quebec and Newfoundland. 

 

A reading of the record of the office in Alberta will lead to the conclusion that the office there has 

performed not in any spectacular way, but in a way most useful to the citizen and the protection of the 

citizen’s freedom. I would anticipate that the office would perform equally well in Saskatchewan. We 

are not looking for miracles. We do not expect any dramatic change, but we do look for a solid 

contribution to protecting the property and rights of citizens through the creation of this legislative 

watch-dog position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this House is particularly fortunate to find a person 

of the capabilities for Ombudsman of Judge Ernest Boychuk. Judge Boychuk is still a young and 

vigorous man. He has nevertheless had a distinguished career as a Judge of the Magistrates Court. He 

has been widely sought after as a conciliator, mediator and an arbitrator in labor disputes. This in itself is 

a tribute to his sagacity and sense of fair play. Since good judgement and fair play, sometimes in 

accordance and sometimes in spite of strict technical rules, are perhaps the greatest attributes which any 

Ombudsman could possess, we are fortunate in having Judge Boychuk available to us and willing to 

accept this appointment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — It is anticipated that Judge Boychuk will be able to take up his new appointment 

as soon as he has wound up matters relating to his present judicial appointment. The date now 

anticipated, pending the passage of this Motion through the House, is May 1st. Accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, it is with a good deal of pleasure and pride that I now move, seconded by Mr. Romanow 

(Attorney General) — I would ask the Hon. Leader of the Opposition to second this Motion if he wished 

— would you rather Sir? — the Attorney General — this Motion. 

 

Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, first I would like to make it very clear that as 

far as the individual is concerned, Judge Boychuk who has been chosen for this position, the Premier 

told me about this sometime ago and asked if we had any objection to the individual and I said No, he is 

a fine man and enjoys an excellent reputation. I certainly wish him well in this undertaking that he has 

agreed to do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. Again, I want to say very clearly that we will 

co-operate with Mr. Boychuk in every way that we can to allow him to make a success of this particular 

position. 

 

I want to make it very clear as I did to the Premier then and as I did when this Bill was first introduced 

and any time that it has been introduced in the form of a resolution by the then Opposition some years 

ago, that I object to the position. I don’t think it is necessary today in Saskatchewan. The exact duties of 

this individual and of this office have been outlined by the Premier and again I say that in a province of 

less than a million people, 60 Members of this Legislative Assembly and possibly more after the next 

redistribution, that 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1564 

the relatively few complaints that we have from individuals complaining about the Government — not 

complaints about government policy — these will not come under the preview of the Ombudsman nor 

should they, but complaints from citizens who are aggrieved because they don’t feel they either get to 

the right department, or they don’t feel that they have had justice done to their case, or they don’t feel 

that the civil service of the bureaucracy has listened to them and given them a fair hearing. There is a 

relatively few number of complaints. The vast majority can be dealt with by the MLA if he is doing his 

job. The Premier says he is not impressed. Well, I guess if I had some of the MLAs he’s got behind him 

over there I wouldn’t be that impressed either but with the MLAs I have on this side I am very 

impressed that they can do the job. They will do the job if given the opportunity. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, that the MLAs today are in a better position to do this job than they were a year 

or two ago. I think a great many of the MLAs today since the increase in salary are working more or less 

full time. I think there are some who are working full time. I am not talking about Cabinet Ministers 

now or Parliamentary Secretaries. I’m talking about ordinary MLAs on both sides who are dedicating all 

or most of their time now to their position as an MLA. That is bound to have made a difference. I am 

sure they don’t spend all that time politicking, I am sure they spend a great deal of that time listening to 

complaints, taking complaints from their constituents and following them through. I am sure I can say 

this for every MLA on both sides of the House. I have never known of an MLA, if there have been, there 

may have been one or two but I can’t recall them, whether NDP or Liberal, would get a complaint from 

some individual in the constituency and wouldn’t be influenced a great deal as to how that individual 

voted. They would follow it through if for no other reason than it was good politics. If they happened to 

vote the wrong way the last time and if the MLA is able to cut through the red tape and get justice done, 

of course, they figure that they might see the light and vote the right way the next time. So it is just good 

politics to look after your constituents and most MLAs and in fact I think all MLAs do a good job. 

 

Now, I think he could do a better job, I’ve said this before, and while I freely admit we didn’t do it, I 

think that some steps have been taken by every government to give the MLAs more back up, more 

facilities to do the job that they are elected to do and I should like to see every MLA have a full time 

office the year around. I should still like to see us finish the job in this Legislative Assembly Building 

that was once dedicated I think in the beginning to the elected people. Over the years it was taken over 

by the civil servants and in this last number of years, 10 or 12 years and I am not talking about any 

particular government, the elected people have started to take it back again. I should like to see us finish 

the job and see every MLA have an office and have access to stenographical help the year around, so 

that when they come in here in between sessions they could write letters, they could bring delegations 

in. If they come in with delegations they would have a decent place for them to meet, get their case 

ready if they were seeing a Minister, to write letters on their behalf and so on. I think if we back them up 

with this kind of facilities, this kind of help, that all MLAs in this House will do a much better job and 

make the position of Ombudsman even more unnecessary. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1565 

Again I say with less than a million people and with the number of MLAs we have, and the availability 

or should be availability of the Cabinet Minister, the position of Ombudsman is unnecessary. If we let 

the bureaucrats build up so much hope that we are frustrating people in their quest to have justice done 

to them under the laws, then I think we had better take a look at what we are doing and not at the need of 

an Ombudsman but maybe at the need of what we are doing. 

 

I recognize with this Government and the growth of this particular NDP Government and some of the 

powers they have taken unto themselves, that maybe an Ombudsman becomes a little more necessary as 

the years go by. They have taken a great deal of power and we are facing legislation in this Session that 

will give them a great many more powers. I am talking about things like The Consumers’ Affairs Act, 

I’m talking about things like a Hog Commission, I’m talking about things like the amendments to The 

Natural Products Marketing Act. These and many other pieces of legislation put on the books by the 

NDP is certainly going to mean that the public at large are going to need more and more protection from 

the power of the Government. Whether an Ombudsman can do it or not I really don’t know but I don’t 

think so. I think the job still falls to the MLA in the final analysis, falls to the public themselves to make 

sure that no government, NDP or any other kind doesn’t take too much power unto themselves. 

 

Another thing I don’t like about this Bill, and the Premier talked about this Bill and the development of 

this Bill when he spoke, is that they have exempted many of their own possible actions. They have 

exempted, they have set many of the things that they will be doing above the investigating powers of 

this office of the Ombudsman and I think that needs to be reviewed. I don’t know how they compare 

with other provinces but I think if we are going to have an Ombudsman, if we have to have one and 

obviously we are going to have one, then let the chips fall where they may. There should not be 

discretion on the part of the Attorney General or anyone else to set certain operations of the Government 

up above and beyond the investigating powers and the recommendation powers of this man and of his 

office. There may be some jurisdictions in this province, some jurisdictions in this world that become so 

large, and so complex that the office of an Ombudsman is necessary and the work of an Ombudsman is 

called for. I don’t think we have reached that point in Saskatchewan yet. I think that very act of 

appointing an Ombudsman is in effect an admission of failure on our part. It is to some extent at least an 

admission of failure on the part of the 60 MLAs of this Legislative Assembly who are elected by the 

people in this small province of less than a million people, a little over 900,000 people and 60 MLAs 

representing them here, if we can’t order things in such a way and can’t control the actions of the 

bureaucrats in such a way that this frustration will not exist or will not grow or will not in fact be there 

to such an extent that it calls for this office and all the spending and the additional civil servants that it 

will call for, I think to some extent it is an admission of our own failure. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on record very clearly that I still oppose very strongly the principle of an 

Ombudsman but I will support this resolution because I don’t want — I hope no one on this side of the 

House and we haven’t even caucused on this particular resolution — but I hope that no one on this side 

of the House will vote against the resolution because I don’t 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1566 

want to do anything that will impair this man and his office, his chances and the opportunity he will 

have to do some good to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan once that he is installed in office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few words of comment on the 

Ombudsman and the situation in Saskatchewan. I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that the need for 

an Ombudsman is created because of poor governmental practice and the refusal of the Government in 

its many bills to require and institute procedures which guarantee natural justice. The Premier in 

introducing this resolution said that the executive and administrative agencies exercise authority over 

citizens to a greater extent today than before, and that is certainly true, but the Government has to a large 

extent created the problem and then seeks to pat itself on the back by creating a solution to the problem. 

He says that an appointment of an Ombudsman will not solve all the problems, to which I say, “hear, 

hear”! He certainly cannot solve all the problems, particularly with the kind of powers he has been 

given. 

 

To begin with, Mr. Speaker, he has not been given any authority to deal with any agencies where there is 

a mixture of more than one authority. For example, if some old age pensioner is wrongly treated by the 

Regina Local Housing Authority, that body being composed of not only members of the Provincial 

Government but members of the City and Federal Government would be beyond the scope of 

investigation or the concern of the Ombudsman, despite the fact that Saskatchewan has or should have a 

real concern for the way its money is being spent and the way people are being treated. 

 

At the time that this Bill was brought in, of course, Section 17 where the certificate of the Attorney 

General could block any view was withdrawn. But that is the only improvement that was made to the 

Bill. This Ombudsman will not have any powers to summon any person of any real authority under 

subsection (1) of 22 and subsection (2) of 22: 

 

Persons who really exercise authority, and those executive and administrative agencies or people who 

exercise real authority, will be excluded from the purview and the examination of the Ombudsman. 

 

Deputy Ministers are excluded, and almost no person in Government apart from the Minister himself 

exercises more authority than the Deputy Minister. People who are responsible to the Minister are all 

excluded. In addition he is limited to residents of Saskatchewan. This is another example of this 

Government treating people in Alberta and Manitoba and other parts of Canada differently from the way 

they would treat people in Saskatchewan. Under Section 13 (1) the limitation to residents clearly 

applies. 

 

There is no adequate provision for counsel for people who come before the Ombudsman; no 

requirement that the Ombudsman or his staff assist people in framing their complaints despite the fact 

that the people who come to the Ombudsman are likely to be the very group who most need assistance 

in preparing and 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1567 

framing their complaints. The premier said that among the reasons for an Ombudsman is the poor 

arrangements for legal aid. I say, “hear, hear” to that. There is no question about it that the province still 

inadequately provides for legal aid to people, particularly in the civil areas, who require assistance. This 

is, therefore, intended to cover for the failure of the Government to provide adequate legal assistance. I 

would remind the Members of this House that the program which was began in 1967 by the Liberal 

Government when the Hon. D.G. Heald was in power, has not been substantially improved since that 

time. 

 

There is a limitation as to time. When we discussed this I pointed out that this was the only Bill in 

Canada which limited the length of time which the Ombudsman could cover to review a claim. The 

complaint must be started within 12 months of the date on which it arose or the complaint should not be 

examined by the Ombudsman. I refer to Section 13, subsection 2 of the Act. I said, Mr. Speaker, that 

this is the only Act in Canada which has that limitation at the time we discussed it last year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said in introducing this resolution that he was not looking for miracles. 

With the power that this Ombudsman is to have we too do not look for miracles. We wish him well, we 

believe that the appointee was well chosen and we will support the individual chosen as the 

Ombudsman. We want to make it abundantly clear that we regard the Government as having failed this 

Ombudsman right from the start in not arming him adequately with the kind of powers which he ought 

to have. If they really and truly trust their appointment they should give this man and the kind of powers 

which he needs to carry out the job properly and effectively. You can be sure, Mr. Speaker, that we will 

not undermine in anyway the efforts of the Ombudsman. We hope he does well and we shall look 

forward with eager anticipation to a job well done by him within the limits and the confinements which 

they have given him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I must just say a few words on this Motion as 

a result of the comments made by the Member from Albert Park. In many ways this is a rehash of the 

debate of Second Reading and I don’t want to get into that. I do feel that we must make two or three 

things clear. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, my point is that the powers of the Ombudsman in Saskatchewan are 

substantially the same as the powers of the Ombudsman as they exist in other jurisdictions. There is no 

uniformity with respect to the definition of power. Some include deputy ministers under the examination 

of the Ombudsman, some jurisdictions don’t. Some include executive assistants and some don’t. 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, I believe the exception of the Minister and the Minister’s support staff from the 

purview of the Ombudsman is above debate. The Minister must be responsible to one body only and that 

is this Assembly. The Minister being a Minister of the Crown and Minister of this House, must account 

for and give answers to questions on a day to day basis to the Members of this House. That is the theory 

of responsible government. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1568 

It is not the job of the Minister to be replying to the Ombudsman and I don’t know of any jurisdiction, 

anywhere, that historically has allowed an Ombudsman to go right into the Cabinet room, or to go into 

the Minister’s office, with respect to powers. I don’t think it could be suggested, or has it ever been 

suggested by the Liberals opposite, that any Ombudsman anywhere has, in fact, that power. 

 

And it is a natural extension therefore, Mr. Speaker, that an executive assistant or a special assistant in 

that category, a person who reports only to the Minister, a person who does not work within the line 

structure of the deputy minister and the Government. It also makes common sense that he, too, should be 

excluded because the Minister should be responsible for the actions of his executive assistant and special 

assistant, to this House as he is responsible for his own activities. I want to make that abundantly clear, 

Mr. Speaker. That as far as that exemption is concerned there is nothing untoward about it, in fact, to 

include the Minister and his assistants within the purview of the Ombudsman would be to thwart the 

theory of parliamentary democracy and certainly be adding a new concept, a new dimension to the 

Ombudsman that to my knowledge exists nowhere else where this office has been set up. 

 

Now the question on the deputy minister. That is another issue. Mr. Speaker, my position was at the time 

of second reading that an argument – and I repeat it – that an argument can be advanced that the deputy 

minister’s actions should be reviewed. When we made the policy decision to exclude the deputy we did 

so for basically two reasons. 1. We felt the deputy was the policy advisor – and I underline the word 

advisor – to the Minister. We felt that in that capacity he might be hindered in giving free, 

unencumbered advice, his opinion as to how government should be directed or how the department 

should be directed, if he knew that everything that he said, every step of his actions, could be reviewed 

by the Ombudsman. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, from my short experience in government, it is true that deputy ministers 

have a great deal of general power, but the type of administrative decisions we are talking about, 

generally, aren’t made by the deputy minister. They are generally made by a director of Labour 

Standards or some one out of the field with respect to meat inspection or health inspector. It doesn’t 

require a deputy minister’s final decision. So that in a majority of cases, we felt that this was not an 

appropriate office for consideration. 

 

I acknowledge that my colleague from Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) has a good point and a good 

argument that the deputy perhaps should be included. It was my position at the time of second reading, 

and it is today, that if after a period of operation the Ombudsman should, in fact, recommend that his 

powers are too limited and the deputy should be properly included, we would certainly give very careful 

consideration to that approach. 

 

I should like to make one other comment relating to legal aid. This Bill or Resolution is not designed as 

a substitute for legal aid. Members of this House will know that Dean Carter of the College of Law is 

now nearing the completion, almost a matter of days, before he tables a final report for us which 

recommends to the Government that legal aid should be set up in 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1569 

the Province of Saskatchewan. It certainly will be one aspect of the entire process of protection of legal 

rights that we will be looking at. 

 

And the other comment that I should like to make, Mr. Speaker, is on the business of the one-year 

limitation, one year back from the time of the institution of the Act and of the Ombudsman. My simple 

point is that there has to be a time to start something. We have to pick an arbitrary date for starting, and 

one year we felt was certainly not unreasonable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to make the point in rebuttal to the Member for Albert Park, lest it be 

misinterpreted by Members or by the Press or by the public, that the powers of this Ombudsman are not 

of power or not of meaning. That is not the case. His powers are substantially the same as they exist, 

elsewhere. I think that message should be left. 

 

In conclusion I support the Resolution by the Premier. I know Judge Ernie Boychuk very well. Ernie 

Boychuk is a person who knows Saskatchewan inside and outside. He was born in Saskatchewan, 

educated in this province. He knows people of all backgrounds. He has a good academic training. He has 

a good judicial temperament. He is a man of experience in conciliation and mediation. He will be a 

tremendous loss to the Magistrate’s Court in the city of Saskatoon, but I think a benefit to all citizens of 

the Province of Saskatchewan. I also give my wholehearted support in concurring with this Motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to nenine contradicente. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that 

Bill No. 66 – An Act respecting Community Colleges, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I am proud and pleased to endorse the community 

colleges legislation. 

 

The introduction of this Bill represents a dream that began when the late Woodrow Lloyd proposed this 

kind of institution to the Province of Saskatchewan. The community colleges purpose, its particular 

structure and the reason for organization in this way was understood, appreciated and promoted by 

Woodrow Lloyd when he sat in this House, first as the Premier and then as Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The present Member for Last Mountain, who is also the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) will go 

down in education history as a man of courage and foresight because he introduced this type of Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The people of this province will give him full credit for the approach taken as outlined in his 

introductory remarks regarding the legislation. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1570 

I agree with him when he says that local instructors should be used as much as possible; that the latest 

techniques for teaching such as audio-visual aids and television should be utilized. The assertion that we 

will not need new schools but meet in basements and churches, or wherever space is available, will be 

appreciated by those who have paid for schools that now stand empty in some areas in our province. 

 

To organize this program, so that there is a specific program to meet a specific need, will require the 

complete co-operation of the students, whether they are Grade Twelve graduates or 45-year old male or 

female employees. 

 

Consultation and assessment on a continuous and revolving basis will be a necessity. 

 

I agree wholeheartedly with the provision whereby the board members will be residents in the area 

where the community college is located. In the initial stage it is also essential that they be chosen by the 

executive council on the basis that they understand the philosophy and the purpose of the community 

college. 

 

The Minister said that the community colleges program  . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: —  . . . hogwash. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — You will have a chance to speak on this and I am looking forward to it. 

 

The Minister said that the community colleges program would “shore up” rural Saskatchewan. Let me 

make a plea to him to “shore up” urban Saskatchewan where, for those who have been unemployed, the 

need for a community college is real. 

 

 1. Surveys in my constituency show conclusively that many Grade Twelve students either don’t want 

to or can’t afford to go to university. 

 2. They are unable to gain entrance to the Technical Institute at Moose Jaw. 

 3. They would like to take training to get them into occupations or types of work where training is not 

available in the city of Regina, for those types of occupations, at present. 

 

Some of the kinds of training that they are interested in include, — management of hotels, restaurant 

work, service industries, hospital work, day care centres, and nursing homes, as examples. There is also 

the need for retraining and upgrading in an intensive manner. There is a need for training in journalism, 

certain types of secretarial work, specific training too in the field of electronics and television. 

 

We have to consult the students whether they are 18 or 48, male or female, and organize a community 

college to help them. The city of Regina has within its boundaries people who are in desperate need of 

the community college — Grade Twelve graduates, native people, housewives, unemployed people, 

people whose occupation has disappeared. 

 

I concur in the idea of “shoring up” the rural areas, but in the meantime some of the people who have 

moved into Regina come from rural areas. And whether they come from Humboldt or 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1571 

Regina, from an educational point of view, all of us have to agree that they need “shoring up”. Per 

square mile there are more people in the city of Regina who need “shoring up” than in any other area. 

Over and over they have told us, in questionnaires and in conversation, that there is need for a 

community college type of program. They have told us in letters and pleaded for this type of assistance. 

 

This is my plea to the Minister. I congratulate him on the idea. I wholeheartedly endorse the community 

college concept. I am sure that when it was considered by Woodrow Lloyd this was the sort of 

educational project that he had in mind for all the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that need still exists here and throughout Saskatchewan. I am glad that it has been 

recognized by the Minister and I will wholeheartedly support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 66 is a bill that has been in the concept stage and in the 

discussion stage for a number of years. And while I can’t agree with all of the bouquets spelled out in 

the remarks of my hon. friend from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) I am not sure of the early history 

of this Bill, but there are many people involved in the development of this concept and almost as many 

ideas as there have been people in the sense that depending on whom one was talking to, what kind of 

interpretation they gave this term, community colleges. 

 

Some people viewed it and spoke of it as an institution whereby students across the province could gain 

the advantage, perhaps the first year or two, or a university closer to home than at Saskatoon or at 

Regina. Other people spoke of it more along the lines of the Member for Regina North West, as an 

opportunity for on-the-job training, job training, retraining, this kind of program. 

 

This, as I say, has been one of the interesting aspects of the term and the phrase, community colleges, 

through the years. The entire topic has been the subject of many studies and many debates. It has been 

the subject of at least two studies when the Liberal Party was in the Government, six or seven years ago, 

or up to 1971. The present Government also conducted a study on the question and the role and so on, 

on community colleges. I might point out to the Member for Regina North West, and I am sure the 

Minister is aware, that legislation was indeed prepared on this question in the winter of 1971. 

 

Some of the provisions in the present Bill are somewhat similar and there are some of the provisions of 

that Bill that are not in this particular legislation that is before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the concept of community colleges. Everyone, I am sure, in this House supports 

the principle as such. There is no question that the colleges should be, if they are going to do what the 

Minister hopes to do, they should be controlled by locally appointed boards. They should be controlled 

to some extent. I question, again, how we are going to see the development program and the concept that 

the Minister outlined, how we are going to see that developed with the kind of stringent controls that are 

spelled out here for the 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1572 

provincial authority, his Department of Continuing Education. 

 

I don’t quarrel with some controls. There has to be some budget control. This part is fine. The budget is 

to be submitted and approved and I hope in that process, that there is the kind of development the 

Minister hopes for. I hope we shall see, coming out of this community colleges legislation, the kind of 

education or training if you like, that the Minister spoke of. 

 

I wish him well in this regard. I really do. When I say, Mr. Speaker, he is bucking, as he well knows, the 

organized structure at one end, being the university and that particular well organized segment of 

post-secondary education. At the other end he is bucking the Grade One to Twelve structure, which 

again, is fairly well organized. The organization thereof and the structure being kept there, if you like, 

by not only school boards and trustees but by the teachers and the Teachers’ Federation. Again, where 

he is looking at, trying to carve a piece out in the middle, and if I have any quarrel with any of the 

omissions of the Bill before us than the Bill that I had prepared, Mr. Speaker, is that nowhere in there 

does he make any reference to either the Trustee Association or the Teachers’ Federation, who after all, 

at the moment are perhaps one of the main — the two main groups really — responsible for a good deal 

of the kind of education, adult education and other programs that are ongoing in the rural areas. 

 

Legislatively they are not involved at all in it, no, but they should be involved in quite a bit of it. I am 

sure that they will be involved in the fostering and the development and the creation of many of the 

programs the Minister hopes to see evolved. 

 

Again, I would have thought that he would have had the groups somewhere tied into the Bill, tied into 

legislation. They will be in the process. On the other hand I can see his arguments that by leaving them 

out he hopes to create the kind of institution he speaks of. I question if he will be able to buck the 

establishment to the extent that he would like to and that he would like to see happen. I share his 

objectives in this regard. I just question if it will happen to the extent that the Minister hopes. 

 

I think another point that should be borne in mind, Mr. Speaker, is through the years and beginning 

back, I am sure, when the CCF or the NDP were government years ago, there was a beginning made 

then with adult education, with adult training programs by the school boards of the province. That has 

grown, and it has grown tremendously, over the last 10 years. The Federal Government in the many 

Manpower Programs, short courses and “not-so-short” courses. That is an evolution in education and 

less than formal training, if you like, that has moved and moved a long way over the past few years. 

 

The trades schools and the technical institutes at Moose Jaw and Saskatoon and Regina, are another 

example of programs that have developed and have expanded at a tremendous rate here and elsewhere. 

So that while we have not had community colleges as such, and in some respect I am not sure that we 

haven’t when one looks at what happened in other provinces. I think the Minister would agree with this. 

We have seen too often — they came along as another institution and you get enough people put 

together and they go about building an empire for themselves 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1573 

and the result, in my opinion, has been we haven’t seen developed in other provinces the kind of thing 

that should really be a community college. So while we haven’t been lacking the programs, the kind of 

training, the Minister is seeking here, that’s been development in this province, it’s been going on and I 

think on a fairly well-organized basis, even though on an unstructured basis, on an unstructured basis to 

a great degree. 

 

I want to suggest that I hope the legislation and the regulations that will pertain to it will help formalize 

it, will help avoid some of the duplication of effort, some of the duplication of dollars and energy that 

has gone into this area, even though there have been good developments, and by and large pretty good 

correlation in this province. I think that the Minister will want to see even greater correlation, if you like, 

not only in a region but across the province with respect to programs that are available to people and I 

do hope, as I say, that the kind of things he speaks of will eventually come about. I don’t look for them 

overnight, Mr. Speaker, I don’t look for them overnight. I suggest that it will be some time before people 

will come to appreciate the opportunity that is theirs. They have been bucking the system for so long in 

so many cases, that I do hope he is able to bring about some of the very high-minded objectives he has 

spelled out in introducing this Bill. 

 

Again, I would have some questions on a number of other points that are in the Bill and some that are 

not in the Bill, when we get to Committee, Mr. Speaker, but in principle, if I may again remind my hon. 

friend from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) the idea isn’t entirely new, that the field hasn’t been left 

untilled during the former administration. That much work has been done and the mere fact that this 

legislation is before us today and is able to be put before us is an indication of the work, not only done 

by the former government, but done by teachers, by trustees, by many adult education people working 

throughout the province, manpower counsellors, and many, many others who have built and developed 

these programs that this community college legislation will hope to correlate and set up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make a few comments regarding the 

previous speaker’s remarks before I ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

The Hon. Member who previously spoke said that the previous Liberal Government did quite a bit of 

work too regarding community colleges. Well, they were in office for seven years and I think that all we 

got out of seven years was draft bills which might have been presented to the House at some later date, 

or may not have been. When we took office we had a look at the Bill, and the whole concept, in our 

opinion, was so far off base that we had to reshuffle and reorganize and come up with a truly community 

college idea, and this we have done. So we had seven years of looking and thinking and when we took 

office within twelve months we set up four pilot projects which are going full tilt now and we will have 

the benefits of what has been done in those regions, which we will explain further in our speeches on 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We set up four pilot projects which are now exploring the field and we have the 

basis for a sound community college program forthcoming. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1574 

The previous speaker also mentioned the concern as to how local control or local development of 

programs will evolve when we have such stringent control. Well, really, if you look at the Act closely 

we find that it only states budgetary control; as far as programming and staffing and the use of plants, 

that’s all local control to a large extent. As a matter of fact, I’m sure that the people back home, the grass 

roots people in every community will be glad of the opportunity to examine what its needs are and put 

forth programs and plans for the future. And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, as the previous Member 

indicated we are trying to carve out a piece in the middle. We are really in effect, just trying to shore up 

an area that needs looking at. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I rise with enthusiasm to support this Bill, which lays the foundation of one of the 

most innovative and comprehensive community college programs in Canada today. Well, why do I say 

that this program is innovative? Well this Act is unique in its approach to community colleges. Unlike 

colleges in other provinces it is geared to assist people in rural Saskatchewan to obtain training, 

up-grading, knowledge and techniques for self-betterment or job placement. Our program is innovative 

because it allows for our regional libraries across the province to be used as the bases for films, books 

and resource material in general. Our program for community colleges is innovative because it allows 

for use of local personnel, as much as possible, by a system of accreditation of local instructors. 

 

We are all aware that in every community, every Saskatchewan community, there are many capable and 

able resource people. Our program has a fresh approach because programs, courses and instructors are 

never permanent. They are always in a state of flux, changing weekly, monthly or yearly to meet the 

varied and changing needs of our smaller communities and we are all aware, Mr. Speaker, of the dangers 

that exist when courses offered, and staff giving these courses, become too permanent. They become 

fixed and they become costly. 

 

Our community college program is unique in yet another area. There will be no multi-million dollar 

complexes or institutions to build, that will saddle our taxpayers with unnecessary and stupid taxes. We 

have learned well from the Alberta failure which tries to set junior colleges up as secondary universities 

and technical institutes. All that program did in Alberta was to set up another level of education between 

the university level and the high school level. This was unnecessary and has added heavy financial 

burdens on the taxpayers of Alberta. We, in Saskatchewan, are fully aware that to duplicate facilities and 

staff of universities at the local level would be ridiculous. Furthermore, our comprehensive high schools 

across the province already have all the necessary facilities for our community college program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister for doing an excellent job in planning the basis for our 

Saskatchewan community college system. I am certain this program will meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people at the least possible expense, and this surely is the role of any government today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to take a few minutes to comment on the work done by the Minister’s 

advisory committee, whose chairman was Doctor Ron Faris, whose secretary was Miss Marjorie 

Benson. This committee, of ten men and women, held 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1575 

fifty meetings in southern and central Saskatchewan in June. Small group discussion was encouraged 

wherever possible at these meetings. Total attendance at these meetings was 1,897 persons, and it might 

be interesting to note that just under half of the participants in these meetings were women. Another 

1,000 people joined in discussion of the college concept at meetings of other organizations at which the 

chairman or members of the advisory committee were asked to speak. In addition, 41 briefs were 

received on behalf of organizations and individuals. Some 30 letters were received following the 

meetings. 

 

I mentioned earlier that just under one-half of the participants at the public meetings were women. The 

committee found that women in rural Saskatchewan appeared to be discontented with their learning 

opportunities. Lack of encouragement and opportunities to engage in Manpower programs was reported 

at several meetings. In a significant number of meetings women expressed concern about what they felt 

was a lack of opportunity for participation in a wide range of personal enrichment programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our totally decentralized approach to community colleges will help solve this problem. If 

women in a community feel they want a particular program offered, they will be able to get that 

program. Thus, Mr. Speaker, we will see local control, local autonomy and input at its best in this 

community college program, set out by this Bill. 

 

I should like to congratulate Dr. Ron Faris and his committee for the excellent job they did in the area of 

community colleges. Our Government has used the report as a basis for our new Community Colleges 

Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I support this Bill with enthusiasm because it will bring community college 

programs to many people in my constituency. It will bring about the first intra-provincial community 

college program in the western provinces. 

 

I had the privilege of attending a joint meeting of Ministers of Education held in Lloydminster last 

December 11th. At a meeting of the Hon. Jim Foster and the Hon. Gordon MacMurchy and their 

assistants, a joint communique was issued pledging full co-operation between the two governments in a 

joint community college program in that area. Negotiations are currently under way which will resolve 

the basic issues of finances and administrative structure. It is my hope that the college program in the 

Lloydminster area, the Lloydminster, Maidstone, Vermillion area will soon become the fifth pilot 

program in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our community college program has been so well received in our area that we have already 

set up an action committee consisting of one member from every community within a forty mile radius 

of Lloydminster and one member each from the Lloydminster school unit board and the Lloydminster 

public school district board. My advisory committee is ready to swing into action as soon as 

administrative details are worked out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our Minister, before proceeding on a large-scale program of community colleges, 

has set up four pilot projects to test the difference of programs needed in different kinds of areas. The 

four areas are as follows: 

 

 1. The Humboldt area — which is dense, concentrated rural population, with no large urban centre. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1576 

 2. The Cypress Hills area — which has sparse population spread over a vast area; 

 3. The Parkland region – which is a twin city situation; 

 4. The Northern region in LaRonge. 

 

Each of these areas have different situations, with different problems. For instance, we are finding that 

in the Cypress Hills community college area there is a need to make extensive use of our education 

media in order to meet the program needs and get them out to the people. Because of the sparse 

population, spread over a vast area, we will have to be sure our cable television, our education radio 

programs, audio and visual equipment, will all be available in the area in order to carry out a reasonable 

program in that area. In Humboldt, for instance, the emphasis is on informal programming, recreational 

and human resources such as family planning. In the northern region we are finding the need to have 

more technical, vocational programs. 

 

Each of the pilot communities are establishing rural committees to observe the needs, community 

facilities and resources. The results of these surveys will form the basis of program planning and priority 

setting by the community boards. Each pilot project has a community college developer, with a regional 

advisory committee to assist him in early stages of planning. Community college boards will be 

appointed by late spring and programs will be operating by the fall of 1973, in these pilot projects. And I 

am pleased that the Minister of Education has set aside some $675,000 in the 1973-74 Budget for new 

programming in the community college areas. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend our Minister for introducing this legislation which will 

fulfil a vital need in rural Saskatchewan. My only concern would be that the program will become so 

popular, so fast, with Saskatchewan people, that we, as the Government, will not be able to move fast 

enough because of lack of finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is not doubt that I will support the Bill and have a few comments to make at a later 

date and I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debated adjourned. 

 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 50 — An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): — In rising to support the Bill No. 50, The Natural Products Marketing Act, 

I want to say this is a milestone for me. I have farmed all my life and I have seen the ups and downs and 

have raised livestock all those years. For too many years I saw the rise and fall of particularly pork from 

high levels to low levels. I was talking to one of my constituents on the weekend and he was telling me 

(a man who raises pigs) that two years ago he was getting 21 cents a pound and he said last week he sold 

pigs at 49 cents a pound. If something is not done to stabilize the price of pork we will, within a few 

months, see the same kind of a situation happen again when the price of pork will fall to another low. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1577 

Through all my farming years I was an active member in all of the farm organizations, active member of 

the old United Farmers of Canada, later the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union; member of the Pool, and as 

a member of these two organizations we went on year after year, each one of those organizations 

endeavoring to educate, to sell the idea of stabilized prices and a marketing board. 

 

In 1964, April of 1964, I, as the Minister of Co-operation was involved in the vote that went on at that 

time for the hog marketing board. I remember the real interest that was taken in it, so to see this Bill 

coming before the House today which makes possible the formation of a hog marketing commission is 

indeed a highlight for me. I think there is a real need to stabilize agriculture. This is one of the things 

that we, in the New Democratic Party, promised that we would do. We would endeavor to find answers 

to stabilizing agriculture for the people who make their living in this profession. And I think that the real 

need in this regard is to stabilize production and I think that this is the only way that it can be done, 

through a hog marketing commission. It is interesting to note that in the last year the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer), consulting with all the provincial farm organizations, has worked toward this 

and they supported him in the action he has taken. 

 

I have here a news report of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, which I received on my desk 

last week. I think that this document is proof positive that the farming people of our province are 

wanting to see stabilization of their products and stabilization in particular of pork. I should like to quote 

from this document, news report from the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. This is what it says: 

 

The Provincial Hog Marketing Commission will provide producers an opportunity to participate in 

both domestic and export markets for pork. The Federation and other provincial farm organizations 

support the idea of a commission and after two or three years producers will be given the opportunity 

to elect their own board. 

 

The commission was formed last November by the Provincial Government with the agreement of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the Wheat Pool, National Farmers’ Union and the Swine 

Breeders and the Hog Producers Organizations. The hog and swine organizations have been involved 

in the consultations since the spring of 1972 while the Federation was not involved until late summer 

and fall. 

 

During 1970 the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture developed a policy to assist and guide 

producers requesting the establishment of meat or livestock marketing boards or commissions. The 

policy also recognized commissions as a sound alternative to compulsory bargaining. The basic 

difference between the two is that boards control production through a quota system while a 

commission can only involve itself with marketing as stipulated by enacted legislation. A commission 

was also urgently needed to pursue with vigor the much needed promotion of hog products in the 

development of markets. For that reason the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture also strongly 

supported commodity check-offs as a method of paying 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1578 

for the services. The Government’s view was that the market for Saskatchewan pork was being lost, 

and a structure was needed to co-operate with the other provinces in the prairie region in developing 

the hog industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot understand the position of the Members of the Opposition for opposing this Bill. 

They surely know too that through the years there has been an uncontrolled market with a great variation 

of the price of hogs. I can think of three years ago when everybody was in hogs. Everybody got into 

them and very soon the price was plummeting down. 

 

This young friend of mine whom I was talking to on the weekend said he bought young pigs at $24 per 

pig. At the time he sold them he got less than $31. It has been a bust and a break ever since I was a 

young person. It has been no different. And I see in this Act the possibility of the farm people really 

getting places in the production of pork. There is a great possible market in the far east, Japan and other 

countries in the far east. The only way we are going to get that market is if we can guarantee them so 

many pounds of pork a year, not a year, but a week or a month. We are going to have to be able to 

guarantee them that we will produce the pork and they will take it. I think the Hog Marketing 

Commission is one answer toward getting into that kind of a market. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I support Bill No. 50. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, we are talking about boards, Natural Products Marketing Act in 

this particular case. The Member who just sat down was telling us how hard up the farmer was a couple 

of years ago or even a couple of months ago. We have a Wheat Board and I would suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the farmers that were the hardest up in the last couple of years were the farmers that were 

straight grain growers and sold grain to the Wheat Board. The Wheat Board or the Hog Producers 

Marketing Board or the Milk Board, there is no way that they can guarantee that there is not going to be 

overproduction and there is no way that they can guarantee that there is going to be a price. 

 

“Compulsory” is to me, being a real right wing free enterprise individual, compulsory is a very repulsive 

word to many of us in our society today. It is just always compulsory, compulsory, compulsory. 

 

This Government talks about the Bill of Rights. And they say we want maximum freedom extended to 

all to the greatest extent. Yet this socialist Government in Saskatchewan brings in bill after bill which is 

designed to curtail freedom in one or another sector of our society and also to our economy. 

 

The Natural Products Marketing Act is no exception. You are putting the hog producer in a strait jacket 

without giving him the opportunity to decide for himself if this is really what he wants. 

 

The Association is upset about this Bill. They have requested a vote from the membership, but this 

Government has said 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1579 

no. I just wonder why. I am sure that those older farmers to your right will realize and remember years 

ago the Wheat Board didn’t make it compulsory for the farmer to sell wheat to the Wheat Board until a 

vote came to the farmers and they decided by vote that wheat, oats and barley be sold only to and by the 

Wheat Board. We had a vote there. And all the Opposition is saying now is let’s have a vote. I 

personally am against the Hog Marketing Board although I don’t produce any hogs. But if the farmers 

that raise hogs are against a marketing board that is their business not the Government’s. It is not my 

business it is their business. 

 

The Government believes it has its support through the Canadian Federation of Agriculture and the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. The Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) just read and I have the report 

also from Mr. Boden and he read at length what Mr. Boden had to say. What do the hog producers have 

to say? Why this Federation of Agriculture who have been working their hearts out to try and get some 

uniformity of thinking about the farm organizations. They have gone to the rural municipalities and have 

tried to sell them on a certain idea that only one organization speaks for Western Canada or for the 

farmer. Right in the midst of their campaign you have the Hog Producers Association break away from 

the Canadian Federation of Agriculture. Why? Because Mr. Boden with his socialistic attitude, socialist 

mind and theory, he wants to shove a marketing board on every producer whether he wants it or not. It is 

none of Mr. Boden’s business even though he does raise hogs. And if he raises hogs and there is a vote 

he can mark his ballot ‘yes’. The same thing applies to the Wheat Pool. The Wheat Pool basically is a 

socialistic organization and they go ahead and say, the hierarchy of the Wheat Pool, they go and say to 

the hog producers, they should have a marketing commission. 

 

Why should I make these kinds of statements about these two organizations and in particular the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture? It is not because of what they are supporting recently, but time and 

again in the past. You would hardly notice their policies differ to any extent whatsoever from the NDP. 

 

However, in a recent bulletin, and I want to read from this bulletin too. Mr. Boden says: 

 

The Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture welcomes the 1973 Provincial Government’s Budget as a 

step towards further recognizing the importance of agriculture to the total economy of the province. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

The 1973 Saskatchewan Budget provides $22 million for agriculture. That is 3.13 per cent of the total 

budget of $722 million, which is a new record total for Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t think that the farmers quite understand Mr. Boden whether he thinks 3.13 per cent is a record or 

whether $722 million is a record. Surely the 3.13 per cent must be the lowest percentage for agriculture 

that any provincial budget has ever provided. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1580 

He goes on to say that these figures do not include the Land Bank — they do not include FarmStart, they 

don’t include the grid roads and all other little sums which could in some way help some individual 

farmer. 

 

But let us take a look at how he looks at the Liberal Government in Ottawa. Let us see what statement he 

makes about them. This is what makes me wonder whether the Canadian Federation of Agriculture in 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan section, including its president whether he is promoting NDP policy, 

the present Provincial Government’s policy. What does he say about the Federal Government? 

 

The Federal Budget for Agriculture amounts to $293.3 million. More than 10 times the amount of the 

Provincial Government although this is Federal. But most of the agriculture is in Western Canada. He 

goes on to say: 

 

The Saskatchewan Federation feels this expressed a lack of concern for agriculture by the Federal 

Government, an industry which contributes many benefits, both directly and indirectly to the total 

Canadian economy. 

 

He deliberately fails to mention the $60 million so-called two-price system — most of which goes to 

Saskatchewan. He just casually admits that the $26 million just recently announced by Mr. Turner in the 

Federal Budget coming to Saskatchewan for educational purposes from the Federal Government. It will 

provide some assistance he says. 

 

Mr. Boden, praising the NDP as he does and belittling the Federal Government, which spends four to 

five times as much in agriculture in Saskatchewan than the Provincial Government does. I cannot help 

but conclude that Mr. Boden is riding the NDP horse. 

 

He is rather outspoken against the Hog Breeders Association, so much in fact, that the Hog Breeders’ 

Association have tabbed him and the president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool as socialists and I 

believe they are absolutely right. 

 

Yes, the Wheat Pool and the Canadian Federation of Agriculture have always argued for compulsory 

marketing of most farm products. They both argue that flax and rapeseed come under the jurisdiction of 

the Canadian Wheat Board. We see this in every Western Producer that has been printed in the last few 

years and months. 

 

How come, and I want to ask the Federation and the Wheat Pool, how come that the flax and the 

rapeseed growers have not listened to their advice? There is only one reason for it. They have absolutely 

no confidence in these two leaders. I will tell this Government why. They know that if the Wheat Board 

sold rape and flax this year the price of rape would not be $4 per bushel. And flax this year would not be 

$5 per bushel. The farmers would be lucky if they would receive half this amount, if these grains were 

sold by the Wheat Board. 

 

Mention has been made in this House and reported on radio and I believe the Attorney General was one 

of them and the newspapers have reported that some of the Members have stated how I oppose the 

Wheat Board. Well I tell you I certainly would 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1581 

oppose the Wheat Board today if it hadn’t changed its selling system of only a few weeks ago or months 

ago. If the Wheat Board had not smartened up and changed its selling policy of two years ago I would 

be all for dumping the Canadian Wheat Board. But I want to assure the House that if it had not been for 

the late Ross Thatcher and myself telling them the facts of life  . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: —  . . . I am absolutely convinced that Otto Lang would still be in dreamland. They finally 

got rid of an old age pensioner who was meek in spirit and meek in heart and meek mentally — Mr. 

MacNamara, and embarked on an aggressive trade and selling policy. They reduced the price of wheat 

and barley and they were finally successful in moving grain off the Saskatchewan farm. Oh, the 

proponents like the Member for Touchwood would say, Oh, years ago he could remember, and I am sure 

he did, he sold some wheat for 30 cents a bushel, 40 cents a bushel under the free enterprise system, 

under the Grain Exchange. It is a fact that wheat was sold for as low as 30 cents a bushel during the dirty 

thirties but it also is a fact that wheat was sold for as low as 3 bushels for $1 by our Saskatchewan 

farmers and a cent a pound was quite common only 12 months ago under our Wheat Board. 

 

Today the Wheat Board price for wheat is $1.76 per bushel. The initial price was announced only a few 

days ago that next year it will again be $1.76 and yet the sale of wheat on the world trade today is $2.60. 

I believe it is higher than that, I checked the papers here on the weekend. The Wheat Board thinks and 

the Minister apparently thinks that a farmer is only entitled to a certain amount of money, that the Wheat 

Board feels justified in retaining 83 cents less freight and without interest should be withheld from the 

farmer. Whereas the farmer who sells his rape and flax on the Grain Exchange he receives $4 net. He 

gets it all. And he gets $5 for his flax if he sells it. But the Wheat Board is retaining 83 cents less freight 

for every bushel that the farmer sells today. 

 

The farmers can use this money. The initial price could be higher for next year. This Government wants 

to lay all the blame on Otto Lang for Operation LIFT. I want to tell the Members opposite that the 

responsibility of Operation LIFT lies with the Wheat Pool and the Wheat Board. These were the 

advisers to the Minister and therefore must share the full responsibility. 

 

Compulsory and orderly marketing does not ensure the sale of a product nor does it guarantee a good 

price. There is no argument about it. The Wheat Board has proven this to me over and over again. That 

if you have overproduction and they don’t want to sell, the price of wheat is going to go down as well as 

oats, barley and all the rest of it. 

 

The Wheat Board and the Government of Canada are now concerned about production. You talk about 

stabilized price and the guarantee that there is going to be a certain number of hogs. How is a 

commission going to guarantee a certain number of hogs in the province when there will be no crop for 

two or three years? They can’t guarantee it. The Wheat Board cannot guarantee Japan that we are going 

to sell so much rape to them if there wouldn’t be a crop this year. There is no such thing 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1582 

that the commission has power that is supernatural over and above the farmer. The Wheat Board and the 

Government of Canada are now concerned that sufficient supplies will be available to fulfil all 

commitments and the built up markets. 

 

I am not convinced that the farmers of Saskatchewan will take their advice. Nor am I convinced that the 

hog producer will take the advice of a commission if it was set up. 

 

As the Saskatchewan farmers find it more difficult to get hired help for their farms, or no help at all, I 

am convinced that the hog producers, the dairy men, beef cattlemen, a lot of them are going to sell out 

and sell out in a hurry because the price is good. If the Provincial and Federal Government are 

concerned about fulfilling all the commitments that they have made over the past years then certainly 

they should bear some responsibility and try and get some help available for the farmer who needs it. 

 

As a matter of fact, most farmers are not going to take the advice of the governments, but they will do 

what they think is best for them financially. 

 

Past experience would lead us to believe that government advice or Wheat Board advice is bad for the 

farmer. 

 

I think most farmers will go back to straight grain farming, because of the difficulty in obtaining good 

farm help. If the Federal Government wants to pay the unemployed more insurance benefits than the 

farmer can pay for wages, and if this Provincial Government wants to pay those that are able to work 

more welfare payments, to welfare recipients more than the farmer can pay in wages, then these 

governments will have a hard time convincing the farmer to stay in hogs and in cattle. 

 

Compulsory marketing boards have done very little in my opinion to stabilize farm income or assure 

good crops or good prices for products. 

 

What is basically wrong with this Bill and I haven’t attacked it by the clauses but I have attacked it in 

principle mainly, is the fact that it will not allow a producer a vote. Therefore, I certainly cannot support 

it. I beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 67 – An Act to 

amend The Cancer Control Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, one of the most serious health problems in Saskatchewan and 

indeed in the world at large continues to be the incidence in the toll of cancer among our people. After 

heart disease, cancer in its various forms remains the leading cause of death in this province. Regrettably 

the total number of people in Saskatchewan known to be suffering from some form of cancer will reach 

a figure of over 22,000 persons in 1973. In 1972 cancer patients spent over 162,000 days in active 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1583 

treatment hospitals and very close to 1,400 people died from cancer during the year. Apart from the cost 

of human suffering and misery the treatment of cancer in our hospitals by the medical profession and the 

Cancer Commission costs close to $10 million per year. 

 

It is timely to remind this House that the medical profession, the government and the people of 

Saskatchewan were the great pioneers in the development of cancer treatment and the follow-up 

programs in Canada. In 1930 when The Saskatchewan Cancer Commission Act was passed, 

Saskatchewan became the first province to initiate a cancer control program. In 1931 two diagnostic and 

cancer treatment clinics were set up in Regina in the General Hospital and in Saskatoon at the City 

Hospital. In 1932 500 patients were admitted to these two clinics. 

 

In 1944 the present Cancer Control Act replaced the original legislation and has remained substantially 

unchanged since then. That Act provided that all diagnostic services and treatment including drugs 

needed in the control of cancer would become a charge on the provincial revenue rather than on the 

individual patient. In partnership with the medical profession we developed a team approach towards 

cancer treatment. A team of highly qualified specialists assessed a patient’s need and planned a 

treatment program for him. After treatment became free in 1944 there was a great increase in the number 

of patients referred to the clinics. By 1946 the number of patients admitted to the clinics had reached 

3,000 and the cost had risen to just about $400,000. 

 

Since 1946 the number of new patients admitted to the clinics has risen steadily. About 4,400 new 

patients are admitted each year. Mr. Speaker, this year the Government will provide very close to $3.5 

million towards the operation of the work of the Cancer Commission and its program. This is exclusive 

of the cost of hospital care. 

 

In the last 40 years the Saskatchewan Cancer Control program has become known world wide and has 

made a significant contribution to cancer knowledge. As an example, the first cobalt unit was developed 

in Saskatchewan and now we have installed the most modern betatron equipment, the most modern in 

the world. Speaking in the North American context, the only other betatron unit that exists in North 

America is in Boston. Ours is located at our University Hospital in Saskatoon. The betatron unit was 

opened last fall. 

 

The amendments being introduced today are aimed at providing the Commission with new impetus and 

new sense of purpose and direction. Program and operational changes are needed at this time so that we 

can continue to provide the best in cancer diagnostic treatment services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Early in 1970, the previous Government, the former Minister of Health, the Hon. Member from 

Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) set up a committee under the chairmanship of Mr. Justice F.W. Johnson to 

undertake a comprehensive study of the cancer program in Saskatchewan. The study was jointly 

sponsored by the Provincial Government and the Saskatchewan Division of the Canadian Cancer 

Society. When the committee was established it was asked to examine and comment upon more than 20 

specific issues affecting the provision of cancer services in our province. These ranged from an analysis 

of the medical aspects of the present cancer program; enquiry into the relationship between the 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1584 

Commission and the College of Medicine and the medical practitioners of Saskatchewan; to an 

examination of the management and administration of the cancer program. 

 

The final report of the Johnson Study which lasted close to two and one-half years was handed to the 

Department of Public Health last summer. This report has drawn attention to the fact that our cancer 

control program requires some major changes. It particularly pointed out the need to strengthen and 

update its management and administrative policies. It also recommended that payment for cancer 

services be taken over by the Medical Care Insurance Commission on behalf of the Cancer Commission. 

The report recommends that the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission concentrate more on the quality and 

effectiveness of cancer diagnostic and treatment services. 

 

I should also like to highlight some further findings of the Committee. There is praise in the report for 

the quality of cancer services to patients and the thoroughness of our cancer registration and follow-up 

program. However, the Committee identified major problems in the gaps which exist between the cancer 

program and the activities of the University College of Medicine. There is a need for a closer 

relationship between those staff members who practise at the cancer clinics and those who teach at the 

University. 

 

The Johnson Report specifically pointed out shortcomings in the Cancer Commission’s research 

long-range planning and administrative organization. To rectify these problems the recommendations of 

the Johnson Report focused on the need to restructure the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission, to 

redefine its role and direction and to strengthen its administrative procedures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before introducing the recommendations of the Johnson Committee, I discussed the report 

with professional groups, with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, with the College of Medicine and with the Cancer Society as well as the Cancer Commission. 

They have all had their input into the amendments that we are introducing in Bill No. 67. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that my Cabinet colleagues and I favor the majority of the cancer 

assessment committee’s recommendations on the future role of the Commission. The amendments being 

proposed this afternoon will serve to strengthen and streamline the Commission’s operation. Let us 

examine some of the amendments in detail. 

 

The membership of the Commission will be reconstituted to permit fixed terms of office and allow for 

the inclusion of new members on a regular basis. This was a specific recommendation made by the 

Johnson Committee. The Committee recommended that there is need for a more regular turn over in 

Commission members. The proposed legislation provides for a Commission of six to ten members 

appointed for three-year terms with the maximum of two consecutive terms. This is similar to what is 

provided for membership on the Medical Care and the Alcohol Commissions. The Deputy Minister of 

Health, or Associate Deputy of Public Health will be an ex-officio member of the Commission. We have 

provided for the appointment of one of the members by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to act as 

chairman. In addition to the chairman and the deputy minister two other members are 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1585 

specified in the legislation. One physician agreed upon by the Minister and the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons and one full-time staff member of the College of Medicine. The appointment of a member 

of the College of Medicine will allow both the Commission and the College to keep their watchful eye 

on the training of cancer specialists in our province. 

 

In summary the reconstituted Commission provides for the appointment of three health professionals 

and up to six members of the general public plus the chairman, emphasizing one of the prime functions 

of the Commission. 

 

The amendments, Mr. Speaker, to Section 5 and 6 of The Cancer Control Act will ensure that meetings 

of the Commission are held on a more regular basis to encourage greater participation and leadership in 

the development of cancer program planning. Up ‘til now this was a matter for the Commission to 

decide. They were not required by statute to meet a specific number of times a year. 

 

Further the authority of the chairman has been re-stated to ensure continuity in the administration of the 

Commission business. While the existing Act includes a comprehensive list of powers and duties of the 

Commission the Johnson Committee recommended a clear definition of the objectives of the 

Commission. We have therefore amended the duties and powers of the Commission in Section 11(a) to 

broaden the terms of reference of the Commission’s functions which will now be concerned with 

program development and improvement. 

 

The Commission will serve as a policy-making and planning body. It will become more closely 

integrated with other health programs. It will also maintain a continuing contact with both the providers 

of service and the general public in respect to the adequacy of the cancer program. It will be useful to 

cite the objectives of the Commission. The Commission will administer the program aimed at the 

prevention, diagnosis, control and treatment of cancer. The Commission will solicit public opinion on 

the adequacy and quality of cancer programs. They will allow for an exchange of views on the operation 

of the cancer program with members of the medical profession. The Commission will appoint advisory 

committees for review of those areas of the program requiring assessment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Commissioners will take steps to maintain an adequate standard of professional 

education in connection with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. They will lastly develop longer 

ranged plans and evaluate program development. 

 

I believe that these objectives should allow the Commission to pay particular attention to the present and 

future needs of the cancer program in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past the Cancer Commission has only periodically provided the general public with 

the review of its on-going activities. A very important amendment provides for the tabling of an annual 

report in the Legislature. This change is in line with the need to improve the public accountability of the 

Cancer Commission. The annual report will be transmitted to the Minister of Public Health who will 

table the report in the Legislative Assembly similar to the requirements and provisions in the case of the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission and Alcohol Commission. I am sure my friend opposite, the Hon. 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1586 

Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) will agree with this amendment. I am aware of his desire to 

have the Commission table an annual report with him — the last time we have had a report from the 

Commission was in 1964. It is difficult for the Members of the Legislature as well as for the 

Government to assess programs, and how effective they are, when the Commission does not table an 

annual report. The amendments that we are making will require that the Commission prepare an annual 

report so that we can assess its effectiveness. 

 

I believe that we will find that these organizational amendments will place greater emphasis on 

improving public involvement, encouraging more activity and providing more direction in the operation 

of the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. 

 

It is my belief that sound management requires workable objectives being placed before the 

Commission. The Commission should concern itself with long-range planning, operating policy and 

overall administrative guidance. I am confident that now these goals have been spelled out and the new 

organization will work hopefully, more effectively. As I indicated earlier these organizational changes 

are only the first steps in the implementation of some of the recommendations of the Johnson 

Commission Report. It is not possible to spell out by legislation many of the other recommendations but 

with setting out the new objectives, with the review of the Commission, plus other requirements that we 

are making we are hoping that new impetus and a new direction will be given by the new Commission. 

A reconstituted Commission will have the manpower skills and the appropriate authority to deal with the 

other recommendations contained in the Johnson Commission Report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to tabling the next annual report on the Cancer Commission in this House 

early next year. I am hopeful that the first report will give evidence of steps that the new Commission 

will be taking to improve our cancer control program. Cancer will be one of the major health concerns 

of the Saskatchewan people in the future as it has in the past. The medical profession and the 

Government of Saskatchewan cannot afford to rest on past achievements. We must strengthen the 

organizational structure of the Commission and these amendments will achieve these goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might add that the proposed amendments have been discussed with the Cancer 

Commission and with the College of Physicians and Surgeons as well as the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association. There is substantial agreement on the amendments, in fact when the draft was first 

prepared, we discussed these with the groups I have mentioned and a number of suggestions were made 

by them and were incorporated into the Bill that is before us. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend the Cancer Control Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words. First of all 

cancer is likely the major health concern in Saskatchewan today and the incidence is increasing. The 

nature of cancer is still far from known. We know that some of the causes are chemicals and viruses and 

radiation and other irritants. We don’t know how these agents affect the cause of cancer. A 



 
March 12, 1973 

 

 

1587 

great deal is still to be learned. 

 

I think that, we as a Legislature, we as a public, owe a great debt to the Cancer Society for the 

tremendous contributions they have made to our society. I should just like to comment on the formation 

of the Canadian Cancer Society. I think it goes back in Saskatchewan, back to 1929 when the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association formed a cancer committee which was a voluntary committee at that 

time, and this led in turn to the formation of the Canadian Cancer Society. I think the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association deserves some credit for this. 

 

I think that the cancer program that was established in Canada is also unique because it combined the 

forces of government and the medical profession and lay people and this is what made it unique. This 

led to the Canadian Cancer Control Act being passed in 1930. 

 

What we are discussing today are the amendments to The Cancer Control Act, and really the 

amendments come to this House as a result of the Johnson Report which was commissioned by the 

Member from Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant). Certainly I agree with the recommendations of the Johnson 

Report. One of the strong recommendations of the Johnson Report is that a separate cancer program 

should be carried on rather than including cancer into the generalities of medicine and I strongly agree 

with this and I will certainly support the Bill. 

 

One of the things that may give me some concern is the formation of the Commission. I don’t think that 

it is really spelled out that interested people – truly interested people – should be able to devote as much 

time to cancer as is possible. I have second thoughts about limiting their time on this Commission to two 

terms. 

 

Secondly, I think the chairman of the Commission should be a doctor and I think that he should have, 

not only the desire, but should be emotionally involved in the cancer problems. But I think, first of all, 

that he should be a doctor and I would hope that he can be. 

 

The power and the duties of the Commission as outlined in this Bill, are powers and duties that the 

Commission has actually had in practice and been doing largely in practice and this amendment gives 

the legislation so that they can act properly under it. 

 

The only other question that I would have is that there are other recommendations made in the Johnson 

Report and I would hope that these amendments won’t preclude the implementing of further 

recommendations which were made by the Johnson Report. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I should like to adjourn debate so that other Members of our party can have a 

chance to look at this. I know that the Member for Whitmore Park will have more to say about this. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:33 o’clock p.m. 


