



















































Hansard: February 05, 1973


269 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

3rd Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

8th Day 

 

Monday, February 5, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. E.C. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, through you I should like to introduce to this 

Assembly 60 Grade Eight students from Rosemont School, seated in the west gallery. These young 

people from Regina Northwest are accompanied by their teachers, Ernie Gaschler and John Bateson. 

Members, I am sure you will join me in extending a warm welcome and expressing the wish that their 

stay with us will be pleasant and educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you a group of Grade 

Ten students from Maryfield School in my constituency that have come to this Assembly this afternoon. 

They have had a fine tour of the building and they are here to watch the democratic procedure in our 

Assembly. I know that all Members will want to express their delight in having them here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

MR. McMILLAN — CLERK ASSISTANT 
 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to you, Sir, in 

clarification. On Friday, January 26th, you informed the Legislature that Mr. McMillan had been 

appointed Clerk Assistant. I should like to have clarification as to whether that means he comes under 

your jurisdiction as Speaker and through you to the Legislature as a whole? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think questions to the Speaker are better taken up in the Speaker’s office and not on 

the Assembly floor. I will be willing to discuss it with the Member any time he wishes to come to my 

office. 

 

STUDIES ON CHURCHILL RIVER DEVELOPMENT 
 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 

direct a question to the Minister of Environment (Mr. Byers). Over the weekend the Minister announced 

that studies would be taking place on the Churchill River development project, environmental studies. 

He said they would begin today. Is the Minister prepared to tell the House the names of the groups of 

people who will be undertaking these studies, whether they be 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

270 

independent studies conducted outside the Government or whether the studies are conducted by the 

Government themselves? 

 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I do not have the names of the persons 

other than the various departments associated with this study. If the Member would like to put a question 

on the Paper for the groups other than the Department of Natural Resources, SPC and Highways, we 

shall be glad to provide this information. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, the most immediate question that I think is of concern to all 

Members is, are the studies being conducted by the Government agencies or are the studies being 

conducted by independent groups outside the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Byers: — Well, I draw to the attention of the Member the announcement which may or may not be 

on his desk. I would draw to his attention that these studies will involve ground survey and aerial 

reconnaissance and the survey crews are being co-ordinated by the Department of Natural Resources. 

They are using staff from SPC and the Department of Highways as well as some private contractors. I 

expect that his first question was related to the question of what private contractors were involved. We 

can get that information for him if he wants it. 

 

AMENDMENTS TO UNIVERSITY ACT IN CARILLON 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Education (Mr. MacMurchy). I have in my hand here a copy of the Carillon, the latest edition of the 

Carillon, and in it there is a complete outline of the amendments to the new University Act. I should like 

to know, Mr. Minister of Education how they got this information. Was it made known to other 

members of the Press and is this the policy of the Minister of Education to give out this kind of 

information prior to it being tabled in the House? 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Member from Milestone, 

I should like to know how they got the information myself. It certainly is not the policy of this 

Government, or of this Minister, to make information available of this nature. I think that they have done 

a lot of speculating and the Bill will be coming forward in the House very shortly. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon 

Nutana South) and the amendment thereto by Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie). 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned Friday when I adjourned the debate, I should 

once again like to congratulate the mover and seconder to the Throne Speech and I am sure that the 

honor which 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

271 

which has been bestowed upon them is very gratifying to them. 

 

Now, initially, Mr. speaker, I should like to join with the rest of my colleagues in welcoming back to 

this Legislature the Member from Athabasca (Allan Guy). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — It is especially gratifying for me having spent some time in the Athabasca constituency 

during the campaign working with Allan Guy, to have been afforded the opportunity of meeting and 

getting to know the people whom Allan Guy represents in the northern part of this great province. It 

gave me the opportunity of better understanding the North and some of its problems, as well as to see 

first hand the tremendous potential which we have in the North. 

 

Having a better understanding of the North, I realize Allan Guy truly is the voice of the North. His 

understanding of the North and its people will certainly benefit this Legislature and, in turn, the people 

of this province. 

 

Since becoming a province in 1905, Saskatchewan’s major industry has been agriculture. Agriculture 

over the years has played a major part in the development of this province. It is a heritage of which we 

all can be proud. Agriculture, if developed properly, will continue to be one of our major industries. Our 

efforts inside and outside of Government must be directed to developing a sound and stable economic 

base that will provide for meaningful expansion of this very vital industry. We must insure that 

agriculture continues to expand, continues to provide opportunities for new farm units, for 

diversification and for stability. In this complex world stability is difficult to achieve. 

 

Because of this instability in world markets on which expansion of Saskatchewan agriculture depends, 

we must be careful not to put all our eggs in one basket, we must not ask for, nor expect agriculture to 

carry the entire burden of our economic future in this province. We have talked about diversification in 

agriculture itself, we must also talk about the economic diversification of this province. If we wish to 

grow and provide a good standard of living and opportunity for all people in this province, we must look 

to our other resources as well. 

 

We have vast mineral resources which are crying to be developed. We have renewable resources other 

than agriculture, such as forestry and fishing, second to none in Canada. These, too, are crying to be 

developed. We must make use of these resources — resources which belong to each and everyone of us. 

They must be developed if we wish to provide Saskatchewan with that broad economic base. 

 

1965 saw a start in this diversification, the province became alive with development. Industries began to 

be established, confidence returned to our business community. Our youth who did not wish to farm 

were given the opportunity to stay in their own province and contribute to its development. The spring 

of 1971, under the NDP, brought an abrupt end to this development. For the past two years, we in 

Saskatchewan are again being by-passed by industry and will soon be dependent again only on 

agriculture and Federal Equalization Grants. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

272 

Not all of our youth wish to farm, Mr. Speaker. If we are going to keep them in Saskatchewan, if we are 

going to allow them to contribute to the development of Saskatchewan, we must again begin the 

development of our mineral and renewable resources. We must stop this farce of nationalizing our 

industries, we must return confidence to our business community, we must encourage public and private 

involvement. An economy based only on agriculture cannot afford the tax burden that would be required 

to develop our natural resources under a socialistic program. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, not all our youth in Saskatchewan wish to farm, but for those who do we must 

initiate programs and provide opportunities that will encourage them to take up a career in farming. If 

we are going to put more young farmers back on the land we must make it economically feasible for 

them to do so. We must ensure that they can see a future in the agricultural industry of this province. 

 

The land, regardless of whether you own it or lease it, is not much good to our youth if they do not have 

the resources and credit to obtain the machinery needed to farm that land. As well, to have an economic 

farm unit, incentives must be provided to enable diversification of that farm unit, incentives to expand 

into livestock, into other fields of agriculture and to relieve the dependency upon grain. Incentive 

programs must be initiated. Time does not permit too much elaboration, but for the benefit of Members 

opposite I should like to mention just a few of the incentive programs designed for diversification that 

were implemented by the previous Liberal Government. 

 

1. An imaginative program that made available grants to assist farmers to construct modern 

hog-rearing facilities. A program which by the end of 1971 saw over 700 barns built that were 

capable of turning out an average of 350 hogs each per year. 

 

2. For the first time in the history of this province loans were made available through SEDCO for 

farm diversification into livestock. 

 

3. Grants were made available for individual irrigation projects. 

 

4. Encouragement was given for forage production and incentive grants provided to construct hay 

and fodder shelters. 

 

5. Lease land was sold to young farmers at reasonable prices. 

 

6. Payments were made to producers as an incentive for the production of quality hogs. Just one more 

program that was cancelled by the NDP. 

 

7. Acreage in community pastures were increased from 425,000 to over 630,000 acres. 

 

8. Improved acreage nearly tripled, from 70,000 to over 200,000 acres. 

 

9. Community sheep pastures were constructed. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

273 

10. Co-operative grazing associations were expanded by over 50,000 acres and almost half a million 

dollars paid out in earned assistance. 

 

The list goes on, Mr. Speaker, but I would be remiss if I did not mention the Guaranteed Livestock Loan 

Program. A program which besides guaranteeing the loan also paid a grant to offset the high interest 

rates. This single piece of legislation alone did more for the livestock industry in this province than did 

20 years of socialism under the CCF-NDP. These are just a few examples to show how the Liberal 

Government realized the need for incentives and farm diversification. We came up with sound and 

imaginative ideas and put those ideas into practice. 

 

It might be interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that during the past two years of NDP Government, there 

have been no new incentive programs introduced by this Government. It is also interesting to note that in 

the Throne Speech mention was made of their intention to introduce legislation that would provide for 

low-cost, supervised credit related to livestock. And yet last week the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) introduced a Bill to amend the Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act. All that this amendment does is 

to extend the Bill for one more year. It makes no provision whatsoever to provide for low cost 

supervised credit for our young farmers who wish to diversify into livestock. Just one more indication of 

how the Government Members opposite are only willing to pay lip service to these problems and are not 

willing to act positively upon them. 

 

I should, at this time, like to direct my remarks to some of the concerns which I have regarding the 

direction in which this Government is taking the agricultural industry in this province. As was 

mentioned in the Throne Speech and from the record of the NDP Government during the past 18 

months, it is becoming very evident that they are determined to undermine and do away with the 

individual freedom of the farmer, the livestock producer and those involved in the agricultural industry 

of this province. 

 

Individual freedom, Mr. Speaker, which since confederation has helped to build the West and this great 

province, freedom to make up our own minds, freedom to decide what we want and how we wish to 

shape our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The ethnic origins of Saskatchewan are comprised of thousands of people who left their 

native land to build a new life. To get a new start in a country that allowed them to own property, to own 

land, to rise above their present situation and create the life style they wanted for themselves. Freedom, 

Mr. Speaker! They came to Canada, to Saskatchewan, for freedom; and freedom is what they got. And 

today, freedom, a very basic right of every individual, is being threatened by this arrogant Government 

and its Cabinet. This Government’s desire to undermine this freedom and gain complete state control 

and state ownership of the agricultural industry in this province is becoming more evident each and 

every day. The Land Bank, designed to nationalize the farm land in Saskatchewan; the proposed 

limitations to the size of individual farm units; the restriction of ownership under the abortive Foreign 

Ownership Bill; combined 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

274 

with the disastrous effect the new estate and succession duties have on individual farmers — are just a 

few examples. The inability of the individual farmer adequately to voice his opinion prior to the 

implementation of these programs — programs which affect their very livelihood is of very great 

concern to me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The new Hog Marketing Commission is just one example of the NDP Government’s 

desire to ignore the individual. At this time, Mr. Speaker, I do not wish to get into a debate of the pros 

and cons of the Hog Marketing Commission as I feel this is not the time nor the place. But I do wish to 

comment on the arrogant attitude of the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) in his determination to 

deny the hog producers an opportunity to voice their opinions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — An opportunity to voice their opinion through the means of a plebiscite. When 

questioned in the House last Monday, the Minister stated that he had the backing of the National 

Farmers’ Union, he had the backing of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Agriculture, and Saskatchewan Hog Producers, the Saskatchewan Swine Breeders’ Association, a very 

impressive list, Mr. Speaker. Now, if this is the case, then with this kind of backing and support, why in 

heaven’s name is he afraid to listen to the producer members and allow them that request for a vote? Is 

he admitting to these various groups whose support he states he has, that in effect they do not actually 

voice the opinion and the true feeling of the hog producers which belong to their individual 

organization. When he stated that 48 members of the Saskatchewan Hog Producers had voted in favor of 

the Commission, why doesn’t he tell the whole story? Why doesn’t he say that of the 48 members, 26 

voted in favor of a resolution saying that they approach the government regarding the feasibility of a 

Hog Marketing Commission, but that the second part of that resolution stated that if considered by the 

government, a vote by producers be held. I maintain that the Minister of Agriculture misrepresented the 

true meaning of that resolution. I charge the Minister as well that when he introduced The Natural 

Products Marketing Act he misrepresented his feelings on that Act and that he misrepresented his 

intentions of that Act to the producer organizations and the people of this province. He indicated in his 

remarks that under Section 11 of the Act which gives him the power to implement a marketing 

commission without the 60 per cent favorable vote, that the only time these powers would be used, and I 

quote from Debates and Proceedings, 1972, page 2034: 

 

The need for a commission I think can be better outlined if in the future a need for quick action by 

government to correct or approve a deteriorating market condition arises. 

 

The hog producers of this province believed that before a marketing commission would be introduced, 

they would have the opportunity to understand the functions of that commission and they would be 

given the opportunity to then voice their opinions through a vote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

275 

Mr. Wiebe: — I feel, Mr. Speaker, that if an orderly information program were undertaken and a vote 

held with 60 per cent of the producers accepting a commission, they would do everything required to 

make it work. That basic right to obtain information on what the Commission will do, how it will 

function and their desire to vote has been denied them. Of course, the producers are not happy. They are 

unhappy with the commission because they don’t know anything about it. They are unhappy with the 

Minister of Agriculture because of his dictatorial attitude. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — He is denying them the right to information, he is denying them the right to vote, he is 

going to ram this commission down their throats whether they like it or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Does the Minister of Agriculture feel that hog producers in this province are sheep and 

that they have to be told what is good for them? It is very discouraging to me to see individuals or 

people who when they hold high office begin to give the impression that they are more intelligent than 

the people that they represent. 

 

In an article in the Leader-Post the Minister of Agriculture stated that opposition to the province’s Hog 

Marketing Commission is being fostered among poorly informed producers by a few who are against the 

measure. Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, then I say it is because of the Minister’s own negligence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Not one producer has received a letter or been informed about what the commission will 

do, how it is made up, how it will function and what its benefits are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The Minister of Agriculture has completely ignored the hog producers of this province. 

In his appointment of members to the commission he completely ignored the Hog Producers’ 

Association. He didn’t even ask them for a representative on the Board. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, no! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — This type of attitude, Mr. Speaker, is a slap on the face of all hog producers in this 

province. I urge the Minister to allow producers a vote, to allow them to obtain the information 

regarding what the commission is all about. I am sure that the Minister is not naive enough to think that 

there are only a handful of producers against his method of introducing this commission. I maintain, Mr. 

Speaker, that he does realize that there is a tremendous amount of opposition to his conduct and to the 

way in which he has handled the introduction of this commission. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

276 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The hog men at Saskatoon certainly made that clear to him. Going back to the Minister’s 

comments when he introduced The Natural Products Marketing Act, I should again like to repeat his 

quote: 

 

The need for a commission I think can be better outlined if in the future a need for quick action by 

government to correct or improve a deteriorating market condition arises. 

 

Last November when he formed the commission, where was the need? Prices were not deteriorating, in 

fact, they were increasing daily. Markets were good. The future looked bright. What was the need for 

this great rush? Why was it necessary for the Minister to renege on his statement? What he should have 

done is to have had meaningful consultation with the various farm organizations, started a program to 

inform the hog producers of this commission, given each individual producer an opportunity to 

understand those proposals. Then, and only then, should he have announced the commission, allowed a 

vote and given the producers the right to become involved in the decision that would affect their very 

livelihood. It is very unfortunate that through the Minister’s attitude and his dictatorial actions he has 

created this mistrust and the unrest among hog producers in this province. I once again urge the Minister 

to reconsider his stand and begin a program of informing the producers ad clearing up these 

misunderstandings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — I urge the Minister to find out what the producer wants included in the plan and above 

all to allow them their right to voice their opinion through the means of a plebiscite. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I must remind the Minister that you cannot legislate loyalty to a program or to 

an ideal, that you cannot legislate efficiency nor viability, that you cannot legislate acceptance. This can 

only be accomplished by trust and adhering to the basic rights and freedoms of individuals whom you 

govern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.K. Comer (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like first of all to begin by congratulating my 

seatmate, the Hon. Member from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) and the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Gross) on their very effective moving and seconding of the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

277 

Mr. Comer: — These Members have brought honor to their constituencies, to their constituents and to 

the Government. Mr. Speaker, I should also at this time like to congratulate the three new Ministers that 

were appointed last spring — the Hon. Member for Biggar, Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley), the Hon. 

Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley, Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) and the Hon. Member for 

Humboldt, the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Tchorzewski). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — I should like also to congratulate the Hon. Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) on his 

landslide. I should like later on in my speech to turn and deal with some of the concerns the Hon. 

Member from Athabasca claims to have close to his heart. 

 

I should like also, Mr. Speaker, to once again thank the people of Nipawin constituency for giving me 

this honor of representing them in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — I shall now turn for a few moments and deal briefly with a few of the remarks that were 

made by the Hon. Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe). He talked about the drop of population in this 

province. Time and time again we have heard Members of the Liberal Party get up and decry the falling 

population of this province when, in fact, the decline of population in this province is very effectively 

being stemmed by this Government as it was effectively stemmed from 1944 until 1964. Mr. Speaker, 

the Hon. Member also talked about agriculture. I realize that later this afternoon the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) will be speaking so I won’t be dealing in any length with agriculture. 

 

He talked about the Land Bank. The Land Bank, I think any fair-minded person in this province will 

agree, is one of the most popular and positive programs that has been brought in in this province in 

agriculture since the beginning of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — We have in the Throne Speech been told about the new FarmStart program, a program 

to help people even more to get into farming, help keep people on the farm. 

 

And then the Hon. Member from Morse talked about resource development. He talked about socialism 

in resource development. I should like to turn and deal for a few moments with the development by the 

province of the forest resources of this province. I welcome and I know that the people in northern 

Saskatchewan welcome the announcement in the Speech from the Throne that the Government will be 

moving to get the maximum utilization and the maximum job creation out of timber resources. When the 

New Democratic Party became the Government of this province 19 months ago, the vast majority of the 

timber resources of this province were held by Parsons and Whittemore and Simpson Timber. The 

timber industry in this province was being concentrated in Meadow Lake, Prince Albert and Hudson 

Bay. I think it was clear 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

278 

that in a very short period of time those three communities would have all of the timber industry in this 

province. And I think that this Government has an opportunity at this juncture to spread the benefits of 

the timber industry over many communities, communities along the forest fringe and communities in the 

North. We have an opportunity to maintain the viability of communities along the forest fringe, 

communities such as Green Lake, Smeaton, Carrot River, Sturgis, as well as maintain the communities 

that already have major timber developments. There is a mill operating at Green Lake once again under 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — Let’s make sure that this mill continues, and if possible, expands. There is a mill at 

Carrot River. Let’s make sure that this mill continues and if possible, expands. An experimental mill has 

been established at Sturgis to saw aspen. We are all hoping that this experiment is successful and that a 

much larger permanent mill can be established in this area. Mills which not only make maximum use of 

our forests but mills which provide jobs in communities which very much need those very jobs to 

maintain their existence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn for a few moments and deal with timber development in the North. The 

Liberal answer for timber development in the North was pulp mills. There was a lot of talk by the 

Liberals about the benefit to northern people, about the benefit to native people from the Prince Albert 

Pulp Mill. Looking at the statistics shows that very few natives are hired in those operations and they are 

always hired at the very lowest level. This summer I was in the North and at Green Lake the Hon. 

Member (Mr. C.P. MacDonald) for Milestone (quite a place to be an expert on pulp mills) was 

attempting to tell some of the people at Green Lake what a great advantage the Doré Lake Pulp Mill 

would have been to them. They told him what they thought of that pulp mill. And following that the 

Hon. Member for Milestone got on the bus and went to Meadow Lake, got in his car and never appeared 

in the North again until the Athabasca by-election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — There was a lot of talk by the Liberals about what Simpson Timber Company has done 

for the natives. Look at Hudson Bay. I’m talking about the natives. In my constituency there are two 

reserves, Earth and Shoal Lake. Shoal Lake is just down the road from one of the camps supplying trees 

to Simpson Timber Company. The camp has maybe 60 or 80 men. I was out at that reserve about two or 

three weeks ago and was asking the people how many of them were working in the camp. It wasn’t 

one-half or 40, it wasn’t a quarter or 20, there wasn’t one native working in that camp just a few miles 

from their own reserve. And that is exactly the benefits that source of timber development gave to the 

natives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — In the North there is a need for an economic base for most of the communities. There 

are small mills now in some communities such as Green Lake and Cumberland House. These mills 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

279 

help provide an economic base for these communities. In almost every community in the North, the 

people will ask for a sawmill. And I am not saying that this Government can put a sawmill in every 

native community. It cannot. But I think we must make room in our development of the timber resources 

of this country, of this province, for mills in many of these communities, mills that can fill the local 

needs for lumber. Communities like La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Beauval, Patuanak, Molanosa, Pelican 

Narrows, La Ronge. You will notice I had to mention some of the communities in some of the Liberal 

Members’ seats opposite because they represent their constituencies so poorly, someone has to represent 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — These mills may not always provide balanced financial statements but the social 

benefits far outweigh the economics of the situation. 

 

I should like to turn for a few moments and deal with the situation in northern Saskatchewan in general, 

some of the real problems I see and some of the problems I believe the Government is beginning to 

attack and hope that they will continue to attack. In the native communities of the North the thing that 

strikes me the most — it’s not the poverty, it’s not the cultural differences between natives and whites. 

There is a lot said about those things and they are very striking. The thing which strikes me the most is 

the powerlessness, the dependency that has developed in the North. Statements which you will hear in 

community after community across the North (native communities), any part of the North, are 

statements like, ‘We want to make our own mistakes. We want to run things ourselves’. These 

statements imply a big order, big for the giver as well as for the receiver. It’s a big order for the 

Government as well as for the natives. It’s not an easy solution, it’s not a quick solution, and it’s not a 

cheap solution. It’s hard, it’s slow, it’s expensive. But if it’s not a solution, it’s a beginning of a solution 

to return or give power to these people in the North. 

 

May I deal for a moment with what I mean by powerlessness and dependency. Some of the things that 

we expect the local people will decide in southern Saskatchewan, many of the things are not decided for 

the people by those people of these communities. Who decides where the roads will be built? Who 

decides what roads will be built? Who decides what sort of school will be built? Who decides what 

teachers will be hired? Who decides how many houses will be built? Who decides the design those 

houses will have? Who decides even where in the community those houses will sit? Who decides almost 

everything big and small? Is it decided by the residents of the communities? In most cases it is not. It is 

decided by someone in the Department of the North or in Indian Affairs. The decision may be made by a 

civil servant in the community. It is more likely made in La Ronge and Prince Albert, Regina, Winnipeg 

or Ottawa. Often the natives will know nothing about what is happening for months, then suddenly 

action will occur. Or maybe they will know nothing for years and nothing will happen. 

 

I might add that my impression in the North is that DNS has been a positive development towards 

consulting the people of the North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

280 

Mr. Comer: — I am not claiming that all the problems have been solved, but I think there is a start in 

solving them. My impression of Indian Affairs has been that generally they get many ideas from Indians, 

from the Treaty Indians, they take them back to their offices and that is it. You very seldom find 

anything happening on them. When anything does happen, again, all of a sudden out of the blue 

something is done. 

 

The Hon. Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) rose in his place and delivered his exhortation on what he 

thought of our policies in the North. 

 

Hon. G. Bowerman: — Where is he now? 

 

Mr. Comer: — Oh, he is gone. I am sure he is not up in his constituency and not in the House as usual. 

 

He read a letter and I should like to read part of a news release that was given by the Métis Society of 

Saskatchewan regarding the letter that he tabled. 

 

The Métis Society said there are a lot of bureaucrats that the native people would like to see let go. 

The ones that are suppressing rather than helping the people. 

 

It is interesting to note that the ones that she refers to are some of the very few who they are trying to 

help and improve the situation of the native people by promoting local control of education, the 

economy and other aspects of their life. I think that news release is very revealing. I was talking to some 

white people from the North last fall. They were complaining bitterly about what this Government is 

doing in the North. They said to me and the other person who was with me, ‘The trouble with you 

people is, you go into the North, you don’t talk to the people of the North, you go and see the Métis 

Society in each community’. In other words, what they were saying was, you don’t go see the white 

people, you go see the Métis Society. This is why people, like the Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. 

Coupland) and people like the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) are miffed. Because we are not going 

to see their friends, we are going to see the real people that need help in the North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Comer: — I should like to bring forth some suggestions about how we can transfer power in the 

North. Right now in various departments there are a number of positions called supernumerary positions 

which are held by native people. These native people, as I understand, were to be trained to take over a 

more responsible position. And what really happened to these people and this was originated under the 

Liberal government, was that the native people became nothing more than cheap help. Outside of the 

union, just sitting at the bottom, typing and answering phones. Now this Government has frozen the 

supernumerary program. I think we should re-open that program but let’s hire supernumeraries and let’s 

give them responsibility in the jobs they are in. Eventually they can become the welfare workers and the 

conservation officers and so on. In my constituency in Cumberland House there was a supernumerary 

some years ago. The people, I think it is fair to say, disliked that person because he had no 

responsibility. This Government has hired a person, I am not sure if he is classed as 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

281 

supernumerary or what he is classed as to work with the welfare worker. I am very pleased and proud to 

say that that person, in over a six month stretch of time, assumed many of the responsibilities of the 

welfare worker. For the first time we have given to the people of that community, or we are in the 

process of giving to the people of that community, responsible positions. I think this is the sort of idea, 

the sort of development we should be attempting in many of our government positions. 

 

Another thing that I think we should look at and I believe it is being looked at, is training natives in law, 

make them court workers, to help their people in the courts. Because so many times natives are taken 

before the courts on charges they don’t understand, in a court they don’t understand and almost all of 

them plead guilty when many of them don’t need to. 

 

I should like to turn and deal with one last thing in the North before I sit down. This has to do with the 

Local Community Authorities. The LCA’s. This is the nearest thing to municipal government that one 

finds in the North. It is made up of an elected council headed by an overseer. The economic base of 

these communities is generally very small, and too small to establish any tax base. Provincial grants are 

small so that the LCA hasn’t enough money to do anything and ends up spending a few dollars for odds 

and ends in most cases and passing bylaws about fairly inconsequential matters. I think we should move 

as quickly as possible to give these LCA’s more decision-making power and also we must give them 

money which they can spend as they see fit. A fair amount of money goes into LCA’s for certain 

specific projects, but very little money goes in that can be spent as the LCA’s see fit. 

 

I mentioned timber development. It is my hope that we can foster economic development such as the 

development of a timber industry. I think there are many other small projects, economic development 

projects that could be carried on in the North. I think the most important thing is not only transferring 

power but consultation. I mentioned this last year and should like to mention it again. I think we are a 

long ways down the track. We have made some very positive development in consulting the people of 

the North. I hope that we shall continue to develop in this manner as the years go by. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is up. I will be supporting the motion. I will not support the amendment. 

 

Mr. H.E. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech is an indication of the 

continuation and expansion of state control in this province. 

 

This is not surprising. Before I go any further though, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the 

Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) on his re-election to this House. He is a hard working Member and I 

am sure he will continue to warrant the support of the people of the Athabasca constituency. I want also 

to congratulate the three new Members to the Cabinet and wish them well in the couple of years they 

have ahead of them. Mr. Speaker, I wish also to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Throne 

Speech. It is not much wonder that neither of them mentioned the Speech very often because it doesn’t 

say very much other than that the Government will continue its trend towards complete state control. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

282 

Mr. Speaker, I hope the people of Saskatchewan realize how much state control we have already. Take 

agriculture for instance. We are told by the Minister that hogs are coming under state control. We have a 

turkey board, broiler board, egg board, wheat board, milk board, now a hog board. Then there is the 

Land Bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — What is there left for the farmer, Mr. Speaker, except cattle and I venture to say, Mr. 

Speaker, those people opposite have their eyes on the cattlemen too and are subtly looking for ways to 

get them under state control also. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — We have state control of our health care. Dentistry is coming under state control. 

Insurance is state controlled in Saskatchewan and, of course, there is Power and Telephones. I am just 

mentioning these to show people how much state control there is already. 

 

If teachers obtain the right to negotiate with the provincial government for salaries, then education 

comes under state control also. Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech tells us that this Government is going to 

put our timber resources, also gas, oil and mining exploration under state control. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, only one company supplying the petroleum products for our cars, as the 

Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) advocated the other day? All we have to do is know 

that when you get state control you have monopoly control and then they don’t have to worry about 

services. We could run all over the cities trying to find some place that is going to give us gas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — It is hard to imagine, Mr. Speaker, why anyone or any Party would even have the 

remotest thought of such a thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments and especially this one opposite, are eroding individual freedoms at an 

alarming pace and I urge the people of Saskatchewan to take a serious look at what is happening to 

them. I’m as guilty as anyone, we let governments quietly erode our freedoms, thinking it won’t bother 

us, but then when we finally wake up it’s too late, our freedoms are gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a bit about the timber industry. I think that’s one place this Government 

should keep their, “cotton pickin’ fingers” out of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — They had a disastrous experience in that field prior to 1964. They broke every small 

sawmill operator in the North. I hear one has moved into the Meadow Lake area from British Columbia. 

I bet you, Mr. Speaker, that if he operates under the timber board that he won’t make enough money to 

move his 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

283 

machinery back out of the province. 

 

The Member who just spoke, from Nipawin (Mr. Comer) mentioned Green Lake. Well, I want to tell 

this House that Green Lake has had a sawmill operating for years and it has been operated by strictly 

Métis people in the Green Lake area and doing a fantastic job. He tries to convince us that it just started 

since they became elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier likes to quote a Mr. Lucas, I wish the Premier was in his seat today, I know he 

would have something to say. But, this Mr. Lucas, as the Premier quotes him, is supposed to have said, 

the Beaver River could not take the effluent from the pulp mill north of Meadow Lake. It’s very strange 

that our Premier has so much faith in articles appearing in the newspapers when they seem to serve his 

purpose. But when it is something he is supposed to have said, he jumps up and says he is not 

responsible for what the papers print. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I took the time to write to Mr. Lucas, to find out what he really said, and I’m sure the 

Premier could have done the same thing if he hadn’t only been grabbing at straws to defend his bad 

judgement of getting rid of the pulp mill, which cost the taxpayers of this province some 6 to 10 million 

dollars cash, plus thousands of jobs. 

 

Here is what Mr. Lucas actually said, Mr. Speaker, when he spoke to the Canadian Society of Wildlife 

and Fishery Biologists on February 18, 1972, and I quote. I want to say that I wrote to Mr. Lucas on 

March 3rd last year and I didn’t get a reply until May, after the Session was over, so I was glad the 

Premier brought it up again. Mr. Lucas sent me a copy of his entire speech to show how it was taken out 

of context. But he said: 

 

We had looked at quite a number of alternatives, one of which includes the use of part of Durocher 

Lake for temporary effluent storage. When cancellation of the project was announced, we were about 

to embark in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission on an intensive 

environmental study of the area to determine what the safest and most practical method of effluent 

disposal from this mill should be. At this point in time the situation was far from hopeless. 

 

That’s what Mr. Lucas said: 

 

And it is possible that the environmentally acceptable solution could have been found. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — Again, I say I wish the Premier was in his seat to hear this. In fact I will table the 

letter for him. He goes on to say: 

 

The single sentence extracted from talk that appeared in the Press could not do other than lead to the 

conclusion that you reached. 

 

This is how they use these things out of context to fool the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

284 

Mr. Speaker, I am glad that the Meadow Lake sawmill was far enough advanced that this Government 

did not cancel it as they did the pulp mill, because it is really a boon to the town of Meadow Lake and to 

the area with its 60 to 70 thousand dollars per month payroll. 

 

People who were either receiving unemployment insurance or welfare are now earning anywhere from 

$600 to $1,200 per month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — When you go up there you can check it. Mr. Speaker, this is just a small example of 

what could have been the opportunities for the people of that area if the Government had the foresight to 

keep that pulp mill and hadn’t played politics at the expense of the people in the Meadow Lake 

constituency and for that matter the whole province. The Premier and the Members opposite seem to 

take great pride in the fact that they cancelled the pulp mill. If it was such a terrible thing to have a pulp 

mill, I wonder why the socialists in Manitoba didn’t cancel theirs. No, Mr. Speaker, they are proud of 

their pulp mill. We don’t hear the socialists in British Columbia saying anything about cancelling pulp 

mills in that province and, of course, Alberta, it’s still building pulp mills. You know, Mr. Speaker, even 

Russia is building pulp mills. I understand they are going to call their latest pulp mill the Meadow Lake 

Pulp Mill. Why can’t you fellows open your eyes and your hearts and help the people of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when they made such a to-do about cancelling the pulp mill 

in Meadow Lake, they promised the people up there some alternative programs. To date we have seen 

none. I will say though, Mr. Speaker, that they started a very small version of the vocational training 

school that the Liberal Government had planned for Meadow Lake. But I will say, Mr. Speaker, they 

were really on the bit, they hired the principal for the school before they even had any foundation laid, in 

fact, I think before they even let any tenders. I have an idea, Mr. Speaker, why he was hired so early. I 

seemed to run into him in every settlement in the North that I, and the Federal Liberal candidate 

happened to be in, and from the signs that were in his windows and on his lawn and on his vehicle, 

before October 30, indicated why. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have also been told by the people of the North that a Mr. Thompson who, I think, works 

for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan was   

 

Mr. Steuart: — I wouldn’t say he works. 

 

Mr. Coupland: —   out doing a little campaigning too. But he was threatening settlements in those 

areas with cancellation of provincial programs in certain areas, if the vote on October 30 was not 

favorable to his way of thinking. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Minister in charge to advise his staff to refrain from this type of 

politicking, it is not fair to the people of the North, or for anybody anywhere in the province. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

285 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about highways. Since the Liberals left office, highway 

building in the Meadow Lake constituency has been virtually non-existent. Even the good highway, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Liberals built north of Glaslyn is being allowed to deteriorate and I urge the Minister of 

Highways to do something about it or he will have to get out that horse and ride to the Meadow Lake 

stampede like he did a few years back. 

 

I would ask the Minister, Mr. Speaker, to get on with the oiling of No. 26 between Loon Lake and 

Goodsoil, the regrading and oiling from Peerless to Pierceland. You know, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

wonderful country there for tourism as was indicated by large turnouts in response to meetings, re the 

provincial master plan of the Meadow Lake Provincial Park. The first priority should be good roads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — For instance, Mr. Speaker, Green Lake is one of the best pickerel fishing areas in the 

province, but it hasn’t a very good highway. Then there is the highway to Waterhen Lake and to the 

Waterhen Indian Reserve. This one concerns the people very much because they have to bus their 

children into Dorintosh and they are really concerned because of the many curves and dust hazards 

which is also a deterrent to our tourists. 

 

I hope the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) will be doing something about this and we shall hear 

more about it in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to Welfare for a minute. I am very concerned with the welfare 

situation in the North, especially when it doesn’t have to be that bad, if the Government would supply 

opportunities for these people to earn their own livelihood. 

 

I understand the post cutting operation at La Loche has folded again and once again I am told it was 

because of the welfare. You ask how this can be, Mr. Speaker. Well I know what happened the first 

time. Instead of co-ordinating the programs and their efforts in co-operation with work programs, 

Welfare seemed to do just the opposite. The Welfare people went right into the post camps and handed 

out welfare cheques to the workers and this, of course, disrupts the whole program and eventually kills it 

because it seems to be easier to get welfare than to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a need for more programs to provide job opportunities for the North and to help 

people learn how to budget their money. I was hoping this new Department of Northern Saskatchewan 

would be a step in this direction, but apparently it is not. We need a program where the departments, 

namely, Welfare, Education, Natural Resources and, of course, I suppose now this Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan would work together so that when men are in a post cutting operation, they are 

not handed welfare, or when fishing or trapping is in season, they are not offered an upgrading course, 

and so on. I think this is where we have failed in the North by not co-ordinating programs   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: —   and getting the input of 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

286 

the local people in those areas. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of programs that could be formulated to help create job 

opportunities and I realize this Government wouldn’t tolerate any industrial expansion in those areas, so 

that we have to go to some smaller community things. Just to name a few, Mr. Speaker; a lot of those 

areas could raise their own vegetables if the Government would put in a root cellar so they can take 

them out of there in the winter. Or community wood programs where they can get fire wood in the 

summer. There are a lot of these programs that could create work for the people in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think my time has run out, but because of the continued trend toward state control and 

infringement on the freedoms of the people, I cannot support the motion, I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, it is with considerable satisfaction and 

even pride that I speak this afternoon in support of the programs outlined in His Honour’s Address to 

this Assembly. 

 

I should like to recognize and congratulate the mover and the seconder as well at this time. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I am always a bit confused when   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: —   the Members opposite get up and talk about agriculture. We were told that they had 

some kind of shadow or shifty Cabinet or something like that who were going to keep track of the 

Government and its activities in regard to the programs that were being brought forward. Last year I 

know it was the Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), this year I am told it is the Member from 

Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), yet the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) seems to be doing a more adequate 

job of outlining the agricultural programs of Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want for one moment, Mr. Speaker, to mention some of the areas that he made mention of earlier 

this afternoon. He said the former Liberal Government of Saskatchewan instituted a program to facilitate 

hog production by building barns. They built 700 barns by 1971, but then he stopped, Mr. Speaker, 

because he didn’t want to go on and say that at that point in time hog prices in Saskatchewan were at an 

all time low and they did nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Nothing, Mr. Speaker, to correct that problem. He went on to say that SEDCO extended 

loans to farmers in Saskatchewan. Again, he stopped, Mr. Speaker, because he can’t come forward with 

one family farmer in Saskatchewan that had a loan under that SEDCO program. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

287 

Mr. Speaker, he went on and said what the Liberal Government did in regard to the South Saskatchewan 

River irrigation project. Then he stopped, knowing full well that when we became the Government in 

1971 there was complete chaos in the irrigated areas of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — He mentioned, Mr. Speaker, quality premiums for hogs. And, again, he stopped 

knowing full well that the records show that those premiums for hogs did nothing to improve the quality 

of hogs in Saskatchewan. And what he didn’t say is even more important, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t say 

anything about some of the Liberal programs that the Federal Government was involved in at the time 

that they were the Government, or programs that they should now be involved in, programs such as 

LIFT, programs such as the Task Force, which they tried to implement during their seven years. We 

don’t hear them talking about freight rates, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t hear them talking about railway 

abandonment. So I want to make the recommendation and the suggestion to the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) that he get an agricultural critic who picks on areas where there are problems 

for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that Address that was given one week ago here indicated clearly 

that this Government is going to move forward with vigor and with determination to overcome those 

problems and difficulties which have prevented this province in the past from achieving its legitimate 

place in the national economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — It also indicated that this Government will continue to give high priority to continued 

progress and innovation in social legislation and social programs. Economic development and social 

development go hand in hand, and you may rest assured that this Government and the New Democratic 

Party, out of which it is constituted, will take whatever steps are needed to ensure that each and every 

family in this province has access to a standard and quality of life equal to that anywhere in Canada. 

 

Foremost in this Government’s mind, at the present time, is the challenge that lies ahead in terms of 

meeting our province’s legitimate needs and aspirations in terms of continued economic development 

and growth. 

 

Saskatchewan has the potential of being a productive and growing area in Canada. We have a reserve of 

natural resources much of which is still to be identified, with potential to equal that found anywhere in 

Canada. We have an energy generating and distribution system with a fantastic capacity to support and 

develop economic activity. And most importantly, we have a food production base which could play an 

essential role in meeting the nutritional needs of an ever-growing world population. 

 

All of these factors put our province on the threshold of a new and exciting period of dynamic growth 

and development. In 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

288 

order to cross that threshold and realize our full potential in the future, we must mobilize our vast 

resources and our tremendous capabilities in order to move ahead aggressively in all aspects of our 

economic life. 

 

The task that lies ahead of us, Mr. Speaker, will not necessarily be an easy one to accomplish. We must 

overcome numerous obstacles — including the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan — in the path of success 

and rapid growth and development. We must be positive in our attitudes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is essential that we avoid falling into the trap of the Hon. Members opposite, with their fear of change 

and their lack of courage to face the problems and difficulties that lie ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — We must strive for change in national economic policies which discourage and inhibit 

economic growth in the prairie region. We must mobilize the capital and labor needed to meet the 

challenge that lies ahead. We must take steps and measures to counteract the effects of the vested 

interests of major multi-national corporations which dominate industry in this country and on this 

continent, and which prevent the mobilization of the necessary capital to bring about the development 

which rightfully should be taking place in this province. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that one of the greatest economic tragedies this province has ever 

experienced was the unfortunate and, indeed, unnecessary trend which developed and took full force 

after two or three years of Liberal mismanagement and paralysis. 

 

Liberal Governments, comfortably ensconced in Regina and Ottawa during this period saw no need to 

take positive and courageous action to reverse the trends that became so evident. A declining 

crisis-ridden economy was, in their view, an unfortunate but acceptable result of an economy unfettered 

by government interference. Consistent with this philosophy and this principle, they remained 

determined to let things take their so-called natural course. A few token, highly-visible sell-outs to major 

multi-national corporations were the only types of responses that the Provincial Government in Regina 

was able to come up with when faced with the true magnitude of the difficulties as they developed. 

 

The proceedings to date in this Session indicate to me, Mr. Speaker, and I think to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that the Liberal Party in this province has learned nothing from that experience. The 

hysterical and outrageous tirade by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) in response to His 

Honour’s Address indicates clearly that the Liberal Party has not been able to formulate a progressive 

and forward-looking program for economic development in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — A do-nothing negative policy is still apparently the order of the day for the Liberal 

Party in Saskatchewan. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we find them completely incapable of coping with the 

thinking and philosophy that underlies the mixed economy that we are developing in this province under 

this Government, which has 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

289 

become the basis of growth for all progressive economies in the world today. 

 

I am confident that the people of Saskatchewan want and demand the programs we are developing to 

strengthen both the farm and non-farm economy. Contrary to the impression left by the Opposition, 

there are very few people in this province who are not willing to take their courage in their hands, and to 

press on with developing the new credit institutions, the new farm transfer institutions like the Land 

Bank, the new marketing institutions, namely, the Hog Marketing Commission   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: —   and the whole host of other new and innovative activities so badly needed to get this 

job done. 

 

Nothing is more illustrative of the Opposition’s continual policy of obstructionism and sabotage than 

their current campaigns to destroy the Land Bank and the newly-formed Hog Marketing Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, let me turn to this matter of the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing 

Commission. I have outlined to you already the fact that our programs and our policies in agriculture in 

rural areas are being based on expanding and productive capacity of our farm areas and taking advantage 

of the great potential we have in this province to meet the growing needs of a hungry world. 

 

Now it is clear, at least to any thinking person, that if we are going to produce ever-increasing quantities 

of farm products we are going to have to be seriously concerned about doing a business-like job of 

marketing these products. There are major markets in Canada, in North America and in the world 

demanding meat products in large quantities and markets where an adequate price to farmers can be 

obtained if we do a business-like job of marketing our products into these areas. The world market for 

pork is without question one of the most rapidly growing markets today. Saskatchewan has a 

tremendous capacity to utilize the grain and farm resources at its disposal to produce pork and to meet 

the dual objectives of feeding a hungry world and providing an income to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

The benefits to the whole provincial economy of doing this will be absolutely fantastic. In order to do so 

we must market products. It has been clear to me for some time that this whole question of marketing is 

one we are going to have to sort out if the province is to move ahead in an aggressive way into the world 

markets for our agricultural products. 

 

It has been a question that has been greatly on the minds of producers. The farm organizations of this 

province involving hog producers — and I mean the Saskatchewan Hog Producers’ Association, the 

Saskatchewan Swine Breeders’ Association, the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture and the 

National Farmers’ Union, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool — these organizations have all been thinking 

about this question too. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

290 

 During the past year, these organizations have been in extensive discussions with my Department about 

the   to do something in the marketing area for pork. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — During the course of our discussions, the representatives of these organizations pointed 

out with great clarity the need for a marketing agency that would make it possible for us to contract with 

the large foreign buyers who are now entering the Canadian market, and would make it possible for us 

to stabilize and improve prices to producers through improved pricing arrangements. 

 

They emphasized a fact which is absolutely clear to me also, namely, that unless we do something soon 

we in Saskatchewan are going to lose out to the other provinces in the prairie region who are actively 

pursuing the market opportunities that exist in the world today for pork. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this area of marketing is one that we cannot afford as a province to fall behind in. 

One of the most unfortunate aspects of the seven years of Liberal Government that this province had 

was that that government remained absolutely opposed to any type of aggressive marketing organization 

for any products of the province. That Government, which pretended to be interested in forward-looking 

and progressive economic development refused to do anything about this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Refused obviously because they had sold out to the large corporate interests which did 

not want this kind of activity for the little man of Saskatchewan — the farmer, the businessman and the 

laborer. 

 

The decision to organize a Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission was made after full and extensive 

discussion with farm organizations. The urgency of this matter and need to get on with the job, made it 

absolutely necessary that the Government move ahead quickly in this area, and for this reason we have 

established the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission, and for the further information of the 

Members to your left, Mr. Speaker, there was representation from the Hog Producers’ Association and 

the Swine Producers’ Association and all the other organizations that I talked about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — We discussed with them for eight months the implementation of a Commission and 

they unanimously, with the absence of one person from the representatives of the Hog Producers’ 

Association, directed the Government to establish a Hog Marketing Commission with all haste. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Now, the Member from Cannington, (Mr. Weatherald) says that I 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

291 

said in the introduction of the Natural Products Marketing Bill in 1971 that there was no reason for the 

establishment of a commission unless we were in some difficulty re the pricings of hogs, when prices 

were low. The contrary is also the case, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba and Alberta, because they both have 

organizations, one a Commission, one a Producer Board, neither of them put to a vote in those 

provinces, have already sold the negotiated contracts with Japan for large quantities of pork, which we 

have missed because we have no Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — I have no question, Mr. Speaker, in my mind as to where the Liberal Opposition would 

stand on this question. I knew that they would become engaged in a game of political sabotage trying to 

kill this agency which is obviously in the interest of Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Liberal Party of this province knows only one kind of game — they know only politics in the 

crassest and lowest sense; and, as a result of this, we cannot expect them to think through and support 

these kinds of activities which are obviously essential in order to move ahead in the development of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That’s what Stalin said. 

 

Mr. Messer: — There’s a close resemblance sometimes. Mr. Speaker, I think the Opposition should be 

told that the people of Saskatchewan and the hog producers of Saskatchewan will not be fooled by this 

kind of political footwork. The majority of the people in this province realize the great importance that 

must be attached to this marketing question and the majority of the farmers of this province support the 

establishment of marketing agencies that will make it possible to market ever-growing quantities of 

products at reasonable and stable prices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — People will not be fooled by the propaganda inspired by the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan as being directed from the Leader of the Opposition’s office in this Legislative Assembly 

Building. 

 

Let me for a moment, Mr. Speaker, quote to you from a statement made by Mr. E. A. Boden, President 

of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture and Vice-president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, in 

response to the kind of political   

 

Mr. Steuart: — Poor old Ted! 

 

Mr. Messer: — He may be poor old Ted, but he is respected by farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — In response to the kind of political opposition being drummed up against the 

Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission. 

 

Mr. Boden said this, and I quote: 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

292 

We are getting somewhat tired of the very obvious political manoeuvring aimed at obstructing the 

creation of a more rational marketing system. I want the actual producers of this province to know we 

recognize the real motives of certain groups who want to scuttle the plan. 

 

He said further, and I quote: 

 

If there is a need for a wholesale educational program to tell the full story, then we will be ready to go 

to work on behalf of the producers. 

 

As President of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture and Vice-president of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, Mr. Boden said he had no hesitation in saying that the two organizations, which represent .a 

large percentage of Saskatchewan producers, support the establishment of the provincial Hog Marketing 

Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Only Liberals appear to be against this program, Mr. Speaker. The people of this 

province and this Government, have no objections to an Opposition which will come up with positive 

criticism, and will take a positive view about what’s being done and for that matter, what needs to be 

done. We make no pretence about being able to have perfection at the first try; and we welcome the 

thoughtful criticism that may come forward from any quarters. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I challenge you to look at all the statements being made by the Members of the 

Liberal Party and their pawns who are stirring the pot out in the country now. You cannot find one 

rational statement regarding the need for and the operation of hog marketing, or any marketing agencies 

for that matter. The have given no thought to the kinds of marketing organizations we need and to the 

kinds of things that marketing agencies should be doing in the marketing of our products today. Rather, 

the Opposition is out there attempting to undermine the program before it even gets off the ground — to 

destroy the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission and thus to destroy any possibility of 

Saskatchewan becoming a major supplier of pork in the world today or for tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a scandal. It’s a scandal that a major, or maybe more correctly, Mr. Speaker, a minor 

political party in this province can attempt, for obviously misguided political advantage to destroy the 

future possibilities of this province. We cannot afford this at this time and date in our development and 

we will not tolerate it. 

 

It is clearly recognized by all thinking people in this province that rural and farm development is going 

to be essential to the future stability and growth of the province and, to do this, Mr. Speaker, we must 

have the kind of clear rational thinking that will lead to the right kinds of organizations, agencies and 

programs to do the job. We cannot afford these games of what may be hoped to be political opportunism 

that has the effect of destroying our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

293 

Mr. Messer: — The legislative program which we have put before this Assembly serves notice to all 

and sundry that we do not intend to sit idly by and see the development potential of this province 

ignored because of the narrow-vested interests of this Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Interests this party condones and advocates. We intend to take the steps necessary to 

mobilize capital and to get on with the job of economic development and growth. 

 

Now, Mr. speaker, the Land Bank is an integral part of our program to modify trends and improve 

conditions of farming in Saskatchewan. It was developed because we recognized the family farm after 

years of Liberal neglect, was truly being threatened in Saskatchewan. Rising capital needs of farmers 

and highly inflated interest rates are making it impossible for talented young people with a future in 

farming to get an effective start. 

 

We recognized that there is something wrong with the traditional view that the farmer should have to 

buy and pay for all his assets. Only by reducing the burden imposed by high-priced land and high 

interest rates are we going to be able to modify this trend toward ever-declining farm numbers. 

 

The family farm can only continue to exist if many of the talented young farm people who come of age 

in this province are given a chance to get started without being doomed to failure before they start. The 

Land Bank will give them this chance. 

 

We believe we have a sound program. It will no doubt need improvement and no one stands more ready 

to make positive changes than I. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The fact that the Land Bank is needed and accepted has already been established. The 

commission was absolutely swamped by those wishing to lease from it. I might point out to the Hon. 

Members opposite the complaints we were getting, and they were not numerous, were almost without 

exception, related to the fact that not enough land was bought to satisfy the demand. 

 

This is the program the Leader of the Opposition, when it was introduced into this Assembly last 

session, called, and I quote, “State-owned communistic farmers.” Farmers farming land that belongs to 

the Government, as if they never farmed any land that belonged to the Government. In fact he went on 

so far as to say, “outside the iron curtain there’s not a scheme like this.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that this Land Bank program is a popular program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that this Land Bank program is a much needed 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

294 

Mr. Messer: — It is making it possible for many, many young people who could never have got started 

farming to do so through renting land from the Land Bank Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — It is, more importantly, an accepted program, accepted no not by the Liberal 

Opposition, but by the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — It is making it possible for our older generation of farmers to retire, to retire with 

dignity and withdraw from the farm taking their saved capital with them. 

 

Without question, Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank combined with numerous other programs we are 

developing on our own, and in some instances co-operatively with the Federal Government, providing 

the Leader of the Opposition keeps his nose out of them, will lead to a much changed picture in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The one real concern I have, however, Mr. Speaker, is this campaign against the Land Bank being 

carried out by the Liberal Opposition. It’s almost impossible to tell whether the Liberals are saying that 

they are opposed to the Land Bank in total, or whether they favor it in principle and are only opposed to 

parts of it. Their story changes from day to day. It changes depending on which Member across the way 

is speaking on their behalf. 

 

This campaign of sabotage that they are carrying on in the country, in Regina and in Ottawa, is 

obviously politically motivated. The principles underlying the campaign are impossible to detect and I 

maintain that there are no principles underlying it. Let me give you some examples of the crass political 

nature of this campaign being carried out by the Liberal Opposition. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, when the Land Bank legislation was first introduced our friends from across 

the way said that it would never work because the rents were too high. They said that we would never 

rent the land, that if we did rent it the farmers could never make a go of it. The Honorable Member from 

Morse (Mr. Wiebe) says why did we lower the rent. I want to bring to his attention that we had 350 

written applications for land before the rent was lowered. There was never any indication that the plan 

would not be a success or any need to make it more advantageous. 

 

I should like to remind the Leader of the Opposition of a statement he made in this Assembly last year, 

he said and I quote: 

 

Then you set an extremely high rent because you are going to base it on interest and don’t use 7 per 

cent because your Government can’t get money at 7 per cent. The rate you will have to pay for 

long-term money when you get this plan into action, will be closer to 8 or 8 1/2 or 9 per cent. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

295 

However, Mr. Speaker, you’ll notice that they are not saying that this year. No, they have a different 

basis of campaigning against it this year because they know the rents are acceptable. In fact, some to 

your left now say that the rent is too low. They know that renting from the Land Bank will provide a 

clear and obvious advantage to young people who wish to start farming. 

 

This year, the theme of the complaint seems to be a new one. The Hon. Member from Moosomin (Mr. 

Gardner) introduces an amendment to the legislation suggesting that lessees do not have to rent their 

land for five years, a satisfactory tenure before being able to buy from the Land Bank. This, says the 

Member from Moosomin, and the Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart), and all the other 

highly-principled men of the Liberal Party, this is a matter of principle to them, they say. It is a matter of 

high Liberal philosophy. It is a question upon which they can make no compromise whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Their philosophy (new word for them), their philosophy is built on the suggestion that 

people must own their land, not rent it. They must own it immediately and if the Government has land to 

make available to farmers they must sell to those farmers immediately. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s just test how highly-principled this Liberal Opposition really is. One would 

assume (that’s dangerous), one would assume that when they were in the Government there would be no 

such requirements as a five-year leasing period before land could be sold. This is obvious because of the 

principled Member from Prince Albert West and the principled Member from Moosomin and their 

highly-principled cohorts. They could never have accepted such a philosophy when they were the 

Government. 

 

Well, now Mr. Speaker, I should like to read to this Assembly from a policy statement issued by the 

Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture during the periods 1964 to 1971 and in this case signed by Mr. 

D.T. McFarlane, the Minister of Agriculture, in that well-known and for them, too well-remembered 

Liberal Government of the period, (that’s why Mr. McFarlane is now somewhere in Ottawa). The policy 

relates to the sale of provincial land, which was operating during that period. Now the first line under the 

eligibility criteria says this, and I quote: 

 

The Lessee must have held the land under disposition for a minimum of five years satisfactory tenure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that one year before purchasing? No, what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that before 

purchasing land from the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture under the Liberal administration 

from 1964 to 1971, anyone who wished to purchase land from the Provincial Government had to lease 

that land for at least five years before he was eligible to purchase. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I emphasize, that was the policy of the Liberal administration. I don’t 

disagree with it; I believe that it was a good policy, and the right one. Good, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because they inherited it from the previous CCF administration. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

296 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — I believe that if you are disposing of public assets that every step must be taken to 

assure that these assets are being disposed of to the people who can handle them adequately and to the 

people who are in real need of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The point I want to make is this, the Liberal Opposition claims to be carrying on a 

campaign of principle against the Land Bank. They’re opposed to it as a matter of high Liberal principle 

and high Liberal philosophy. They claim not to be carrying on a campaign of political sabotage but 

rather, they are questioning some of the basic principles of the program. 

 

You know this Provincial Cultivated Land Policy is an interesting document. I should perhaps table it 

for all Members opposite. Some other interesting points are here which Members opposite obviously 

aren’t aware of. The second point of eligibility criteria states, “Sale of a parcel may be refused where it 

is in the public interest to do so.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer:  The Member opposite who is the Opposition critic says the Government has no such right 

to make those kinds of decisions. Yet for seven years of Liberal Government they made those decisions 

and he never made any observation in regard to that power of government. 

 

It further states that instalment purchase will require a minimum of 20 per cent of the price in cash. I 

notice now when they are in Opposition they say that the purchase price or down-payment should be 

reduced to ten per cent. It also goes on to say that the interest rates charged will be 6 1/2 per cent. They 

now say, when they are in Opposition and have no responsibility, that the interest rate has to be 5 per 

cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I wish to ask the Members of the Opposition, is when did this magic 

transformation and Liberal philosophy of principle take place? Did it take place sometime between June, 

1971 and September or October ‘71? Maybe right after June ‘71. But was this a great period of thought 

and philosophizing within the Liberal Party leading to a new statement of principle about the disposition 

of land owned by the province. Did the period of great thought lead the Liberal Party to come up with a 

new highly developed school of thinking about to whom provincial land should be sold? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite clear that there was never a change in the Liberal philosophy on this 

question and for that matter it’s clear that there never was any particular philosophy of any sort or kind 

in the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. The Party, led by Mr. Steuart, is not guided by philosophy and 

principles, they change horses on questions of politics and public policy without any qualms or 

conscience whatsoever. They do this because they continue to pursue a course of vandalism for their 

own political gains   



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

297 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: —   without thought as to whether the program is a good one, a bad one, without thought 

as to whether it is needed or not needed, without thought as to whether it is in the interest of the 

province, or not in the interest of the province. Every move made by that group of Machiavellian 

politicians across the way is made for pure political advantage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The Honorable Leader of the Opposition even has convenient lapses of memory and 

simple arithmetic when it comes to the Land Bank. 

 

When he appeared on a hotline program recently, one caller suggested that renting land at 5 per cent 

rental rate was a better deal for him than paying interest at 7 per cent to the Farm Credit Corporation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who wrote your speech? 

 

Mr. Messer: — We write our own speeches on this side, that is why when we were sitting over there we 

changed and came over here, Mr. Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — If you would do a little more of that yourself, instead of hiring those poisoned pen 

writers that are running around the corridors of this building you might stand a better chance   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The Leader of the Opposition assured this caller that he would be paying for the land 

anyway under the Land Bank program, only he still wouldn’t own it. All of us who have a grasp of 

simple arithmetic know that in order to payoff a mortgage one must make payments against the principal 

as well as paying interest on that mortgage. All of us know that the rental at 5 per cent is less than the 

interest at 7 per cent. The Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) has invented his own 

version of the new math, Liberal mathematics, that don’t add up to anything but a deliberate attempt to 

deceive the public for their own political end. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mentioned in my introductory remarks that it is time, indeed past time for us to 

get down and deal with some of the basic economic questions of rural economic development in this 

province. Our Government is trying honestly and sincerely to develop a program which will be 

meaningful in meeting the needs of rural areas of this province. We don’t criticize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

an Opposition that can criticize with thought and with care and that can help us in this process. But 

thought and care is not the case, they are out in the country telling one farmer that the Land Bank pays 

too little for land, telling another that the Land Bank pays too much. The Member for Moosomin, (Mr. 

Gardner) the agricultural critic — 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

298 

apparently the Member for Moosomin knows all about it, ask him — speaks of inflated sale prices of 

land on the one hand and depressed prices of land on the other being offered by the Land Bank 

Commission. The Member for Moosomin should name the cases he refers to, name the people involved 

and tell us who got paid too much and who got paid too little. He should also stand up and tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that it is a voluntary program and no one has to accept a price which they think 

is too high or which they think is too low. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — He knows as well as I know that the Land Bank prices are determined on the basis of a 

carefully developed formula and that there is no arbitrary juggling of prices so that some are being paid 

too much and some am being paid too little. He knows the truth about this matter, Mr. Speaker, but he 

doesn’t want to tell the truth because it doesn’t fit his plan to sabotage this program and destroy this 

interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The Member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when he spoke in this Legislature last Friday made 

several statements in regard to Land Bank purchases on which I should like to make some comment. 

The agricultural critic as it is reported in the Leader-Post of Saturday, February 3rd, stated and I quote: 

 

Mr. Gardner cited the case of a young couple who rented land and were saving money in order to put a 

down payment on it. A few weeks ago the Land Bank Commission carne along, bought this farm for a 

big price and cancelled their lease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the agricultural critic to bring forth the name of the couple that he made reference to 

in this House last Friday. I challenge his credibility in maintaining that such a case in fact happened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The Member for Moosomin, as do his colleagues which sit to your left, know full well 

that if the tenant and the lessor of the land have a binding agreement it would have to be worked out 

between themselves and that a lease agreement is a legal document and could not be broken. It certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, could not be broken by the Land Bank Commission, nor would the Land Bank put itself in 

a position of purchasing land whereby it would be confronted with a parcel of land that had a formal 

agreement made by the former owner with a tenant on that farm that had not yet expired. These kinds’ of 

tactics, Mr. Speaker, are to my mind the lowest that one can resort to and try   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: —   the lowest that one can resort to in trying to 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

299 

mobilize a scare and terror campaign in regard to a program that has been accepted by Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

The Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) and his colleagues should be ashamed at having attempted to 

use and resort to this course of action. I ask him again to apologize or bring forward the names of the 

people and the evidence that would show that, in fact, the Land Bank Commission is actively 

participating in the cancelling of leases anywhere in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The agriculture critic also said last Friday, and again I quote from the Leader-Post: 

 

That prices paid for land by the Commission range from occasionally too low, but usually ridiculously 

high. Mr. Gardner cited an example of a farm worth $34,000 that was purchased by the Land Bank for 

$50,000 and another of a farmer who had been advertising his land for sale at $27,000, had it 

appraised by the Land Bank and sold for $30,000. 

 

I ask the Member for Moosomin whose figures of worth he uses when he says a farm is only worth 

$34,000 but the Land Bank pays $50,000. We have a formula, Mr. Speaker, a fair formula in appraising 

and assessing the values of farm land. When the Land Bank is considering an offer to purchase they 

have in my mind and in the minds of farmers been most fair in their offers. We certainly have some who 

complain about the prices offered being too low and there may be on occasion prices offered by the 

Land Bank that in the minds of some people are too high and this is to be expected, Mr. Speaker, but in 

no way indicates unfairness nor deliberate manipulating in land pricing. I again, therefore, and I stress, 

Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Gardner either apologize or bring forth documented evidence of the Land Bank 

paying excessive prices for land purchases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — You brought it up, you bring us the names, because you know full well, Mr. Speaker, 

that there is no fact to those statements and again I say the Member should be ashamed of himself for 

trying to impress on the people of Saskatchewan those kinds of activities by the Land Bank 

Commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may for a few moments turn to another matter, a related matter though, and that 

is the question of the Small Farm Development Program. The Members of the Opposition led by their 

leader are going about this province and this country on a campaign urging the Federal Government and 

for that matter, whoever else they can convince/not to co-operate with this, as they attempt to interpret, 

this evil Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission. The Leader of the opposition (Mr. Steuart) knows the 

truth about this matter. He knows that both myself and my officials have spent a great deal of time with 

Federal Ministers and Federal Government officials discussing ways of making these programs work 

together. He knows we have never said that there is no place in Saskatchewan for the Small Farm 

Development Program. He knows that we have argued for improvements in that program and that 

indeed we have seen improvements made as a 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

300 

result of these arguments. The Leader of the Opposition knows perfectly well that when this program 

was first brought in it was nothing more than a bribe to move small farmers off their land. A substantial 

grant was going to be paid to anyone who would sell his land and promise not to farm again. The 

Government of Saskatchewan went to Ottawa and argued with the Minister of Agriculture, then Mr. 

Olson, that he also had to be concerned about the person who receives the land when it is sold. It was 

with some difficulty that we were able to convince the then Minister of Agriculture that he should attach 

to this program a system of special credit facilities for those with little equity so that they would have an 

opportunity to purchase this land that was being freed, so to speak, by the Small Farms Development 

Program. 

 

If I may, Mr. Speaker, digress for a moment, I should like to bring to the attention and knowledge of 

Members sitting to your left, that the Small Farms Development Program as it is now referred to was not 

always called by this name, nor did it constitute or have incorporated into it some of the benefits that it 

now has. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Called the Federal Task Force   

 

Mr. Messer: — This program emanated from the Federal Task Force Program, yes. This program was 

first brought to the attention of the farmers in Canada in March of 1971, it was introduced and referred 

to as a farm plan, which was an abbreviated form for Farm Adjustment Resources Mobility Plan. That 

plan, Mr. Speaker, was devised simply to reduce the numbers of farmers that we now have in Canada 

and especially in the Province of Saskatchewan. This plan was not accepted by those who were in a 

position to speak for farmers at that time. In fact, all farm organizations, and at that time all provincial 

governments were most apprehensive of accepting or considering the plan as it was proposed. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the publication entitled, “The Grain Grower” best summed up the proposal as it 

was initially brought forward. May I refer to an article outlining the farm plan in the August 1971 

“Grain Grower’ where it quotes: 

 

One thing is certain, regardless of the fine words the proposal aims to reduce the numbers of farms in 

this country. One drafter of the proposal said the ideal number would be one-third what there is now. 

He also said, just as big a proportion will be relocated from Western Canada as from Eastern Canada. 

 

It was in reaction to this kind of attitude which was common to all of those who are supposedly 

concerned about farming and farmers in Canada that we went to Ottawa and asked for changes to be 

made in that plan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it was because of our representations in seeking amendment and 

change to that original proposal and our references to the need for a Small Farm Development Program 

that the Federal Government chose to change the name of their program and use the terminology that we 

referred to in our proposals. I am pleased that they saw fit to accept some of our proposals, not only the 

name which in fact may be a minor change, but their adjustments of their program to accommodate 

farmers with $60,000 net worth which is one of the more obvious changes. I am highly critical of them 

taking some of the advantageous proposals that we made 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

301 

in still refusing to accept some of the key elements that would make the two plans harmoniously 

operative for the Province of Saskatchewan. Some of these changes were eventually made at the urging 

of myself and other Provincial Ministers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we the Government of Saskatchewan were intent on destroying this plan surely we 

would have never urged Mr. Olson to make the kinds of improvements that have been made in this 

program today. The truth of the matter is that we would be happy to see the Small Farm Development 

Program operating in Saskatchewan now that some improvements have been made and with some 

further future changes. It is important that we work together, the Federal Government and provincial 

Government and that the Small Farm Development Program and the Land Bank work together 

effectively in doing the job of providing equitable land transfer systems for farmers. 

 

Prior to the first of this year, I found that there was general agreement on this, including the Federal 

Government as well. I was extremely hopeful that we were going to come up with an agreement to work 

co-operatively in this whole area of land transfer and farm tenure. But then, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) made his famous sojourn to Ottawa, his sojourn of political sabotage 

against Saskatchewan. He went down there and he demanded, and he ordered the Federal Government 

not to co-operate with the Saskatchewan Government and with the Saskatchewan Land Bank. He said to 

the Federal Government: 

 

We Saskatchewan Liberals are opposed to this Land Bank as a matter of principle and as a matter of 

high philosophy. We are opposed to it because they will not allow people to purchase the land 

immediately, but require them to lease the land for five years. 

 

That, he said to the Liberal Government, is a matter of high principle and something which we as 

Liberals in Saskatchewan would never stand for if we were in government and we cannot stand for with 

an NDP Government. As I have just indicated to you the Liberals had exactly the same policy in regard 

to selling Crown land while they were in government, for the whole time they were in government. This 

is where the high principles of the Liberal Government stand, Mr. Speaker, and I want all people of 

Saskatchewan to know and to understand that fact. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition objects to government action aimed at mobilizing capital and 

developing the resources and the production potential of this province. It is clear that the great resources 

of this province will never be developed effectively for and in the interests of people of Saskatchewan 

unless the people of Saskatchewan themselves take the action necessary to ensure that development 

takes place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to be more specific about the things this Government is doing and is proposing 

to do to ensure that this province does not go through the kind of doldrums we experienced during the 

last four years of Liberal Government. We are placing first priority at this time on agricultural 

development, we make no apologies for that. Agriculture is the fundamental basis of existence for the 

provincial economy. A full 50 per cent of the net value of production of this province comes directly 

from our farms. When we take into 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

302 

account machinery manufacturing, feed manufacturing, fuel sales, retail sales to farmers, marketing 

activities, processing of farm products and the multitude of similar economic activities — agriculture 

assumes an importance unequalled in any other economic activity of this province. Our Liberal friends 

across the way have a lot to say, unfortunately, most of it ridiculous, about the agricultural programs we 

are implementing. They are full of big talk of how they would do things differently if they were in 

power. What gall these people have, Mr. Speaker, the brashness and the arrogance of their statements is 

beyond comprehension when you look at their record during their seven years of office. The fact of the 

matter is that during those seven dismal years agriculture and rural Saskatchewan was almost completely 

ignored, the people of Saskatchewan universally recognized and demanded that something needed to be 

done about the plight of farmers. But our friends across the way, and in particular the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition when he was Provincial Treasurer and letting everyone in Saskatchewan know it, said No, 

we have no money and we can’t afford agricultural programs. He was right, we couldn’t afford it. Why 

we couldn’t afford it was because the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and his henchmen were pouring 

millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money into the foreign bank accounts, their pals in Toronto, New York, 

London or Paris and other places with equally well-known concern for the people of Saskatchewan. But 

when it came to the little man, the individual about whom they claimed to be so concerned, the farmer, 

the storekeeper, the implement dealer, the small businessmen, they had virtually nothing to offer. 

Parsons and Whittemore and their kind already had first claim on the hard-earned tax money of the 

individuals in this province. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan made their feelings quite clear on this subject in June 1971, their message 

was quite clear. They were saying, let’s get the economy going, and let’s do it by helping the little man, 

the individual and not the big foreign corporate friends of the former Liberal Government. Now that we 

have an honest government that is honestly trying to get the economy rolling and improved standards of 

income, by helping the family farm and the family business, the Liberals are busily crying the blues. The 

Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) as Minister of Agriculture — heaven forbid — the Liberals never 

saw fit to appoint him as Minister of Agriculture during their term of office and it won’t likely ever get 

the opportunity, judging by their presently dwindling support in this province; he would have had a 

Land Bank, but he would have done it differently, he would have made it possible to buy the land 

immediately. He would have made it part of Bud Olson’s and Pierre Elliott Trudeau’s Task Force 

program of getting as many people off of the land as quickly as possible. The Member for Moosomin 

has the unmitigated gall, or he is so ill-informed with the Federal Government program that he called the 

Land Bank a monster which could well destroy our rural way of life. 

 

If the Liberal Party here and in Ottawa had their way we would no longer have a rural way of life in 

Saskatchewan. The Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) would have done something about 

marketing, particularly hog marketing. But he too would have done it differently than we are doing it. 

Now we are proposing an Agricultural Incentives Act and a FarmStart Program of low-cost credit and 

grants to assist the family farm to develop and reach its full potential. Already the old familiar rumblings 

and mumblings are beginning on the other side of the House about how the Opposition would have 

introduced the program 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

303 

if they were in Government, that they would have switched it a bit here and changed it a bit there. 

 

Let’s all of us in this Assembly be clear about one thing. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will 

not be swayed by the claptrap claims of the Opposition about their basic support for these programs. The 

people know that there is not one Member across the way who has ever had an original thought about a 

new agricultural program and policy. They know that the Liberal Party would not do anything for 

farmers when they were in office before and they will not do anything if they are ever in office again. 

And why won’t they? Because their great corporate friends don’t want them to. The Liberals oppose the 

Land Bank because the big banks tell them to oppose it. The banks are afraid that the Land Bank will be 

cutting into their mortgage business. The Liberals oppose the Government credit programs because the 

banks tell them to. They oppose marketing boards and commissions because the multi-national packing 

companies tell them to. It is absolutely impossible to believe that the Liberals would ever take positive 

and progressive action to improve the farm economy. Their hands are tied by the vested corporate 

interests which so generously fill their party coffers. Despite the claims of opposition Members they do 

not support these new programs in any way, shape or form. Quite the contrary. They are deeply engaged 

in systematic sabotage of each and every new program we propose for agriculture. They are playing 

politics of the very worst kind. 

 

We cannot afford this kind of nonsense at this critical time in the development of our economy, Mr. 

Speaker. We must revitalize agriculture and the family farm before it is too late. We must provide the 

means whereby young people will find the prospects of farming attractive enough to take up that 

vocation if they want to. The job will not be easy, Mr. Speaker. We will have to alter fundamentally the 

income-earning potential of smaller farms in the province. We will have to improve long-term prices of 

farm products and take the measures necessary to stabilize these prices. We will have to have continuous 

growth and expansion in agricultural production and we will have to provide the mechanism and 

institutions necessary to assure markets with stable prices for these products. That, in a nutshell is what 

our agricultural programs will do. 

 

It is because of this, Mr. Speaker, that I serve notice here today that I will not be party to such a result as 

would obviously come about if we followed the recommendations of the Opposition. Nor for that matter 

do I think the people of Saskatchewan want that course of action set out for them. 

 

For those reasons I will not support the amendment, but will support the motion by the Member for 

Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) and seconded by the Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.L. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to enter this debate to congratulate the 

Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) and the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr, Gross) for the moving 

and seconding of the Speech from the Throne. They made a very fine job. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

304 

I wish to congratulate the Member from Biggar (Mr. Cowley), Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor) and 

Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski) for their elevation to the Cabinet and for the excellent job they have been 

doing in their positions. 

 

I wish also to congratulate the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) for his return to this House. Each of 

us on the Government side has to rationalize some grounds for congratulating him on his election. I 

think perhaps my reason might be that he can complement the Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. 

Coupland). That Member made a very distinguished speech here this afternoon. I congratulate him on 

his maiden address in this House but I was rather amazed that he went through his speech talking about 

the “state control” in education, the “state control” in hospitalization, “state control”, “state control”. 

This is all we heard. Then what was his solution for northern Saskatchewan? It was that the Government 

should provide root cellars in northern Saskatchewan. That was the highlight of his contribution to the 

Throne Speech debate and I hope that the Member from Athabasca will advise his people of this great 

Liberal program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to speak in support of the Speech from the Throne. In it we can see some 

of the broad strategy for economic development that is needed to strengthen the economy of this 

province. I would hope to see this Government come up within the next year with a whole white paper 

on economic development strategy. I think that the strategy is fairly clear but I think that it should be 

spelled out so that the public can know what we are doing and why we are doing it. The new initiatives 

to strengthen and to diversify agriculture should be set in the context of increased emphasis on 

secondary manufacturing. But perhaps even more important is that the public be made aware that our 

Government is a social democratic government and that we intend to fully utilize every means available 

to promote social planning and democratic control of an economy composed of a public, a co-operative 

and a private sector. 

 

The Liberal Party in Saskatchewan has historically tried to run a scare campaign against the socialists. 

The Member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) has shown me a pamphlet published by the Yorkton 

Liberals, 1944. It warned the Ukrainian people that the socialists would close all of their churches and 

nationalize all of their farms. Mr. Thatcher and now Mr. Steuart continues this great tradition. They try 

to persuade people that the CCF-NDP want to nationalize everything — all industry, all businesses, all 

farm land. 

 

In point of fact the CCF have issued two statements of basic principles — the Regina Manifesto in 1933 

and the Winnipeg Declaration in 1956. These both dealt with the role of public ownership in a 

democratic-socialist society. Basic principles run through both of these documents. Social planning, 

democratic control of an economy made up of a public, a co-operative and a private sector. These 

principles were further elucidated in the speeches of J.S. Woodsworth and M.J. Coldwell and T.C. 

Douglas. They have been explained time and time again in the Federal election platforms of the CCF. 

 

The Regina Manifesto was largely based upon work done by the League for Social Reconstruction, 

which was a scholarly research group modelled after the British Fabians. The end product of a large 

convention the Manifesto contains some fairly 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

305 

vague phrases which party leaders were required to defend and explain. It discussed a public sector. The 

public sector would include banking and insurance, transportation, communications, electric power, 

mining, pulp and paper, the distribution of milk, bread, coal and gasoline. The Manifesto refers to the 

public ownership of the “principal” means of production, or “main” industries, or “industries essential 

to social planning.” The co-operative sector was first discussed under the heading “Agriculture”. There 

is mentioned consumer co-ops and extension of co-operative institutions for the processing and 

marketing of farm products. In a separate section on co-operative institutions there is mention of co-ops 

to distribute staple commodities such as milk and to enter into wholesale distribution and to 

manufacturing. The private sector in the Regina Manifesto is not defined in a positive way, but rather by 

exclusion. One is left with the view that those businesses which are not “principal means of production”, 

not “main industries”, or not “essential to social planning” and not in the co-operative sector, will be 

allowed to continue in private ownership. Included in this private sector was the family farm where the 

need was for, “Security of tenure for the farmer upon his farm”. The CCF Leaders in the 1930s spent 

much of their time explaining their basic principles to their opponents in the House of Commons. On 

April 19th, 1934, Woodsworth explained the word ‘socialism’ as follows: 

 

I know that a great many Members in this House are prejudiced against the word ‘socialism’. I am not 

particular whether or not that word is used. But I take it that we have reached the stage when we must 

have some sort of social control, if that term sounds any better. 

 

Woodsworth had earlier in the year explained that: 

 

The body which we have been working nearest to the lines which we advocate is the British Labour 

Party. 

 

This moderate social democratic approach led him to criticize the Conservative Natural Product 

Marketing Act because: 

 

The Government in this Bill goes much further in the direction of bureaucracy that, we in the CCF 

would like to see because we believe that while there must be some sort of social control, we should 

do our utmost to avoid centralized control and on the other hand rather encourage the development of 

co-operative institutions. In this particular Bill it would seem as if the state itself undertakes not 

merely the supervision but the actual administration of the marketing of goods. We, in our part, would 

rather see a larger measure of local co-operation. 

 

Here we see Woodsworth’s preference for co-operatives as embodying both social control and 

democratic participation. His flexibility is further shown when he discusses what should be done about 

private monopolies. He said: 

 

Under these circumstances some of us believe that the only possible way is for government monopoly 

or centralized government control over these monopolies, which if effective would be much the same 

as actual ownership. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

306 

Woodsworth taught that public ownership was not an end in itself, the co-operative movement or social 

controls would achieve the same ends sometimes with even greater effectiveness. His position in regard 

to the family farm is clear. He said on February 5th, 1934: 

 

We recognize that the farmer is not an exploiter, rather he is one of the worst exploited. 

 

Today farming is still in the family farm stage and as long as that is maintained there is no reason why 

under our scheme there should be any alteration in the ownership of farms. In 1936 he said: 

 

The Co-operative Commonwealth Federation has never advocated the socialization of farm lands in 

the sense of the government taking them over. We have always held that it is desirable that a person 

working on his own land should be made secure in his tenure of that land. 

 

M.J. Coldwell in this same debate praised the Scandinavian countries and their great co-operative 

institutions. In regard to public ownership he decried the practice of taking over, “bankrupt facilities 

mismanaged by big business”. He preferred the Swedish example where they had, “taken over and 

organized some of these great profitable industries which had become monopolistic in their nature and 

which, therefore, ought to be a matter of public concern.” 

 

T.C. Douglas summed up this argument with characteristic wit and clarity: 

 

There is no reason why the Government should run a little shoe store here or an ice cream parlor there. 

They are not monopolistic. Only where a monopoly exists do we say that there should be government 

ownership. 

 

In the 1944 platform, the CCF stated: 

 

Only large scale public investment and expenditure under social ownership or control and carried out 

with a national economic plan will meet our needs. 

 

The platform explains social ownership to mean, “The socialization and democratic control under either 

public or co-operative ownership of industries which are being operated to the detriment of the Canadian 

people.” The role of the co-operative sector is dealt with in a separate section. It suggests: 

 

The promotion of co-operative ownership wherever possible as a desirable form of social ownership. 

 

He desired Federal legislation to encourage co-operative enterprise to enter new fields and sought a 

program of education on co-operation as a means of achieving democratic self-help and 

self-government. 

 

The role of the private sector is quite explicit in the 1944 platform: 

 

The socialization of large scale enterprises, however, does not mean taking over every private 

business. Where 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

307 

private business shows no signs of becoming a monopoly, operates efficiently under decent working 

conditions and does not operate to the detriment of the Canadian people, it will be given every 

opportunity to function, to earn a fair rate of return and to make its contribution to the nation’s wealth. 

 

The 1944 platform states further: 

 

The CCF have always stood for the private ownership of family farms, family homes and other 

personal property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fullest explanation of the social democratic program of the CCF was in fact in the 1949 

Federal platform. It deals openly with public, private and co-operative sectors of the economy and I 

quote: 

 

The CCF is often accused of being doctrinaire. In reality the CCF critics are the doctrinaires. They 

believe in the doctrine of free enterprise complete and uncontrolled no matter what the results. They 

persist in this experience in spite of our experience in peace and war. Free enterprise has not and 

cannot meet with people’s need. In the light of this experience the CCF believe that some parts of the 

economy must be brought under public ownership. Some more are suited for co-operative ownership. 

In a Federal state like Canada, many resources can be developed only through the combined efforts of 

Dominion and Provincial Governments. Finally, there are large areas which can best be left to private 

enterprise. The CCF is determined to build a working balance of all of these methods. It believes that 

each should be used where most effective to achieve the fullest possible production. 

 

It follows with a section on social ownership and says: 

 

The purpose of bringing any industry under social ownership is to increase the freedom and welfare of 

all of the Canadian people. By social ownership the CCF does not mean only ownership by the Federal 

Government, on the contrary the CCF have always recognized that owing to the Federal nature of the 

Canadian Constitution there are many fields in which provincial and municipal ownership is the most 

appropriate form. And, in particular, the CCF has always emphasized co-operative ownership in view 

of the opportunities for direct participation by the people which co-operatives present. The CCF 

program, therefore, comprises all of these forms of social ownership, federal, provincial, municipal 

and co-operative. The program outlines the policy for CCF Federal Government and is, therefore, 

mainly concerned with Federal socialization but in every possible and appropriate case a Federal CCF 

Government will vigorously assist provincial, municipal and co-operative ownership as well. It cannot 

be too often emphasized that the CCF regards socialization of industry as a means to an end and not an 

end in itself. It believes in social ownership and economic planning because only through such policies 

can we lay the basis in Canada for a much greater freedom and security for the 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

308 

individual and his family than today exists. 

 

The statement goes on to say: 

 

Social ownership will free the people from the power of private monopoly. It will make possible a 

higher standard of living through increased production and lower prices. It is an essential part of any 

plan for maintaining full employment and for providing a fairer distribution of wealth. In some cases 

socialization may also be necessary to restore efficiency to a disorganized and undeveloped industry. 

 

The 1949 statement goes on to deal with a section on co-operative ownership. This section states: 

 

The growth of the co-operative movement in Canada has the full backing of the CCF which in 

Parliament and throughout the country has fought to protect co-operatives from every attempt to tax or 

limit their activities. Although co-operative ownership is not government ownership the CCF use it as 

a most desirable method of producing, processing and distributing many of our basic commodities. 

The CCF Federal Government will encourage and assist co-operative development in all appropriate 

spheres. It will remove Federal taxation of patronage dividends of co-operative enterprise. 

 

The 1949 statement then went on to deal with a section entitled “The Role of Private Enterprise”: 

 

The application of these measures of socialization will considerably extend the area of public 

ownership under social and co-operative ownership. But it will also leave a large section of business in 

private hands. In order to achieve effective production and distribution in both the public and in the 

private sectors of the economy a CCF government will help and encourage private business to fulfil its 

legitimate functions. Experience has shown that where public business flourishes, private business 

thrives also. The private trader or industrialist freed from the domination of industrial and financial 

monopoly will have a better chance to exercise his enterprise and initiative to earn a fair rate of return 

and to make his contribution to the nation’s wealth. 

 

The 1949 Federal platform again stated the CCF policy in regard to farm land saying: 

 

Since the ownership of agricultural land is widely distributed amongst individual members the CCF 

have always opposed the nationalization of land. 

 

Having studied the thoughts of G.S. Woodsworth, M.J. Coldwell and T.C. Douglas in the 1930s and the 

CCF Federal programs in the 1940s, we can see that the Winnipeg Declaration in 1956 was a good 

precise summary of these teachings. It said and I quote: 

 

In the Co-operative Commonwealth there will be an important role for public, private and co-operative 

enterprises working together in the people’s interest. The CCF has always recognized public 

ownership as the 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

309 

most effective means of breaking the stranglehold of private monopolies on the life of the nation and 

facilitating the social planning necessary for economic security and advance. The CCF will therefore 

extend public ownership wherever it is necessary for the achievement of these objectives. At the same 

time the CCF also recognizes that in many fields there will be need for private enterprise which will 

make a useful contribution to the development of our economy. The Co-operative Commonwealth 

will, therefore, provide appropriate opportunities for private business as well as publicly owned 

industry. The CCF will protect and make more widespread the ownership of farm lands by those who 

till them, of homes by those who live in them and all personal possessions necessary for the well-being 

of the Canadian people. In many fields the best means of insuring justice to producers and consumers 

is the co-operative form of ownership. In such fields every assistance will be given to form 

co-operatives and credit unions and to strengthen those already in existence. 

 

We can see that in the 19305, the 1940s and the 1950s the CCF constantly maintained social democratic 

principles of social planning and democratic control of an economy made up of a public, a co-operative 

and a private sector. J.S. Woodsworth, M.J. Coldwell and T.C. Douglas clearly stand in this social 

democratic tradition. It can clearly also be seen that the 1973 Throne Speech stands in this same 

tradition. We find references to specific areas of public initiative. We find specific reference to areas of 

co-operative enterprise and we are awaiting the report from a committee of this Legislature set up on 

small businesses. This broadly based approach to economic development is in stark contrast to the 

policy of the former government. The Liberals sold out our Crown corporations. The Liberals ignored 

the co-operative movement. The Liberals did nothing for small businessmen. Their entire development 

strategy was based on loans and grants and give-aways to giant corporations. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, 

to support an economic development strategy based on social planning and democratic control, of an 

economy composed of a public, a co-operative and a private sector. Therefore, I am pleased to support 

the Speech from the Throne and to oppose the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, may I first take this opportunity of 

congratulating the mover and seconder of the Reply to the Speech from the Throne. Both of these 

Members have done an outstanding job and have had much to say that is deserving of the attention of 

every Member in this House. I would also like to take this opportunity of congratulating the two other 

Members of the House who were appointed to the Cabinet at the same time as myself. I appreciate very 

much the opportunity of working with them and know of their dedication and of their effort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech presented by His Honour, was an indication that this Government 

intends to pursue its policy of providing a New Deal for the people of Saskatchewan. There is no need 

for me to remind this Assembly of the benefits which were provided to the people of Saskatchewan 

during the preceding 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

310 

two sessions of this House. Many giant strides have already been taken in the fields of health, 

agriculture and in many other areas. 

 

The present Throne Speech indicates a continued awareness of the problems facing the people of our 

province and the willingness to meet and to overcome these problems. I am particularly pleased that 

once again the emphasis is placed on our farm economy. Our Government has recognized that farming 

is the prime industry in this province and as such the health of our whole economy depends on the 

agricultural industry. We look forward to the introduction of The Agriculture Incentives Act, for we 

recognize that one of the major problems facing the farming community is indeed a lack of reasonable 

credit. There is no question but what one of the major difficulties faced by young men entering the 

agricultural field is that of obtaining sufficient credit to enable them to enter diversification. The new 

program called FarmStart commits us to a system of both low-cost supervised credit and also of grants. I 

am certain this will be looked upon with favor by everyone in our farming community. 

 

Our farmers will likewise be most happy to see that amendments are being brought forward for The 

Agricultural Implements Act. Of major concern to many of our farmers is the availability of parts and 

also the warranty performance of manufacturers. This is particularly true during the harvesting 

operation, when frequently our farmers are held up and face costly hold-ups because of parts delayed. 

 

The Speech from the Throne also indicates that a Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will be created. 

We look forward to this corporation and the expectation that it can help to meet many of the needs for 

housing in our province. It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that this corporation may be active not only in the 

cities but also in the smaller towns of our province. There is no question of the need for better housing. 

Up until now the lower-middle income families and lower income families have found it almost 

impossible to obtain home ownership. 

 

In the same way our Government, through the Speech from the Throne, indicates our continuing concern 

and interest in the needs of our senior citizens, by announcing a new program to assist senior citizens in 

the repair and improvements of their homes. This, too, is a program that will benefit many of our people 

and will be, I am sure, acceptable to all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased at this opportunity to devote a few minutes to review some of the 

major activities of the Department of Social Services over the past year. This Department, which I have 

been given the responsibility for, touches the lives of a vast number of Saskatchewan citizens. It is this 

Department that is charged with the responsibility for assuring that no resident of our province shall be 

allowed to live in economic circumstances below that which is described as minimum standard. It is the 

Department which is responsible for assuring that the young and the old residents of our province are 

provided with adequate care and sustenance. It is this Department that has the responsibility for those 

who run afoul of the law, and have been confined to one of the provincial correctional institutions or 

placed on probation. The responsibilities are large, and at times of a very sensitive nature. I suggest that 

because of this, this is why there is 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

311 

much criticism at times aimed at the Department and the people who receive our services. 

 

I would also like to suggest, however, to those critics, that it is always easy to criticize those who at any 

given point in time are considered to be at the bottom of the social ladder. They have little power in our 

social system and few spokesmen with the necessary skills to gain access to the public consciousness. 

Too often those who criticize us for assisting those they like to call “drunks, loafers, deadbeats and 

people too lazy to work”, are, to put it simply, unaware of the situation in which we operate, or else they 

are attempting to make cheap political gain at the expense of the unfortunate. For myself, I cannot 

believe the Opposition to be ignorant of the facts, and that leaves only the other answer. 

 

We are the first to acknowledge that we have always had with us a minute group who live off the system 

we operate; but the vast majority of those in receipt of public assistance are those who are socially 

disadvantaged for a number of reasons — health, education or other reasons. It is these people who have 

little control over the circumstances they find themselves in that our Department is organized to serve. 

The problem we face, Mr. Speaker, is how to provide adequate social services to this group of people to 

allow them to escape from a life of welfare support. We are further faced with problems over which we 

have little, if any, control. It was not our Government’s decision to create huge pools of unemployed 

people in this province and throughout the country. It was the decision of a Federal Liberal Government 

and those who support it. A decision carried out with more efficiency than any other program the 

Federal Liberals have ever embarked on. But it is our Department that carries a large portion of the 

burden created by these ill-advised and ill-conceived Federal-fiscal policies. 

 

Before going into a description of some of the Department of Social Service’s functions over the last 

year, I would like to take a moment to congratulate the Hon. Member from Regina Lakeview (Mr. 

McPherson) on his appointment to what the Opposition Leader (Mr. Steuart) has termed his shadow 

cabinet. As a critic of our Department I can assure him that his comments will be closely listened to and 

his criticism, where constructive, will be given the full consideration of my staff. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I would like now, Mr. Speaker, to discuss some of the directions our Department is 

moving in. The first subject I would deal with is the new approaches we have laid down for the mentally 

retarded persons in Saskatchewan. Through the co-operation of the three provincial departments of 

Health, Education and Social Services, we have established an interdepartmental administration called 

Core Services Administration. The direction of future developments under Core Services involves three 

important concepts. First, there is agreement that programs for the retarded should be viewed in the 

broader context of programs for handicapped persons generally. Second, there is agreement on the 

importance of co-ordination and services provided by the three Government departments involved. 

Third, we have agreed that. the mental retardation program should be moved into a broader education 

and social service framework. These steps will insure that needed mental, social and physical 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

312 

health needs can be provided in a community rather than always in an institutional setting. We have 

recognized, in other words, that the treatment of mental retardation is similar to the treatment necessary 

for any social problem; and we have, in fact, said that mental retardation is a social problem rather than 

a mental problem. The isolation that previously existed for many persons will in a great many cases be 

removed. 

 

The new interdepartmental co-ordination comes under the leadership of the Department of Social 

Services. This move to Core Services of the mentally retarded program, as well as allowing a fuller 

development of community-based services, will also enable the province to obtain cost sharing under the 

Canada Assistance Plan. The test of financial eligibility becomes necessary because of the cost-sharing 

Federal regulation. It will affect only a small percentage of those under the plan. The benefits to the 

province as a whole will be extremely important. Core Services personnel will be responsible for the 

progressive program development of services for the mentally retarded at the community level to allow 

the retarded a more normal, non-institutional life wherever possible. It will also guarantee co-ordination 

between the community program and the institutional facilities currently being operated at the Moose 

Jaw Training School and Prince Albert Training School. It is expected that Core Services will also 

absorb the functions of the Provincial Co-ordinator of Rehabilitation. It will co-ordinate a number of 

specific service areas. The Executive Director of Core Services will administer and co-ordinate services 

that affect the three departments involved. This co-ordination of existing programs will lead, we believe, 

to a more effective utilization of both personnel and facilities than now exist. 

 

The beneficiaries of this step to interdepartmental co-ordination will, of course, be the residents of our 

province who require these services. 

 

One of the first tasks being undertaken outside the field of retardation itself is the task of planning a 

conference for the handicapped. A provincial conference of the handicapped will be held in Moose Jaw, 

probably around the last week in March of this year. The main participants in this conference will be 

members in the handicapped community including the mentally retarded, the physically handicapped, 

the blind, the deaf and other similar groups. The conference is being organized to give the handicapped 

an opportunity to make their needs known and to voice their concerns directly to the people responsible 

for the programs. The main speakers at this conference will be the handicapped themselves. This is the 

first time, as far as we know, that a government agency has arranged such a conference in order to allow 

the handicapped to speak to the Government. This is being done to make sure that we are not being 

blocked off by the so-called professionals and experts in the field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my Department is also involved in the Senior Citizens Commission recently announced by 

the Premier. The nine-member commission will be chaired by the Rev. Bruce Wartman of Regina. The 

most recent review of senior citizens’ needs in our province was in 1963. In the past ten years there has, 

of course, been rapid social change. The impact of this change on our senior citizens, the pioneers of our 

province, has not, we believe, received sufficient attention, analysis and consideration. It was our 

Government’s feeling that more current data about the needs of senior citizens now, problems as they 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

313 

themselves see them, and their own ideas about the solution, is an urgent requirement for relevant 

programming. 

 

While there has been much progress in the provision of nursing home accommodation for the aging with 

long-term illness needs, modern programming trends emphasize de-institutionalization, more home care 

and support services to sustain aging people as participating members of their community. This 

approach emphasizes the provision of more mid-way resources for aging people to enable them to 

continue their choice of living situations longer and delay entry into the expensive nursing facilities until 

that type of care becomes a real necessity. The intended goal is to offer senior citizens a meaningful way 

of life as an integral part of their community for as long as possible. Planning for services to provide for 

those needs we need to know more about the extent of the needs and the type of alternatives that senior 

citizens not only need but also want. Not enough is known about their differing aspirations and needs. 

The information that there is requires updating. 

 

While there has been much community involvement in nursing home programs, and more recently into 

home support services, such as meals-on-wheels, activity centres and others, it is vital to keep 

communities involved in assessing needs and alternatives, planning developments and the whole process 

of change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the task of the Commission will involve initiation in searching out elderly people who 

cannot or do not turn out for public meetings, or write briefs, or even letters. The nature of the 

population to be studied requires an imaginative approach, some innovative methods and aggressive 

strategies to bring out data from the less vocal segments of the population. The task requires the 

Commission to be available and accessible to the public. The Commission must be mobile, ready for 

travelling and for an active schedule. To be readily apparent to the public during its six-month tenure it 

will require the full-time identity of an office, a phone number and address and full-time staffing. 

 

It will be vital, Mr. Speaker, to get and to keep the public participating in the assessment of needs, 

consideration of alternatives, and the planning of developments throughout the whole process of the 

study. Publicity to the work of the Commission, public statements about progress with the assignments, 

and public relations are implicit in the mandate given to the Commission members. 

 

It is my hope that all Members of this Assembly and members of the general public will view this study 

with consideration and seriousness so that its findings will lead to the best possible life situation for the 

senior members of all Saskatchewan communities. 

 

The Commission has representation from all stages of life, Mr. Speaker; senior citizens, middle-aged 

people, young people, all are represented. Middle-aged people are, or at least should be, planning and 

preparing for their future. unfortunately that future has been viewed far too often as declining years, 

rather than as the continuation of an active life. The preparation of it emphasizes the terminal features 

like wills and estate planning, rather than that of continuing a vibrant life role. 

 

Some of the most successful projects under the Opportunities 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

314 

for Youth program indicate as well that youth are concerned, innovative and active in their interests in 

the elderly citizens of their communities. A fully rounded body will bring the best possible approach to 

the question at hand. 

 

This Commission has been instructed to report to myself within a six-month period. Two full-time staff 

members, an office secretary and a research officer will assist the Commission members in their work. 

 

It might be appropriate at this time, Mr. Speaker, to briefly remind the Assembly of the fate of the 1963 

study commissioned by the New Democratic Government under the able leadership of Woodrow Lloyd. 

 

At that time a study was established to look into the needs and the concerns of the senior citizens. The 

original report was complete, work was completed in setting up a study group to carry out some action. 

And then the Liberal administration came in and abolished the study committee. Mr. Speaker, we have 

now moved to try and do something. Our Government has taken further steps to ensure a better quality 

of life for our senior citizens. 

 

You will recall that a little over one year ago my predecessor the Hon. Minister of Labour, set up a study 

committee to research and develop alternatives for the programming and financing of special care homes 

services in this province. This committee has completed its task and made its report to the Government. 

The Government has reviewed the philosophical goals of the Special Care Home program relative to the 

study committee report. The Government, as well, has given serious consideration to briefs, proposals 

and resolutions on this subject advanced by individuals and organizations associated with the program. 

 

In resolving this question now the Government has adopted a program of assistance that will provide 

financial relief for all guests in special care homes that are not now receiving financial benefits from 

other programs administered by the Provincial Government. 

 

This new program will be available to all guests in all Special Care Homes in Saskatchewan. It will 

provide financial assistance to eligible Level III guests in an amount of $144 a month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — At the same time eligible Level II guests will receive assistance of $54 per month. 

Assistance will be available to Level I guests now residing in Special Care facilities in amounts of up to 

$30 per month depending on the financial position and the rate structure adopted by the Special Care 

Home in which they reside. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this means that as of March 1st of this year the system of block grants as a means of 

subsidizing Special Care Homes will be abolished and replaced with the new grant structure designed to 

ease the financial pressure of nursing home care on the patients. This combination of grant payments 

that I have just outlined will mean a total expenditure of almost $3 1/2 million the first year. But it also 

means, Sir, we have completed another promise; that we have completed our election promise 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

315 

of providing nursing care to all guests in special care homes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Rates in these special care homes have been frozen since May, 1971, Mr. Speaker, with 

the Government providing extra funds to enable these operations to break even. This was not a very 

equitable arrangement since some patients were paying a much higher proportion of their costs than 

others. And since, in effect, it meant that the costs of chronic care patients were often subsidized by 

patients in Level I and II. It also meant that guests in new homes did not receive the benefits of the 

grant. 

 

The new grant structure represents serious attempts by our Government to place the financing of Special 

Care Homes on a rational basis, and to provide a basis for the further development of services for the 

aged in the years to come. I point at this to contrast our actions with those of the former Government 

when they were in power. 

 

They froze the rates and thus perpetuated the inequalities. It is interesting, however, to note the date on 

which the rates were frozen so that there would be no increase in costs — May, 1971. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — What was that date again? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — May, 1971. Mr. Speaker, we have also publicly announced since I took this portfolio 

that this Government would not permit the further development of commercially operated Special Care 

Homes in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — We do not feel .that this is an area where profit making can be justified, and we do not 

intend to support efforts to this effect. But in making that announcement we didn’t forget that there are a 

number of Special Care Homes, commercially owned, already in operation. Since we favor municipal, 

church, or other charitable organizations filling the role in the operation of these homes on a break even 

basis, our Government has announced that grants are available towards the cost of purchase of these 

commercial homes by non-profit groups. 

 

The Government grant for the purchase of the existing homes is similar to the construction grant given 

to groups constructing or building new homes. We hope that this grant system will eventually remove 

commercialism from special care operations in our province. 

 

This is not to say, as some Members opposite would have you believe, that we are against private 

enterprise in every field. Mr. Speaker, our Government simply believes that the care of the older 

residents of this province, who have given so much of their lives in building what we now have, is not 

an area in which we can encourage the making of a profit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

316 

Mr. Taylor: — Our Government was pleased with some of the steps announced over the past few 

months on the Federal level for senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, we were very pleased to hear that we could 

expect a substantial increase in old age pensions and we look forward to this coming. 

 

The new Horizons program is another step, we think, in the right direction, but it also has some 

difficulties. This program, like Opportunities For Youth and the Local Initiatives Program, is based on 

priorities established — if established at all — at a Federal level. The priorities at the Federal level are 

not always the same as those established by a provincial government. Many of the projects are excellent 

and have an ongoing function after the original Federal grant has run out. The problem my Department 

is now facing is that we are in a position of tremendous pressure to continue funding these projects, even 

though they may not have fitted within the priorities previously established. 

 

At a recent meeting of Provincial Social Services Ministers, just a short time ago, it was the unanimous 

feeling of the provincial representatives that Ottawa should more actively and readily seek the advice of 

those working at the provincial level before giving final approval to any new projects. This was agreed 

to by all the provinces present. We hope that this problem can be cleared up in the next months by 

holding another meeting with the Federal Minister responsible. We should like to see the problem 

cleared so that government spending at the two levels can be made more effective. And we certainly 

assure the Federal authorities of our co-operation in working towards this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Hon. Members of this Assembly are aware, my Department has moved ahead in 

implementing recommendations contained in the Saskatchewan Corrections Study Committee report 

·submitted to this Government. In the past year corrections have already been integrated as a full 

division within the Department of Social Services. 

 

We have appointed a Director of Corrections and a Chief Probation Officer. As well, we have recently 

appointed a Director of Community Corrections to continue the move to place increasing emphasis on 

community based programs as an alternative to incarceration. The appointment of additional probation 

officer has already resulted in a significant decrease in our correctional population. A community 

training residence has been established in Saskatoon and we now, therefore, have three in operation in 

the province. The others are in Regina and Prince Albert. In an effort to integrate corrections with other 

government programs, an interdepartmental committee has been established. 

 

In accordance with a further recommendation of the Corrections Study, the Provincial Correctional 

Centres are now receiving inmates on a geographical basis instead of the age division. We have also 

established elected inmate groups in all Correctional Centres to improve the relationship between those 

incarcerated and the staff who are working within the institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as has been announced some time ago, the Provincial Government set aside $5 million for 

provincial-municipal winter works. There are already over 425 projects approved. The main objective of 

the Winterworks Program is to 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

317 

provide useful employment for people seeking work. We have made it a requirement of those receiving 

grants under this program, that they contact the regional office of the Department of Social Services, 

before awarding a contract or hiring any personnel for a project. We do not yet know the full effect that 

this provision will have on those now receiving social assistance who are, indeed, capable of working. 

 

Many projects are just now getting under way, and there are more applications to be processed. We do 

know, however, that a good number of people receiving social assistance have been placed in jobs on 

these projects. This is the first time, the first year, that this type of approach has been initiated. I can 

report at this time that with a number of projects still to get underway over 150 of the clients of our 

Department have been successful in obtaining employment through this program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — We hope that through continued emphasis on this approach that job placement from the 

list of the Department of Social Service clients, will continue and provide a valid alternative for those 

needing public assistance in times of high unemployment. 

 

It might be pointed out too, Mr. Speaker, when Members opposite complain about those on assistance 

who are not working and who are capable of working. Up until this point the Federal Government has 

been willing to pay half the welfare costs, and have steadfastly refused to pay any share of work 

creation. This, it seems to me, when we travel to Ottawa for discussion, is a good item for such 

discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, turning briefly to the area of Federal-Provincial relations, I was pleased to note the recent 

remarks of the Federal Minister of Health and Welfare. In a recent speech he said that income security 

for Canadians is one of the highest priorities in the eyes of the Federal Government. In this, I may say, 

our Government concurs wholeheartedly. The whole area of income security is one that has been dealt 

with in the past on a piecemeal basis. I am pleased to see the Government moving towards a more 

comprehensive approach in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I also briefly mention two pieces of legislation to be dealt with by this House from my 

Department. I refer, of course, to The Family Services Act and to The Children of Unmarried Parents 

Act. 

 

The Family Services Act was introduced to the Assembly during its last session. Since then it has been 

widely discussed and examined by many segments of Saskatchewan society. Changes have been made, 

clauses adjusted, and we are now ready to ask the House to go ahead with this Act. 

 

The Children of Unmarried Parents Act goes with The Family Services Act. I will have more to say on 

these particular Bills at a later time. 

 

I should like to comment also, very briefly   

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 p.m. until 7:00 p.m. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

318 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity of commenting very briefly on some 

of the questions that have already been raised during this debate regarding the work of the Department 

of Social Services. 

 

The first comment refers to the supposed great increase in assistance being paid out by our Department. 

Something that I discovered rather interestingly as I examined the last four or five years was that I noted 

that the greatest increase in assistance came in the year 1970 to 1971, when the former administration 

increased its payments by approximately 40 per cent, which is probably one of the largest increases in 

history. I am not sure whether this had anything to do with it being an election year, it is probably just 

coincidental. 

 

One or two Members of the Opposition have also talked of our so-called advertising campaign, as 

though we were urging people to get on welfare. Mr. Speaker, I realize that the world has a problem 

with illiteracy, but I didn’t really understand that it had affected the Opposition. Anyone who takes time 

to read the advertisements, as they call them in the newspapers, would note that the so-called advertising 

comments were nothing more than a means of informing people of the services offered by the 

Department, and explaining the work carried on by the Department of Social Services. The real 

emphasis on the ads, if they were read, was on the handicapped, the senior citizen, the foster child and, 

yes, the criminal. 

 

One of the reasons for the need for such a brief as it was, and short campaign, was to correct some of the 

false impressions that I can only suggest are being placed in the minds of people by those in the 

Opposition, something that I think is nothing more than a cheap political gimmick to try and take away 

from the work that is being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also rather disturbed to hear the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) speak of 

young people in receipt of assistance. And to speak of them as feeding at the welfare trough. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, oh! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — This to me was a rather detestable type of comment to come from anyone who would 

try to have the population believe that he cares about people. They were talking mainly about 16 and 17 

year olds. I think it’s a most reprehensible attitude, but really hardly surprising considering its source. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, there are some young people in need of assistance. But assistance is only 

provided as a last resort after a family breakdown occurs and not before the fact. We, like all Members 

of this House, at least I assume all Members of this House, are concerned with the necessity of 

protecting family life. However, there are situations where young people can no longer exist in the 

family atmosphere. In these exceptional cases, assistance is provided. 

 

May I also remind this House of when and how this program 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

319 

was initiated. This may be of some interest to the Members. The impression left on Members by some 

opposition Members that this is a new program on which we have embarked. Such is anything but the 

case. It was a new program all right but it was new in November of 1970 under the Liberal 

administration. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, oh! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I would like to take just a couple of minutes to quote from two of Saskatchewan’s daily 

newspapers concerning this particular program. The first from the Star-Phoenix, December 19, 1970 and 

the second from the Leader-Post, December 15, 1970. The Star-Phoenix, and this is talking about the 

new program of providing assistance to young people who leave their parental home. 

 

This is without a doubt a courageous initiative and one that promises to trigger hostile reaction from 

some quarters. Some will charge that it is interference in domestic affairs, support of youthful 

rebellion, a contribution towards the weakening of the family unit an important part of our social 

structure. 

 

And then it goes on, 

 

Therefore, the department is by no means abetting family breakdown but is intervening after the fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Then from the Leader-Post, 

 

The Minister   

 

and later we will see which Minister, 

 

The Minister said it would be incorrect to call them all socially disoriented or long-hairs. 

 

and this is a quote, 

 

Most are having difficulty at home. The situation may not be entirely the teenager’s fault. There are 

two sides to all these stories. Mr. MacDonald said the increased number of teenage welfare 

applications has become a real concern and that is why the new policy was instituted. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the situation has not changed. There is still a need for assistance when young people are 

separated for one reason or another from the parental home. The government has changed, and certainly 

the program is being handled in a more humane manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I should also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in May 1971 under the Liberal 

administration 582 young people were in receipt of assistance. In May, 1972, under our government, 

545 were in receipt of assistance. This hardly indicates the vast increase in the use of this program by 

our Government. It 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

320 

is, and it will continue to be our policy, to do all that we possibly can to reconcile families. Failing that, 

we will provide the assistance necessary to help young people get on their feet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I should also like to say one or two words about the increase in the number 

of public servants. While I don’t have the figures available at this time, there is no question but that 

there has been an increase, and I believe a substantial increase. For this I make no apologies. As you are 

aware, new departments have been set up, and new departments require staffing. But more than this, it 

was necessary to increase the staff of some of the present departments in order to carry out the job that 

was necessary to be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — My own Department is a good example of this. We have increased the number of social 

workers and the number of probation officers along with supporting staff. And for this, I am in no way 

sorry. The increase in probation workers has already cut about one hundred of the population of the two 

correctional centres. These increases in staff were necessary because these necessary programs were in 

the past suffering from a diet of starvation. Our workers were overloaded so that they had little time to 

carry out the kind of counselling that is both necessary and required. And I hope that we can add 

additional staff even in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — The establishment of the Land Bank Commission will also require additional employees 

if they are to do their job properly. It seems to me the question is not how many employees are in the 

public service, but is the public service staffed to do the necessary job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I want to suggest that under the previous administration, it was not staffed to do the job 

that needed to be done. As long as this Government remains committed to working for the betterment of 

our people, then it will be necessary for us to increase the services offered, and as we increase the 

services, we will need the people to staff the programs. This we intend to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Throne Speech indicates a continuation of 

the direction of providing a new deal for the people of Saskatchewan and for this reason I am pleased 

and proud to support the motion and to oppose the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

321 

Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to congratulate the mover and 

the seconder of the Speech from the Throne, the Member for Saskatoon, Mr. Rolfes, and the Member for 

Gravelbourg, Mr. Gross, for the excellent job they have done. I am sure the speeches they have 

delivered can assure the people of this province that there is a New Deal for People. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I also want to congratulate the three new Cabinet Ministers, the Member for 

Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski), the Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) and the Member for 

Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor). I can assure you that this evening following shortly after the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) is going to be a pretty tough job to fill in. I can assure you that the 

way I feel after his speech, that there isn’t much for me to say because he has done an excellent job in 

delivering that speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I also want to refer to safety in the Chamber. One of the Members across the way 

recommended seat belts. I think it wouldn’t be a bad idea at all. But what happens when the chair breaks 

down — I don’t know what seat belts could do. One purpose that the seat belts would serve quite well is 

to keep the Members in their seats when the debate is on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I think it would help the Whip a great deal if he had the key. He would be able to keep 

them in the House. I can recall the former Member for Saltcoats when he went for a spill. He was sitting 

in Mr. Lane’s seat now. Actually it’s not funny when it is taking place. Mr. Whelan, Member for Regina 

North West went for a spill. If these chairs are in such rotten condition, I think it’s time to have a good 

overhaul job done before something really happens. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Put them on the other side. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am glad to see that in the Speech from the Throne we do mention 

such things as repair parts for machinery to see that we get a better service. I know of combines that 

have stood for two and three weeks, brand new combines, waiting to go into the field, and have to sit 

there and the farmer has to get somebody else to harvest the crop because he couldn’t get repair parts. I 

think that matter should be looked into. There is no doubt that better service should be available. 

 

We also hear the opposition complaining about votes. Now they want a vote on the Marketing Board. I 

want to point out to the Opposition that in the New Deal for People, and they all have it they tell us, if 

you turn to page 2, they will see Item 12 and it says: 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

322 

Establish a provincial controlled hog marketing board. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there was a plebiscite, there was the election. That’s what the people said. They said 

45 to 15. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — We heard that similar story before. I can remember when hospitalization was brought 

in. They wanted a vote there again. They said, “We want a vote because what’s going to happen, only 

the CCF will be able to get into the hospitals, there are so few hospitals.” They said, “We are going to 

have to write to Regina before anybody can be let into a hospital. We should have a vote.” It was called 

communism and so on. I can remember an old Liberal in my area and he said, “Look if that’s what you 

call communism, we need a little bit of it.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — So, hospitalization came about. Then we had Medicare. Again, they wanted a vote. 

Well, we said the election was the vote and we went ahead with it. But the funny part of the whole 

situation is this, that once we have done it they say it’s a good thing, we’re going along with it. If the 

CCF and the NDP had copyrights on their programs, I don’t know what the Liberals would be able to 

do. But we have no copyright. And I hope that the Federal Government is going to come along with a 

farm program that is going to outdo the provincial government because they have the money to do it. If 

they don’t want to co-operate, if they don’t want to come along with a better program than ours, well 

then Saskatchewan is going to have to go it alone and that we will do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a few other things I want to talk about. It is rather 

ridiculous that in a hungry world such as ours we had operation LIFT that was telling us to summer 

fallow land two years in succession. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! There is too much interruption. Let the Member speak without so much 

interruption. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think when a world is hungry there is absolutely no reason 

whatsoever for having to summer fallow land two years in succession. We could have produced an extra 

600 million bushels in Western Canada and sold it if we would have people on their toes to sell it. I’ll 

say that’s what we should have lifted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to dwell on the farm problems too long because we have had the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) who has done a wonderful job. I want to compliment the Minister 

of Highways (Mr. Kramer) and the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood) for their road program, 

especially the Open Roads program. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

323 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — The Open Roads program has brought some of the kind of roads that our rural people 

have been waiting for, for a long time. And I am quite happy to cut down on a couple of miles of 

four-lane highway and give a few miles of oiled road to the main roads to the towns and villages and 

small hamlets including the oiling of streets. I hope that this program will be continued and when the 

time comes I should like to see an oiled grid road program undertaken in this province because that is 

needed also. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about social welfare. The former Minister of Social 

Welfare, who is now in the Opposition, knows very well that I don’t play politics with social welfare, 

and I don’t appreciate anybody playing politics with it. It’s a department that will always be seriously 

criticized no matter what you do. But I think it’s the job of every parliamentarian to see that it is 

properly represented no matter what happens. I always advocated that the local governments should be 

involved in this program to do a better job. Some are going for advisory boards at the present time. 

That’s a move in the right direction so as to get the local input into this program. And I don’t care 

whether it’s administered by the Liberals or administered by the NDP. With all the best intentions in the 

world, there is going to be some abuse, but we will try our best to keep it down to a minimum. As I said 

before, I am not going to try and make any politics out of social welfare. \ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier for having appointed me to the Liquor Committee to 

replace the former Russ Brown who passed away. One of the reasons I was glad to be appointed to the 

Committee was because the area of impaired driving interested me a great deal, not for the sake of 

drinking but for the sake of driving safety. On one of our trips to Cook County we encountered 

approaches to the problem which were some of the ideas that I had believed in for a long time. Also the 

Committee, to me, was a continuation of the studies that had been made by the Highway Safety 

Committee that had been brought in by the former Liberal government under Ross Thatcher in 1965 and 

1966 and had good results. But where the government of the day failed was when it did not follow up 

the recommendations of the Committee to continue its work. I feel satisfied in saying that many people 

have been killed because the good work that was started in 1965 and 1966 was discontinued when the 

Highway Safety Committee was shut down. 

 

I must compliment the Premier for the reinstatement of this committee and I feel that if it is manned by 

people who really have that type of work at heart, and I know we can find them from both sides of the 

House, I feel sure that we will see a drastic reduction in the traffic deaths on the highways. 

 

At the present time there is a committee set up to recommend restricted licences for those who need it. 

Although I support restricted licences, I believe that unless the driver improvement program is attached 

to the package of restricted licences it will go down in history as a bad move. I strongly believe that if 

we can get the support of a good safety program from our education system, ask everyone to police 

himself, ask for the support of our churches and our clubs, our local governments 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

324 

could get involved in this safety program. I feel we can get that support if we ask for it. Then we will see 

a great reduction in the death rate of this province. We must also develop a better social attitude towards 

the rule of law. That is one of our problems. I would quote you many other passages from Hansard, but 

at a later date we will be able to speak on the same subject so I will leave it off for now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard a lot about intersessional committees. My opinion of intersessional committees is 

that it is a good way to approach a problem. At the 18th Parliamentary Conference in Malawi when the 

question of bringing parliament closer to the people was discussed, it was indicated by several speakers 

that they were moving in that direction, bringing parliament closer to the people by the use of 

intersessional committees. It is one of the important methods that can be used to preserve democracy. I 

believe that 70 per cent of our problems could be taken out of the realm of politics if we use 

intersessional committees to the fullest. I think the Legislature would be a lot healthier if we did it that 

way. 

 

Personally, I have served on several committees under the CCF, under the Liberals and I could never see 

that it was a waste of time and money. In 1965-66, the Highway Safety Program had good results. A 

reduction from 295 deaths a year was brought down to 207. That committee had recommended 

continuing its study but it failed to do so. And where are we today? Over 275 deaths on our roads last 

year. 

 

I want to point out that intersessional committees give the Opposition a chance to operate in a very 

constructive manner. What more do you want? 

 

I can recall the flag committee we had in this province. Ottawa went ahead with no committee to start 

with. They debated it for three months and finally they had to bring in closure to end the debate. In 

Saskatchewan, a flag committee was set up and when it was brought before the Legislature, in two hours 

we had a new flag. It was done by the Liberal Government, but the Opposition co-operated. They can’t 

be all bad. A lot of difference, two hours and three months. I think it is well worthwhile. 

 

In the last while we have heard the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) strongly criticize the work of 

the committees. To me, it is an attack on democracy. But it is nothing new for him. He was involved in 

the worst gerrymander of constituency boundaries this province has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Has he got love for democracy? I call it an attack on the parliamentary system as well. 

He seems to be very jealous of the Cabinet and the Premier for giving a chance to the people to express 

themselves. Now what is wrong with that? 

 

I think the time is here for the Liberal Party to choose a new leader. The Member for Lumsden (Mr. 

Lane) is breathing down his neck. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

325 

Mr. Thibault: — The Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) would like to have it too and the former 

Member for Elrose is going to take it the first chance he gets. If Davey was here, I would tell him this, 

“do your party a good turn, pack it up — you have had your day.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Well, I think they will have quite a few candidates there, but there is no second prize, 

there will only be one. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They are all second prizes. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Another matter I should like to talk about tonight is one of the most appalling 

attitudes developing towards our society today and it is the bad attitude towards the rule of law. A great 

deal of it stems from the handling of our traffic laws. I believe that many minor charges laid and which 

people plead guilty to, to save the court costs, have turned many people off, against the rule of law and 

makes the law become nothing but a farce, and provide a breeding ground for crime. 

 

I have heard that officers get their promotions on the basis of charges and convictions. If that is some of 

the criteria and I have enough information that I believe it to be the case, then the rules of the game must 

change, as it lends itself to making professional liars out of some of our police officers. 

 

I would say let us use the law, mainly for direction and for enforcement where it is absolutely necessary 

and do away with minor charges. I would much sooner work at it this way. Give me an officer who can 

come into a community and develop a good attitude toward the rule of law and we will have the young 

people respect the police instead of scorning them and also respect the law. Many feel that charges are 

laid in order to finance the government. Now that feeling is out in the country. When you look at 

approximately 9 per cent of the people who over the age of seventeen have been charged in 1971, and 

you multiply that by ten, you will see what you get. I will go into more detail of those figures in another 

debate. I would say that a large amount of this stems from unnecessary charges. It is creating an attitude 

that is not good in our society. I am not interested in a little game going on in a town or village of cops 

and robbers. I think a better attitude can be developed if we use a different approach. One thing that 

disturbs me is that every year that I have come to this House I have seen an increase in the estimates in 

fines and forfeitures. In the last few years, we can see that was the trend. It probably still is but I think it 

is a very poor way to finance the government because we create the breeding ground for crime. When a 

person has been hauled into court unnecessarily or on a cheap charge we keep turning people off at a 

rate that certainly will not pay off in the end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another matter that is before our society today, that concerns me and all of you. It 

is before the House at Ottawa now. The question of capital punishment. Mr. Speaker, the question of 

capital punishment is one that is facing our society today. At the present time it is strongly 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

326 

debated at Ottawa. Although I would not support capital punishment, I believe if a plebiscite was taken 

today it would carry an overwhelming majority for its re-instatement. I have heard remarks that a society 

that has capital punishment is sick. With that I can agree. But who has made it sick is a good question. If 

we had not provided the breeding grounds for this sort of thing, perhaps we wouldn’t have it. Unless we 

see an improvement in the handling of the situation, we can look forward to see capital punishment 

re-instated before 10 years go by. I think some serious thinking has to be done on the part of the 

do-gooders as well as the legal profession to come up with some answers that society can accept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have one more subject to speak about and that is about our Indian friends. During my trip 

to Africa, I had occasion to speak to Members from Australia. The Australian situation runs very parallel 

to ours. People in jail there are about the same percentage of natives as what we have. The attitude of the 

natives toward the rule of law is very much the same as in Canada. Aboriginal rights are debated and it 

runs very parallel. But when you take another country, New Zealand, where they use a different 

approach, the situation has worked out much better. I think that Canada will have to look abroad to find 

some of the answers. You take for instance in New Zealand, out of a House of 87 Members they allowed 

the Maoris to elect four Members to the House. You may say that it is going to bring up a lot of 

problems. But I think one of the main things that they say that the problem of minorities is the fear of 

exploitation. Isn’t that one of the problems? Suspicion and jealousy, isn’t that part of our problem? 

Sometimes the numerical majority needs protection as in South Africa and Gibraltar. The true way to 

protect a minority is to eliminate the cause which creates the minority and majority. It is essential that 

the minority assimilate with the majority sufficiently in the main aspirations of the majority. It is 

essential for a minority at all times not to take advantage of any privileged position they have, but to 

promote the welfare of all its people of the country. 

 

I think if you read the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference report you will find all this in it. Now 

last, and I mean last. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Did you take my name in vain? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I’ll give you a copy of it afterwards. You should have been here. I am sorry you are 

late for school again. But at last and I mean last, I must say a few words about the Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy). I want to say that I did not take part in the election campaign. I want to say that I 

accept the decision of the people of Athabasca. Even though he had a small majority, there is no second 

prize. But when the Member for Athabasca said last week in the debate, with reference to the plane 

crash and the Premier and I quote: 

 

I wish he had been on the plane. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would expect a remark of that kind coming from a drunk that has been booted out of a 

pub but not from a parliamentarian. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

327 

Mr. Thibault: — It is a dirty shame and especially when we have students in the galleries. It bothers 

me. We are supposed to set an example and hold our debates at a higher level. But I will answer it in this 

way. In the words of Martin Luther King, “Just love the hell out of people like that   ” 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s going to be tough. 

 

Mr. Thibault: —   “and hope that as they get old and their shadows lengthen that they will wipe that 

hatred out of their hearts.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing you will see by my few remarks that I am going to oppose the amendment and 

support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to speak in this But there 

are a few things that I am prompted to talk Therefore, I hope the House will bear with me for a few I am 

in pretty good humor, Mr. Speaker, at the present spite of being a bear with a sore paw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to add my words of congratulation to those who have spoken before. I want to 

include the mover and the seconder and other speakers in this debate; I especially want to congratulate 

our Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) for the tremendous speech that he gave this House   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —   and his replies to the cheap criticism that has been levelled in this House and outside 

this House ever since he brought forward these bright new ambitious, adventurous programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Certainly it is the mark, Mr. Speaker, of the deficiencies of the Opposition and those 

who would want to criticize, that they would select, like the little urchin in the street who says, here is a 

nice white door, let’s sling mud at it. I listened to the new highway critic this afternoon and I was a little 

surprised that in his speech there wasn’t a single word about highways, so he didn’t even look over the 

road, he just headed straight for the barn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — He is a bit nostalgic. I think that is a good idea. He went right back to the farm. It 

wouldn’t have been so bad if he hadn’t got on to the manure spreader. That is where he stayed all the 

time he was on his feet. As far as highways are concerned, he was as mum as a dummy and dumb as a 

mummy. He had nothing to say. I think you had better look for a new critic there, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition because I don’t think we really got a great deal from him this afternoon. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

328 

Mr. Weatherald: — You changed Ministry — might happen again. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Possibly, possibly. He spoke and I think it is only proper that we have to reply to one 

or two things that he said. He talked about selling the land and then taking the land away from the 

farmers as others have done. One of the advantages of having been around for a while is you develop a 

long memory. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) pointed out that the policy of the former 

government was not to sell after five years. It was not and even though interest rates were lower at that 

time, it was six and one-half per cent, not five, if you were renting. Of course, we are not selling it at 

that rate. They seem to be obsessed with the idea that there is something sinister, in spite of the fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that since in the last 20 to 25 years we have seen our rural farm population drop from 140,000 

farmers on the farm to something around 75,000 today. The programs of these people that sat opposite 

and those of their colleagues at Ottawa have brought this about (along with the short-sighted short-term 

Tories that sat in office for a while). There really isn’t any difference. The only difference that there is 

between these two parties is that one is in and the other is out. Like someone once said, they are just two 

wings of the same bird of prey. Just like two empty beer bottles in the ditch — the labels may be 

different but they are both empty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — So we watch this attempt to belittle. You know they said that you wouldn’t be able to 

get this land unless you had a CCF or New Democratic Party membership. Well, let me remind you — 

and some of you people are still there — Mr. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart), when that land was 

for sale (the lease land) I, for one, tried to buy and I was refused by these people opposite, by the former 

Minister of Agriculture. I didn’t have a Liberal membership. I am talking first hand, not second hand. I 

was refused! And how many more New Democrats were refused? It was a special program for Liberals, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is amazing how they cry about this lease policy. You know some of the most rugged individualists we 

find anywhere in Saskatchewan are the ranchers of the short grass country in the South and they have 

lived all their lives on leased property. You know, I don’t think very many of those are socialists, I don’t 

think that any more than half of them carry a New Democratic membership. They still have their leases 

and they have done very well, thank you. But the Liberals apparently would say immediately, maybe 

next week, maybe we ought to tell the ranchers down in the southwest that next week, that we have a 

buyer, we put a price on it and make them buy it. Maybe that is what they want. 

 

Maybe the Member for Shaunavon (Mr. Oliver) and the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Flasch) and a 

few others would like to tell their ranchers that that is what the Liberals want to do to the ranchers down 

there and see if they want to put up the cash for that section after section of land and be the free 

enterprisers or the private enterprisers that this bunch opposite seems to think they want to be. Why 

don’t you apply your policies there? Why didn’t you apply your policies when you were in office for 

seven years? 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

329 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — A whole bundle of inconsistencies like an old maid getting ready for a wedding! 

 

You know, the Leader of the Opposition hauled off early in the debate with a great deal to say. He 

reminds me of a neighbor a neighbor of mine had. He was a little guy who lived across the fence and 

this old Irish lady was telling me — after this fellow moved in, she said, “Oh, he is such a wonderful 

chap. He is so kind. Look over there now, would you. He never fails to light up a smudge when the flies 

and the mosquitoes are bad.” And sure enough! You know the amazing thing is that one of the best 

smudge makers in the House has to be the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart). To light a smudge, 

you first have to get some dry rotten wood and some straw and then cover it with wet manure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Then you can throw up a real smoke screen. Well, Mrs. Murphy was so proud of this 

fellow because he was so kind to his animals. You know, Mr. Speaker, it was about one week later that I 

dropped over to Mrs. Murphy’s and I said, “How is that neighbor of yours doing?” “Oh, he is a 

blatherskite.”, she said. “You know I thought he was kind to his animals, but the only bloody time that 

he ever lit that fire was when the wind was blowing between the house and the hen house. And I went 

out there one day when he had a real big smoke going and I caught the little blighter in there sucking 

eggs.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Smoke screens! That’s all you fellows have been able to put up because this program 

is so good that you can’t touch it. 

 

And then another thing, he held forth not only here but at North Battleford, very little to do, but to try to 

make something of a sad situation there, where a patient had escaped from the hospital and 

unfortunately, I am very sorry about this because Steve Totchek’s family are friends of mine and have 

been for many years. 

 

You know the last person to be talking about a situation at a Saskatchewan hospital is that little 

gentleman that sits across peeking over his desk. Even when he is standing up! It is not good when 

someone walks away or escapes. It happens and it has happened in jails, it happens all over, they walk 

away and escape. But under the jurisdiction of those gentlemen opposite, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t walk 

away, they chased them out of there. Regardless of what their condition was they sent them out, 

regardless of whether they were prepared for society or not and history shows and there are cases I can’t 

talk about because they are still before the courts, because you turned them loose, they didn’t escape. 

And that is the difference. That is the difference between your philosophy and mine. 

 

The little gentleman that sits across the way said and I 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

330 

quote from the North Battleford News Optimist: 

 

The Leader of the Opposition suggested that one of the reasons for the disenchantment by the staff 

was the political interference of Mr. Kramer. He is trying to make his own private area of political 

patronage. Many recent appointments to the staff have certainly been made more on political 

consideration than on ability. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Leader of the Opposition or anyone else across there, as I did in the 

Press when that statement was made to name one. Name one person whom I was influential in having 

fired or hired. I dare you! Just name one and, Mr. Speaker, if he doesn’t I am going to break the rules of 

this House and use the word ‘liar’. I want to hear from him before too long. It seems strange you know 

after all this talk from the wee blatherskite. Here we are. We have all the headlines in the same paper, 

Mr. Speaker, and I will be glad to table this. We have the “Patient care level declines”, says Steuart. 

“Things are terrible over there.” “Political interference”, the whole bit. The same paper! — 

“Saskatchewan hospital accredited”, and I read from the same paper: 

 

Dr. John Gray, Executive Director of the Saskatchewan Hospital has announced his hospital received 

provisional accreditation. A two-man survey team from the Canadian Council of Hospital 

accreditation recommended accreditation following a survey in October. In making the announcement 

Dr. Gray noted that the Saskatchewan Hospital is the second psychiatric facility in the Prairie 

Provinces to be accredited. 

 

Strangely enough, Mr. Speaker, it took a New Democratic Government to bring things about there, too, 

in Selkirk, Manitoba. Further I quote: 

 

The next step in full accreditation will be made in a survey next year. Canadian Council on hospital 

accreditation has been authorized to conduct surveys on the accreditation programs in hospitals 

throughout Canada. Through its programs it establishes standards for hospital operation and assists 

hospitals to attaining these standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that will, at least, put things in their proper perspective and I want to be hearing 

from you Davey. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to compare that and if any of the Members here or across the way — some of 

the newcomers — haven’t really got a clear understanding on what happened, I recommend the Frazier 

Report, that was commissioned by the gentlemen opposite. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We had the nerve to have a commission? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, you did! You carried on the investigation, let’s have your report. He (Steuart) 

said that he was investigating it, the Liberals are investigating it! The doors are open, the open door 

policy, remember! Let’s hear your report, we would be pleased to hear it. Incidentally, Davey, there is a 

picture 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

331 

here that may start your wee heart afluttering a bit! Friend of yours on that page too. 

 

I’ll get to highways now and some of the new programs we have heard a great deal of talk and a lot of 

blather about this, that and the other since last Spring, when we commissioned a general study on 

highways. The last study that was done was the Woods Gordon Report and many of the 

recommendations in that report were excellent. The problem was that the Liberals allowed the report to 

gather dust — they did nothing with it. 

 

So now with the combination of the Woods Gordon Report and the Genereux Report (which incidentally 

has been completed and I will be tabling very shortly) will probably result in new directions and 

programs in the Department of Highways. 

 

One thing that I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we will not be doing. we’ll not be wasting 

and frittering money away for non-existent industries and so on that I will go into a bit later. They even 

had the gall, some Members opposite, to criticize ‘Operation Open Roads’, ‘Operation Main Street’ and 

the municipal grid road program for the side streets that are under the jurisdiction of my colleague the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood). 

 

I want to say at this time that I don’t particularly want to take any credit as this is a government 

program. A great deal of the work and the planning that went into Operation Open Roads and so on was 

conducted by my colleague Neil Byers while he was the Minister and a lot of the credit for these 

programs certainly has to go to the Minister of Highways whom I succeeded. 

 

There is nothing in this world that is constant except change. We have a good many things that we have 

to take a look at. Certainly there have been a good many programs that were excellent, but the problem 

is, Mr. Speaker, they were only excellent in some places, for some people, like the autobahn that my 

friend from Morse rides on back and forth to his particular constituency. When the traffic counts 

warranted a great deal in another direction. However, we won’t go into that. 

 

We are going to try from now on to serve as many as possible. as economically as possible, without any 

deterioration of quality. That is a pretty hard task but I am certain that we can accomplish it. Operation 

Open Roads was just a start and Operation M ain Street was just a start on taking those roads back into 

the country where people really need them. Mr. Speaker, 283,000 people is more than a quarter of our 

present population. And certainly by the end of 1974 nearly 500 communities should have been served. 

 

We heard from the dollar-a-head Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) this afternoon and he was 

telling me what roads needed to be built and what roads should be built or should not be built. I 

appreciate that and we will take care of a great deal of it. A great deal has to be said. The interest of 

tourism in northwestern Saskatchewan is going up by leaps and bounds. Budgets, real meaningful 

budgets, were placed into both Meadow Lake and The Battlefords Provincial Park this last 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

332 

year which had been starved for years in the Provincial Budgets under the former administration. 

 

Please remember, because I made pleas time and again. All the budgets were down. Down in southwest 

around the main centres, down in the southeast and so on, but as far as the west half of the province, 

again, they were ignored under the former administration. I am pleased that the Department of Natural 

Resources gave The Battlefords Park and the Meadow Lake Provincial Park, in the constituency of the 

Hon. Member from Meadow Lake, a great boost this year. And, again, judging by the hearings that went 

on last week, the interest in tourism is not dead by any means. 

 

The native people were mentioned. Roads for the native people. Well I didn’t need any prompting, 

because we were up there and we talked to them, and the Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) 

well knows it. They said that the Federal Government had built a very good road on their reserve. I 

suggested to them that I didn’t think the responsibility of the Federal Government went to the edge of 

the Indian reserve, and stopped there. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the native people are not going to be 

condemned to stay on their reserve. They are a Federal responsibility and the roads off the reserves are 

our responsibility, true. But with the amount of money that the Federal Government spent last year and 

the year before in other provinces on road assistance and airport assistance and so on, surely they can 

throw a bit into Saskatchewan. 

 

I suggested that they should apply to the Federal Government and if they were willing to go on a share 

basis, we would be prepared to improve their roads out to the main highway, because on any of those 

roads are mainly used by Indians. And certainly we are upgrading them this winter in spite of the 

weather and so on. There have been some bad turns removed now. 

 

I want to draw the attention to this House and put it in the record, over the past seven or eight years, the 

Federal Government spent $454 million on assistance to provinces in roads, railway crossings, airports, 

etc. Saskatchewan’s share was $2.7 million about one-half of one per cent of the national total budget. 

The Maritimes and Eastern Canada got the great bulk. Our sister provinces to the east and west got $8 

million to $9 million respectively. We got a half of one per cent, slightly more! When we have a little 

less than five per cent of Canada’s population it doesn’t take much to figure out that the figures should 

have been closer to $30 million on a shared basis. 

 

Some of the main problems were that planned programs were never devised, the DREE program was 

never taken advantage of by these gentlemen who sit opposite. It isn’t all the Federal Government’s fault 

by any means. The requests were not made for the type of assistance we needed. Lord only knows that 

the North that is talked about so much could have participated in road improvement programs if the 

requests had been put forward to the Federal Government. I am sure they would not have turned a deaf 

ear to them. It’s a matter of planning and it’s a matter of consistent planning and consistent requests. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another thing that surprised me a bit was the Leader of the Opposition when he went 

through his little bag of industries that had been bought, he had the nerve, once 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

333 

again, to mention Anglo-Rouyn and I was surprised. I thought that he would like to put that under the 

rug so that nobody would ever say anything about that again, because he reminded me of the kind of 

roads we aren’t going to build. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, built, and that was in 1965, 

upgrading and so on, approximately $5 million worth of roads to encourage the Anglo-Rouyn mine, 

which was a subsidiary of a wealthy mining corporation, belonging to the late Robert Winters another 

former contestant for the leadership of the Federal Liberal Party. They brought in their obsolete 

machinery and they high-graded that little pocket of ore that the former Member for Cumberland (Bill 

Berezowsky) said was a peanut mine. Well you know, Bill was wrong. It wasn’t a peanut mine and I’m 

going to tell you why — after 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, about 1968, Mr. Speaker, you will remember in 

this House I put a question on the Order Paper, what were the royalties? No, I didn’t have the question 

on the Order Paper, I asked an oral question — “What were the royalties? What did we receive from 

Anglo-Rouyn?” The former Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), Minister of Mineral Resources, 

said “Well, approximately $90,000.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wondered a little bit about that. The next year I put the question on paper. The Minister 

refused to answer. He said it wasn’t in the public interest. You bet it wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the 

matter was, that last year when I asked the question and got the answer, over that whole six years the 

Provincial Government got less than $100,000 after we built $5 million worth of roads to get the ore out 

to Flin Flon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Talk about subsidies. You know, Mr. Speaker, that makes the shoe factory and the box 

factories and the rest of the things that these people like to chatter about, it makes them look like 

peanuts. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Free enterprise. 

 

Mr. Kramer: —   and Bill Berezowsky said “it was a peanut mine.” You know he was wrong, as I said. 

We didn’t even get peanuts out of that ruddy mine. All we got was a hole in the ground last summer, a 

lot of unemployed people and some empty houses. It was well named, as I’ve said before in this House; 

the promoters and the Government, or somebody had the angle and the taxpayers got the ruin. 

 

Well, there will be no more primrose paths either and I’m not going to tell that story all over again, but 

it’s a sad one and there will be no more Boldt’s bends to accommodate Langham, or Saskatoon where 

you swung around with a great expensive interchange after all the land along 22nd Street West had 

already been purchased, then you could have got into Saskatoon three miles shorter. We’re still 

struggling. It will cost millions to get down to 22nd Street from the way we are going. Mr. Speaker, the 

taxpayers are going to have to pay dearly for every inch of ground that is purchased on Avenue ‘A’. Pay 

through the nose as it were, because they (the Opposition) had to keep a cheap political promise. We 

could have black-topped a highway right into Langham and Dalmeny and brought them all in far 

cheaper than when the final cost is in 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

334 

on that expensive fiasco which comes in on the North side of Saskatoon and down Avenue A. A 

disgrace, Mr. Speaker, a waste of public money and while the public back in other areas, the taxpayers at 

Rabbit Lake, Meeting Lake and back in Punnichy and up in Hudson Bay are without good roads. The 

people of Hudson Bay have got a highway there that would knock the head off of a woodpecker driving 

on it this summer. The money has been wasted on some of these expensive road operations. The former 

Government at Swift Current built bridges and interchanges when there wasn’t even a highway around 

them. These sat out there in the open with the birds roosting on them for three years waiting for a 

highway to be built to them. Waiting for the highway. The highway is there now, eventually — it came. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Tell us about Highway #55. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I imagine that one is still sitting out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of those millions of dollars down the drain, down the ditch, millions and I’m going 

to present a list of these, I’m going to present the bill to the former provincial treasurer as to what it 

really cost for these kinds of high falutin’ pie-in-the-sky type of things that they pulled off, just as show 

pieces, rather than thinking of the length and breadth of Saskatchewan out where the people live. 

 

I should like to report to the House that the Gulf Road which has been mentioned in this House before, 

is well on its way. There is a funny thing about it — something happened to that road on the way up to 

Wollaston Lake. You know it used to be costing about $45,000 a mile and now this last summer it’s 

costing about $15,000 a mile to build that road. Amazing. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It’s a jackrabbit trail. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Once again you are out of line and I’m going to call you — we’ll take a trip up there 

and you show me the difference. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I’ll drive. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — You’ll drive? We’ll both drive. I’ll not take a chance like that. There’s just no way 

Davey — we’ll both drive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll take a few of the boys along and we’ll go this winter. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if 

these boys can tell me where their buddies stopped and the Government crews started, I’ll pay the 

expenses of the trip. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The trouble is it may be a bit better where the Government crew started and I may 

have to pay anyway. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I’ll tell you how much the road cost. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Oh yes! Would you like to 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

335 

put a question on the Order Paper? You’ve got everything else, how about throwing in the Gulf Road. 

Throw Cluff in We built that last winter incidentally, the one to Cluff what it cost you people to clear a 

snow road   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —   so let’s not fret about it. Davey is getting a little peevish again. He’s about ready to 

start another smudge. 

 

I want to congratulate the Premier on the speech from the Throne and the good things that have been 

suggested. One of the good things that I believe in and it’s in line with what we are already planning in 

the Department of Highways, is to put a tremendous amount of emphasis on safety. That just didn’t start 

yesterday. We placed a lot of emphasis on it last summer. We set aside about $400,000 in order to 

improve various areas that were accident prone. There were questions put on the order Paper last winter 

about Sintaluta and that problem is being corrected. For a number of years I asked the former Minister 

of Highways to put lights on the Borden Bridge. The lights are there now and it’s a very nice sight if any 

of you folks get a chance to drive up there. Besides that, you are not driving into a bottomless pit on a 

bend as you were before. 

 

We are also planning to remove, wherever possible, as many of the old, unused approaches in order to 

take those obstacles out of the way. We are hoping, Mr. Speaker, to improve the road signs so that there 

is a better identification of where accidents occur. This may be done with mileposts. There is no doubt it 

is a serious situation, as my colleague from Melfort-Kinistino mentioned (Mr. Thibault). Our accident 

rate is up and it is a serious situation. I should like to point out, however, that less than 30 per cent of 

those accidents occurred on provincial highways. The balance are on urban streets, municipal roads and 

other roads. I guess there are no other roads, are there? Urban and rural municipal roads. That’s the 

situation. The situation is serious, that is why, again, we had a first this summer when we sponsored and 

paid for, along with the Saskatchewan Safety Committee, a safety seminar which was attended by 

people from all over Canada and with some resource people from the United States. It was hailed as a 

great success and I’m sure a great deal of information will be available for the Legislative Committee 

from that seminar when the Legislative committee sits. 

 

Education, prevention, there are a good many things that have to be done and I think we can expect the 

co-operation of all Members in this House and everybody outside the House to stop this mounting 

tragedy on our highways. We are going to do a little more about the signs. We have set up a sign 

committee. One of the things (I’m not saying this critically) — it seems to me that over the years we 

were almost indirectly saying to tourists who were coming through, especially from the South of the 

province, there’s a long straight road, get down it and get out of here as quick as you can. We had a very 

austere sign policy which told you as little as possible, except where to go to get on and out. I believe 

that if we are going to sell the beauties of Saskatchewan, in both the North and the South, that we have 

to loosen up and start to tell people as often as we can and with as much imagination as we can, what 

there is in Saskatchewan that they ought to see. Why we ought to stop here 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

336 

rather than keep on going. 

 

I know that the Department of Tourism and Industry is working on tourist information booths; 

Chambers of Commerce are working on this and I believe that we can glamorize Saskatchewan to the 

point where people will be anxious and eager to stop here rather than simply regard it as a place to go 

through as quickly as they can. 

 

You know, hind sight is usually 20-20. If we had it to do over again, I suppose if we were building No. 1 

Highway, we wouldn’t take it on through the wide-open prairies and miss that beautiful Qu’Appelle 

Valley. We could have built that highway along where it could have had a view of the beautiful lakes 

and an overview of the valley occasionally. It would have cost a bit more money, but there would have 

been something more for people to see as they pass through Saskatchewan. Similarly in the North, we 

do everything we can to accommodate high speed traffic. But I think we could have done a little more to 

give people a little better look at what Saskatchewan is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — So I am hoping that when we get together with the various departments; Tourism, 

Natural Resources; Park’s Branch and so on, that we can, along with the Saskatchewan Tourist 

Association and Northern Developers, co-operate and do a real job on selling the real Saskatchewan to 

those people who come through. 

 

We are going to have another bit of a first and I should like to inform the House and they have already 

probably read in the Press, where next week we are having a Western Highways Ministers’ Conference 

which will be held at North Battleford. We will be holding one session at least in the historic old 

Northwest Territories Legislative Building and which will, to some extent, glamorize a bit of the history, 

do a little bit towards publicizing one of the former homes of the RCMP, the North West Mounted 

Police. It will give the Western Ministers and the. Federal people a first-hand look at the museum. It will 

be a short conference, a two day conference and at which we shall be discussing those things that are 

common to the western prairies and I think to a certain extent British Columbia. We shall be discussing 

the advantages of the Yellowhead route; we shall be discussing conformity of load limits and trying to 

get out of this jungle where you cross the border, you’re hooked if you have 2,000 pounds more or less; 

we can do many things this way. Everyone of our provinces has its own research facilities. I don’t think 

we can abandon research, but I think with some liaison the various departments throughout the 

provinces can select certain areas for research and probably do some economizing and come up with 

better answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many things that we hope to have come out of the meeting next week and I 

certainly hope that all of the western ministers are able to come and although the Federal Minister, Mr. 

Marchand, indicated he won’t be able to come himself, he has said that he will send a representative 

there to assist as resource personnel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it is a pleasure, as I said at the outset, to stand up and speak in support of 

the Throne Speech. We have, as I indicated, made greater strides 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

337 

and will make greater strides in improving the farm economy. Certainly Industry and Tourism is 

working very hard to upgrade, especially in the small business area and so on, to do a job with them. 

Tourism is one of our great resources for the future. I believe sincerely that the North half of 

Saskatchewan is going to be the Mecca for North American tourism as the years go by. We have 

indicated that we want to do better out of the forest resources that we have and that, contrary to some of 

the people opposite, this doesn’t mean in any way that we want to destroy or inhibit any of the industries 

we now have. We simply say that we believe there is a better way to utilize our forests for the total 

benefit of the economy, the total benefit of the forest industry, with no harm whatever to the existing 

industries. Anyone in this House who suggests that we are out to try to destroy the existing industries. 

has. to put it plainly. just got some great big holes in his head. 

 

Our Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) has indicated the terrible problems we have in trying to 

rehabilitate people and I will agree that this is a continuing problem. I believe, a little like my colleague 

from Melfort-Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) that we will have to probably be in some areas more militant once 

people are in place and once there are alternatives. I am a little impatient, Mr. Speaker, when somebody 

says those lazy, good-for-nothings don’t want to work. How can we say that when they have no 

opportunity? But I say this, if you have given them an opportunity to work and they refuse I think at this 

point in time there has to be a little militancy and I would be the first one to be going along with that. I 

do believe that there are a limited few that are out to get as much as they can for as little work as 

possible and no work preferably. However, I agree, our Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Taylor), is right 

and I also will not demean people who have no opportunity for gainful employment and say that they are 

no good, that they don’t want to work. They are just like the old colored man who said his dog didn’t eat 

meat. The fellow says, “Why don’t your dog eat meat?” He said, “My dog don’t eat meat because I 

don’t give him any.” A lot of these people don’t work because we don’t provide them with jobs. It’s just 

as simple as that. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan — Rome wasn’t built in a day, Mr. Speaker. I am sure there are many things 

that still need to be settled but a determined effort is being made by my seatmate. The organizations are 

being set up now, it is a new way to go, it is an adventurous way to go, it’s an expensive way to go for 

the time being, but certainly it is better than sitting there and doing nothing. The late Woodrow Lloyd 

said in this House one time, “It is better to light one small candle than to sit and curse the darkness.” I 

refer that particular statement to the gentlemen opposite. Let us just give these things a chance because if 

you are going to have a new way, if you are going to break new ground. There may be the odd farmer 

sitting across there — when you break new ground it is pretty rough at first. There are a few roots and 

stones that need to be picked and the soil has to be worked down and mulched before you can grow a 

crop. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that we need a little patience and above all we need some sensible 

co-operation if we are going to get out of this rotten morass. It isn’t peculiar to Saskatchewan. The cost 

is 25 per cent higher in Alberta per man than it is here. The problem is, as the Minister of Welfare said, 

we have to have a sharing program that is going to reward provinces when they create work and wage 

programs. We had some 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

338 

of those back in 1964 that were thrown to the winds by the people opposite when they got into power. 

There were sawmill operations; there were wood clearing operations and various other things. The 

rusting axes are still lying in the brush or were a couple of years ago up in the Meadow Lake Park 

because people were told before the election, “We wouldn’t make you work.” We have got to drum 

politics out of this business, forget about it. We have got to handle this thing in a constructive basis so 

that we can present both federally, provincially and politically a united front and tell these people, 

“Look, here is a program, and it doesn’t matter which government is in power, you are going to have to 

adhere to it in order to pull yourselves out of the hole.” 

 

May I say that I am proud to support this Speech from the Throne because of the forward-looking 

programs and the kind of work that my colleague, Mr. Taylor, is doing. We will have later on this year a 

full-scale transportation conference which will take in Federal and Provincial Governments on property 

tax relief. I am again happy because I believe that we will this year, or next year, be very close to that 25 

mill reduction in education tax. It may be that again these people will squawk and cry and talk about the 

increase in income tax which is picayune unless you are in the $8,000 or $10,000 category and it is still 

picayune. A carton of cigarettes a month will pay it. I say this and so do a good many businessmen say 

this that if you earn you can pay but owning a vast amount of property Mr. Speaker, does not guarantee 

that you are going to have an income every year, especially if you are farming. Those taxes roll up, roll 

up and roll up on property if the income is not there. So if I had my choice it is going to be for income 

tax, even sales tax or gasoline tax because the indication is in most cases that you have the ability to pay. 

But to simply put tax and more tax on property regardless of whether that property is productive is just 

not good enough in this day and age. 

 

My colleague from Last Mountain in Education (Mr. MacMurchy) is making great strides. He is having 

a problem here and there convincing a few people and again if some of these politicians who have only 

politics in mind and not the good of the country would keep their nose out of it, I am sure Gordon would 

be getting along much better. So I am pleased with the education program. I still have six children in 

school and I am very interested in the education program. I am not happy generally and I say this as a 

parent, I am not happy with the total education program. I believe we pay too much for far too little and 

there has been far too much attention put on many things rather than on the nuts and bolts of a good 

education system. I am inclined to agree with some of the critics who say, maybe we have gone a bit too 

far with the frills and the frippery of education and maybe we had better be taking a good look and 

getting back to something sound and sensible. I don’t want to go back to the little red schoolhouse and 

the three ‘Rs’, but they had a lot going for them, Mr. Speaker, at that. Maybe it is somewhere in between 

if we could get back to a little more of a common-sense approach to this total education program. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is about time, I said I was only going to say a few words and that I hadn’t 

intended to speak in the first place. I hope I haven’t usurped the time of the House too much. I think it 

goes without saying that I will not be supporting the amendment but take great pleasure in supporting 

the motion. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

339 

Mr. E. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with those who have spoken before 

me to add my congratulations to the Members from Biggar, Kerrobert-Kindersley and Humboldt (Mr. 

Cowley, Mr. Taylor and Mr. Tchorzewski), for their elevation to their new responsibilities in the 

Cabinet. I am sure that their choice will be a popular one and is well deserved. I should also like to 

congratulate the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) who has returned to us for a second time. His fairy 

tales and horror stories will be enjoyed by all but will be believed by few. 

 

The Throne Speech this year once again highlights the importance of agriculture in the economy of 

Saskatchewan. with the return of more realistic prices for most of our farm products and the tremendous 

activity which has resulted from the improvement of farm income, proves again the great dependence 

for the well-being of not only the rural communities but also the larger centres in the Province of 

Saskatchewan on the viability of the farming industry. This recognition is borne out in the nature of 

legislation coming before the Session with regard to agriculture. It will be evident that we have 

embarked on a deliberate program to maintain and upgrade the rural communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was astounded last Friday when the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), who is from 

a rural constituency, launched his vicious and unfounded attack on the Land Bank program. Many of his 

statements were false and he knows they were false. His statements on the air were meant solely for the 

purpose of creating division in the country, just as he and his kind are attempting to create divisions in 

the country among the hog producers. Because he happens to have a viable farm unit which he can 

supplement with income from other sources and can get all the credit he needs, he conveniently forgets 

there are many less fortunate than himself who need help desperately. And, Mr. Speaker, we are 

prepared to give it to them in spite of the efforts of the Members opposite. He attempts to convince 

farmers that this Government has concocted some sinister plot to take over all the farms of 

Saskatchewan. Nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. We have provided in the Land 

Bank a convenient and inexpensive means of transferring land from one generation to another and 

providing a means whereby someone not now farming can get into the business without committing all 

of his assets to the purchase of land. Through the Option-to-Buy Agreement which is written right into 

the lease any farmer leasing land can purchase the land after five years. We will stand behind that 

commitment. His statements that we are conspiring to bring farm land under public ownership is as 

ridiculous as it is false. 

 

Last year when the Land Bank Bill was being debated the Members opposite were loud in their claims 

that the 6 1/2 per cent rental fee then proposed was too high and should be reduced. Now that the rate 

has been struck to 5 per cent are they pleased? Oh, no, Mr. Speaker, now they are violently protesting 

that the rate is too low. It was lowered because no one would rent the land and they continue to say it in 

spite of the fact that young men are lined up at the Land Bank Office daily for leases. Truly, Mr. 

Speaker, another evidence of Liberal logic. 

 

The response to the Land Bank program which our friends opposite would like us to believe is so 

unpopular has been almost unbelievable in my constituency of Saltcoats. To date 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

340 

at least 45 quarters of land has been purchased and at very satisfactory prices. I understand that the 

number of applications for the lease of these parcels far outnumber the land available. If this indicates 

rejection, Mr. Speaker, I hope all of our programs are as enthusiastically rejected. 

 

The constituency of Saltcoats, as most of you know, is in a Parkland area where farms are relatively 

small compared to the provincial average. However, we have one of the highest livestock concentrations 

in the province. Our cattle numbers, both in cow, calf and feedlot enterprises have risen sharply in the 

last few years. We also have many good, viable hog operations with sufficient size to make money for 

their operators. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that these farmers will appreciate the new FarmStart Program 

which is being brought forward into this Session. 

 

We have in common with most agricultural areas a large number of farmers who have now reached the 

age of retirement. Because their sons have not been able to get the credit they needed either to purchase 

the land or to expand into a viable livestock operation of sufficient size to ensure a decent income many 

have left the farm for what appeared to be more acceptable employment. Many of these young men 

would have preferred to remain on the farm. Now, in fact, with the Land Bank and the assistance they 

can get under the FarmStart Program I am sure many of them will consider returning to the farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier mentioned the other day that we are doing all we can to encourage the more 

complete processing of our farm products in our province. One of the major industries insofar as our 

area is concerned is the Milk Processing Plant at Yorkton. Because of the higher rainfall in our area and 

because of the abundance of pasture and forage crops we are particularly suited to take advantage of this 

new plant. We have many young farmers particularly in the area around Langenburg who are expanding 

their dairy operations to take care of this new market. With the new FarmStart Program now available I 

am sure many others will be considering this rewarding enterprise. 

 

These farmers also appreciate the efforts of the Department of Agriculture in making available to them 

at reasonable prices some of the high producing young cows from Eastern Canada which will aid them 

to become successful in the industry. 

 

Our farmers will also appreciate the substantial efforts being made by the department through their 

marketing development branch, both on their own and through the cost-sharing with marketing boards, 

marketing commissions, private groups and co-operatives. We feel that with proper promotion and with 

the establishment of a marketing commission to promote the orderly pricing and assembly of products 

we should be in a position to penetrate many new markets. A target of doubling our livestock output in 

ten years should not be unrealistic. 

 

Farmers will also appreciate the changes being proposed under the new Farm Implements Act which we 

hope will give them much more help in obtaining parts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of you will know that the I.M.C. Potash mine is in my constituency, the first major 

potash mine in Saskatchewan and the world’s largest. This company has now been 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

341 

in operation for over ten years and has become very much a part our community. The towns surrounding 

this operation have benefited over years from the payrolls which are generated from industry, both on its 

own, and through related satellite industries such as trucking fleets, mine supply companies, fabrication 

shops and so on. However, because it was one of the few non-unionized mines in Saskatchewan many 

problems arose with respect to job security, seniority, pensions and plant safety. 

 

This year the employees chose the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Union to be their bargaining agent and 

have been locked a struggle with the company since last July in an attempt to a proper labor contract. On 

January 15th the employees voted to go on strike in order to reinforce their bargaining team because no 

progress was being made on a contract. I am happy to report that only last Saturday a provisional 

settlement was reached. I should like to congratulate the company negotiators, the union representatives 

and the mediator sent out by the Department of Labour for the very responsible manner in which the 

negotiations were conducted. Hopefully the members will ratify the agreement and work at the plant can 

resume again. Many problems at the plant remain to be resolved. Last year I indicated that the working 

and safety conditions at K 1 plant were bad. Another year has come and gone and I am given to 

understand that they continue to deteriorate. Our safety inspectors have been lenient in the past because 

the management has indicated their intention of rebuilding the mill or building a new one. To date 

neither one has happened and I feel that this situation cannot be tolerated much longer. Some employees 

have told me that you need a map to know where it is safe to walk in some areas of the plant. 

 

In this connection, Mr. Speaker, the employees of the mine would like me to convey my congratulations 

to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) for bringing in The occupational Health and Safety Act. Since 

that time I understand committees have been going at the mine and hopefully some of the more glaring 

hazards will be taken care of. 

 

Another area of concern regarding the mining industry is the environmental aspect. It has been brought 

to my attention from time to time large amounts of highly mineralized water has been permitted to flow 

into Cutarm Creek which runs immediately north of both K 1 and K 11 mines. I have here, Mr. Speaker, 

an analysis of water which was permitted to escape into the creek last spring east of the plant. The 

sample contains a high concentration of sodium, potassium and chloride. I understand this water drained 

into the creek for several weeks. Because the Cutarm Creek is a tributary of the Qu’Appelle River which 

eventually flows into the Assiniboine in Manitoba and because both K 1 and K 11 plants as well as 

Sylvite at Rocanville are situated immediately above these watersheds, you can readily see what an 

impact contamination in this area can have. 

 

I have requested the Department of the Environment to do a comprehensive study of all the 

environmental problems which are connected with this area, and I am certain they will make some major 

recommendations for improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that residents in my constituency will welcome the new legislation being 

proposed to provide a new and better grant structure for the building of homes and the remodelling of 

older homes. Senior citizens particularly 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

342 

will welcome the assistance they will be receiving under the new Senior Citizens Housing Provisions. In 

many of our rural communities, a large part of the population consists of retired couples many of whom 

are living in what can best be described as mediocre housing. This program will give them an 

opportunity to upgrade their homes at very little cost, so that they can enjoy their retirement in more 

pleasant surroundings. 

 

They will also be pleased to hear of the very substantially increased Home Improvement Grant being 

provided for this year. Through this program we will have come very close to meeting our election 

commitment of reducing taxes payable on property for education to 25 mills — a very major shift 

indeed for property owners. 

 

I should like to congratulate the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) for his very excellent program, the 

new Open Roads program introduced last year. Through this program a number of villages have already 

been connected to a main highway system and several others are going to be added this year. I can 

assure the Minister that this program is very much appreciated by all rural Members. We are hopeful 

that within the next 12 months a comprehensive oil grid network can be agreed upon so that we can 

proceed with oiling on some of our major grids. 

 

We are fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have two major areas in our constituency where tourist development 

can take place. With the completion of paving of the Yellowhead Highway this year we are confident 

that the number of tourists coming through our area will increase substantially. This will be of benefit to 

many of our people who provide services to the travelling public, such as service stations, motels and 

trailer camps. 

 

The Qu’Appelle Basin study is now complete and recognizes the recreational potential of that beautiful 

valley which borders my constituency to the south. I was very happy to see the enthusiasm with which 

the Minister proposed that we should have a highway through that area. I was just going to suggest that 

to him. 

 

The Premier indicated in his address that employment figures in the province have improved 

substantially. This is certainly true in our area. We have many communities which have taken advantage 

of our winter employment program and in those areas I do not believe there is one person who is willing 

and able to work who is not able to obtain employment. Unfortunately, some communities have not 

taken advantage of this program, but even in those areas the number of job seekers has declined. The 

assistance made available under the housing program has encouraged a large number of people to 

upgrade their homes and build new ones. Our construction people tell me they have sufficient work 

ahead to keep them busy all year. Some have had to take on extra help to meet the demand, a far cry Mr. 

Speaker, from the stagnation and demoralization in that industry under the previous administration in the 

late 1960s and into 1971. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe a great deal more needs to be done to upgrade the recreational and environmental 

facilities of our rural communities and indeed in our cities as well. Far better to provide meaningful 

employment through a subsidized works program than to pay out huge sums in welfare and 

unemployment insurance. It is regrettable that some communities will, 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

343 

through devious methods, seek to circumvent the intent of these employment programs and will use 

people already fully employed to carry out these projects when others desperately need those pay 

cheques. Hopefully, future regulations can be more strictly enforced so that all unemployed persons are 

given top priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to tell the Members of a new and a unique industry which has grown up in the 

town of Esterhazy Sapara Brothers of Esterhazy have over the past few years started a sauerkraut plant, 

known as Sapara Foods. We were pleased last year, through the Department of Industry, to assist them 

to expand their operations. This company started operations a few years ago producing a very superior 

sauerkraut and cabbage product, which they began marketing as a specialty in resort areas in Alberta. 

Since that time the popularity of their product has grown and they have had to expand their operations 

and their line of products. They now sell a variety of cabbage and sauerkraut specialties, both canned 

and frozen over much of the Prairies and are now going into the production of cabbage rolls. I am sure 

that the Member from Prince Albert East would enjoy those. Sapara Foods now employ up to 20 people 

and are processing over 250 tons of cabbage per year. They have markets in Vancouver, Edmonton, 

Toronto and are now starting to sell in the United States. Since much of their cabbage is now imported 

from outside the province, it would seem logical that we should attempt to establish a few small cabbage 

production units in the local area to take care of this market. I am advised that they could use up to 500 

acres of cabbage. A good crop of cabbage they tell me will bring about $500 per acre. You will know, 

Mr. Speaker, from what I have said that I will be supporting the motion and will be voting against the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The amendment was negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 14 
 

Steuart MacDonald (Milestone) McPherson 

Coupland McIsaac Lane 

Loken Gardner MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) 

Guy Weatherald Wiebe 

Grant MacLeod  

 

NAYS — 34 

 

Blakeney MacMurchy Richards 

Dyck Pepper Gross 

Meakes Michayluk Feduniak 

Wood Byers Mostoway 

Smishek Thorson Comer 

Romanow Whelan Rolfes 

Messer Engel Hanson 

Snyder Owens Oliver 

Bowerman Robbins Feschuk 

Kramer Taylor Kaeding 

Thibault Matsalla Flasch 

Larson   



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

344 

The debate continued on the motion. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to get this opportunity in the Throne 

Speech debate, I had to suffer through a long afternoon and an even longer evening, but I think in the 

long run it will be worth it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with a few of the things that Members have been bringing up and in 

particular one or two of the comments brought up by the Minister of Natural Resources — the Minister 

of Highways — well they did have a pretty fast shuffle over there and I haven’t quite sorted them all 

out. In any event, the Minister of Highways   

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: —   in his usual fashion got under way and talked about political appointments. I’ll 

give him one from the Parks system, the construction superintendent at Battleford. You can try that one. 

If you want to talk about a political appointment you can try on the construction superintendent at 

Battleford Park. If you didn’t make it, your seatmate did. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Table his name! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — You know his name, I don’t have to table his name. Look at the job classification 

yourself. The job is there, you know what it is and I know what it is   You can look it up yourself. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! There’s too much noise! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go onto another accusation the Minister likes to throw 

around. It was about Crown land this time, it was about the land that he alleges that couldn’t be bought. I 

happened to be here at that time. I’ll tell you why the individual couldn’t buy it. Because it was contrary 

to The Legislative Assembly Act at the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — He knows it, we know it, and everybody else in this Assembly now knows it. That 

is why he wasn’t able to buy the Crown land at that time, because it was contrary to The Legislative 

Assembly Act. He gets up and tries to make a big man of himself and tells everybody it was because he 

was NDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we might even start to believe all this stuff we get from the Opposition benches 

about freedom and good rights   or from the Government Benches   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Sorry about that. We may even start to believe all this we get from the 

Government Benches   I want to read you a 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

345 

letter that came into my possession. This happens to include both the Premier and the Attorney General 

in the contents, I think most Members will find it most interesting. 

 

A short time ago I signed a contract to be licence issuer. I wrote and asked the Commission involved 

and was told that there wasn’t any remuneration. I then replied that I wasn’t interested in taking the 

appointment without pay. Today I had a visitor, he didn’t introduce himself, perhaps he was ashamed. 

I was told by this man that if I wasn’t willing to work for his department without pay I would lose my 

job as licence issuer with your department. 

 

There is a word for this, and I believe it is blackmail. Have you authorized these tactics? Well I could go 

on with the letter   

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Table it! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I will. You got a copy as a matter of fact, it is written to you. It is addressed, Mr. 

A. Blakeney, Premier of Saskatchewan, I’ll be pleased to table it. That’s fine. Apparently the answer to 

the letter didn’t go too well together because she sent me the same copy as you got. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, I think that these types of things are showing up pretty rapidly under this 

Government. We can take another example of the political patronage which I intend to go into at greater 

length sometime in the near future. For example, today it came to my knowledge, through a question 

which was asked recently in the Legislature here. I think it exhibits the extent to which through 

Government control, political patronage and handling of the news media, the extent to which they are 

willing to go. When we were on our legislative committee on corporate Foreign ownership of Land, we 

noticed that there was a person (not a Member) constantly attending these meetings. We asked what his 

work was, we asked what his name was. He was Graham Barker. This is what he did according to the 

answer that we got. Mr. Barker was employed in the Planning and Research Branch of the Department 

of Agriculture, August 9 to December 29, 1972, as an Information Officer II, at which time he resigned. 

He is now employed with Information Services, as of January 31, 1973. I got that information today. Mr. 

Barker’s job, it turned out, was to attend all the Foreign Ownership Land Committee hearings, attended 

at Leader, Gull Lake, Shaunavon, Weyburn, Saskatoon, Melfort, Wynyard, Kamsack and Regina. You 

know what Mr. Barker’s job was? It was to report on the foreign ownership of land hearings for the 

Government of Saskatchewan to all the small radio stations in this province. Mr. Speaker, paid political 

propaganda for the Government of Saskatchewan! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — What is more, Mr. Speaker, one man suggested to me, that Mr. Barker was a good 

reporter, he is neutral. He is the first neutral reporter that has never said hello to anybody in the 

Opposition benches in a year and a half. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Barker knows which side his bread is buttered 

on, we know it, and to think that he could put out a news broadcast to cover 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

346 

legislative committee hearings is purely ridiculous and it exhibits the extent to which this Government is 

ready to manage the news media if it is at all possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we come to the Premier because we had some difficulty and I expect that we will have 

considerable difficulty in this Session, Mr. Speaker, on knowing just when a Bill presented by the 

Premier is a Bill. It is with interest that I picked up the Potash Miner Journal, and on his non-political 

campaign, the Premier sitting there with his MLA, which is perfectly legitimate, the Member of 

Parliament for Yorkton-Melville which I don’t think was quite as legitimate, on a Provincial Premier’s 

tour which was supposed to be non-political. I didn’t see any Conservatives there sitting at the front with 

him. Anyway, it did turn out to be in the Potashville Miner Journal. It turned out that a question was 

asked of the Premier, if the Government intended to introduce any more Bills such as the Foreign 

Ownership Bill, which they didn’t have any intention of passing. The Premier replied that they may 

introduce some more bills for discussion purposes. He will now have to tell us and the people of 

Saskatchewan which bills he really intends on passing and which ones are just for discussion purposes 

only. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — When, Mr. Speaker, the Premier introduced the Foreign Ownership of Land Bill, I 

do know that his basic intelligence told him that it should have been a White Paper rather than a Bill at 

that particular time. He back-tracked pretty fast and we are pleased that he did. He should have 

back-tracked a little quicker. Maybe he will do so in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to use another example, while we are on the subject of political appointments. I 

might say that NDP candidates have not done too well in eastern Saskatchewan in elections politically, 

but extremely well financially once they lose. This is particularly true of Cannington, Moosomin and 

Qu’Appelle Moose Mountain, because in all three cases they have come to their reward practically 

immediately after the election. Their political activities haven’t exactly ceased though, because Mr. 

Buck the candidate who got appointed to the job in the Department of Industry also turns out to be the 

NDP representative on the Federal Council. He is certainly continuing his political work at a fairly 

ample reward at about $13,000. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where is he working? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I think he is working downstairs in the Department of Finance, part time when he 

isn’t at his political activities. Let us talk about the NDP candidate in Cannington. This is taken from the 

front page of the Carlyle Observer, this is what the Carlyle paper had to say reporting the Cannington 

NDP convention, on Wednesday, August 17th. 

 

Jim Eaton, provincial council member reported on caucus meetings and his work in the constituency. 

 

Mr. Eaton happens to be the same man that was appointed and is in the civil service, but apparently just 

how he had time off and came down to report on political meetings in his provincial 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

347 

Council work and his activities in the NDP caucus, I am not quite sure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I might add, Mr. Speaker, that there are many taxpayers in Saskatchewan who read 

this article in the Carlyle paper on the front page. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — On a Point of Privilege. I didn’t quite catch the 

date. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, it is the August 17, 1972 edition of the Carlyle Observer. 

 

Mr. Wood: — August 17, 1972? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Right. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — What’s the name? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Jim Eaton, the same man who is head of the Emergency Measures Organization. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Jack Eaton! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — No, no, no. Jim Eaton. I’ll table the copy of the article. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We’ll take no responsibility for the Carlyle Observer, but I’ll tell you one thing for 

sure   

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We know your record with newspapers all right. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Jack Eaton is the councillor and you know it. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Jack Eaton? Well I only read what   

 

Mr. Blakeney: — You know it is a different man altogether. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: I don’t know it is a different man at all. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Oh yes you do! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, the article says, Jim Eaton, provincial council. It doesn’t say Jack 

Eaton, I don’t usually go to the NDP conventions. I did not! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I’ll tell you something. 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

348 

It never even occurred to me till you bring it up. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — You go ahead and check. I’ll produce two or three more. I can show you two or 

three more that say the same thing. As a matter of fact, Mr. Premier, the secretary of the NDP sent this 

copy in. If there is a misprint that’s her fault. I think, Mr. Speaker, that according to the various 

comments made by people around the constituency when they read the article, I don’t think there was 

much doubt in their minds as to who was referred to in the article. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can come to some comments of the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) today. I 

think one of the most revealing comments which the Member from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) brought up to 

date was the Minister’s actions on the Hog Marketing Board. It’s been quoted once but I think it’s well 

worth the second time, Mr. Speaker. When the Minister introduced his changes in setting up the Hog 

Marketing Commission no mention was made whatsoever of his intentions that he has used to carry it 

out, in which he said: 

 

The need for a commission I think can be better outlined if in the future the need for quick action by 

government to correct or improve a deteriorating market condition arises. 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

I think a good example would be the feed grains threat that was apparent last fall. 

 

Then he goes on in great detail which is available to all Members to read, but nowhere in it did the 

Minister ever mention the suggestion that he would be taking away rights of individual producers to 

decide their own fate. When it was taken at face value, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Members in this 

Assembly did not really expect that he would embark on the type of action that he has because he never 

suggested that he would when he introduced that change last winter. Now he backtracks on the Hog 

Marketing Commission on the basis that he has the support of some individual organizations. 

 

Well, I want to deal with that, Mr. Speaker, because it is well known in our province and well known 

amongst farmers that there are many farmers who do not consider themselves to be represented in farm 

organizations of any kind. These farmers are hard working individuals who work seven days a week if 

they are involved in a hog marketing operation. They are not great public speakers or debaters. They 

don’t go to marketing meetings, Wheat Pool meetings and farm organization meetings of the NFU or 

hog marketing boards. They do not feel willing or able to fight great resolutions through and make their 

views known. I want to make one thing very clear, Mr. Speaker. These people do believe that they do 

have the capability and intelligence to make their decision on whether they should market hogs in this 

manner or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Farmers in this province have not abdicated their 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

349 

rights to the leadership of any farm organization, Mr. Speaker, and they never should. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — And I want to make that very clear to the Minister backtracks and rests on the false 

assumption that because he has the support of some of the officials of various organizations that we 

accept what he says on that particular version. It’s a pretty weak argument, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pretty 

weak argument to say that just because the leaders of the farm organizations made these suggestions that 

he is unwilling and incapable. To think that of all the power in the Government, of money, people and 

personnel, they are unwilling to even go out and sell a program that they apparently believe in. That has 

got to be one of the weakest arguments that has ever been put forward in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — They had information officers in the Committee. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, I guess that’s true, Mr. Speaker. As my colleagues say, we had an 

information officer to follow us around the province on our hearings but apparently we ran out of 

information officers or people who conduct meetings. 

 

Also the Minister this afternoon talked at length about what the Government has done for agriculture. 

Let’s take a look. Let’s take a look, Mr. Speaker, at what the Government’s program for agriculture 

really has been. Well, we got The Family Farm protection Act which we are all familiar with. We are all 

very familiar with the faults that were in it and the difficulties. Pretty nearly everyone in Saskatchewan 

hopes they never hear about it. I am sure this includes the Premier because he never mentions it when he 

goes out somewhere. Then we got The Foreign ownership of Land Act which nobody over on the 

Government side knew if it was a Bill or a White Paper and they found out that it shouldn’t be a Bill 

because it was kind of unpopular and they knew that everyone in Saskatchewan knew that it had the 

approval of the Caucus and the Government and just about everybody over there but then they decided it 

was a pretty hot potato so they dropped it real fast. 

 

Apparently we are not going to have a vote by hog producers because the Government thinks they don’t 

have the basic intelligence to see a good plan when there is one put into operation. Then we have the 

Land Bank plan, and Mr. Speaker, there is one thing I want to say about the Land Bank plan. The 

Government tells us that we should have the courage or whatever it may take to accept the plan. 

 

Let’s take a look at this Government’s record in political patronage in appointments. Let’s take a look. 

And then I ask you, Mr. Speaker, on what basis should we accept the idea of the Government’s basic 

goodwill as far as the Land Bank plan is concerned? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

350 

Mr. Weatherald: — We’ve got political appointments from one end of the Government to the other, 

Mr. Speaker. And yet the Government when they set up the Land Bank plan have it set up so they can 

make all appointments right from top to the bottom. The head man, the vice president, the second vice 

president, the third vice president, 12 regional directors and six men underneath them. Mr. Speaker, if 

there was a real good record by this Government of appointments then there might be some basis for 

them to say, accept our word that no political involvement will be taking place. Mr. Speaker, this 

Government’s record is bad in that direction and that is exactly why we should never, we should never 

accept the bureaucratic administrative set-up that is made in the Land Bank program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Then, Mr. Speaker, we have about two other items put forward by the Government 

which was supposed to help farmers and one was The Succession Duty Act. I was amazed, Mr. Speaker, 

because the Premier, during the federal election campaign — I don’t have the clipping right at hand, but 

he did go out and he said, “0h, the Federal capital gains tax is a terrible thing on farmers. It’s a terrible 

thing. It should be eliminated, done away with.” No capital gains tax, especially, Mr. Speaker, if the 

land stays within the family. If it stays within the family we should do away with that capital gains tax. 

How can one man apparently say that we should do away with the capital gains tax and at the same time 

slap on the Succession Duty Tax on the very same person? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He wants to get it all. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, apparently one of the great disadvantages of this Succession Duty 

Tax as many people are finding out is that there is only a $25,000 exemption between partners. As we 

all know, there are many partnerships around the province and, of course, this has worked a hardship on 

them in keeping the land and the farm in the family. As we well mentioned at the time, it is a tax against 

people who make their living from property which is a most unfair tax because they frequently, as one 

Member just a little while ago told us, they have a very low income, they make a low income from 

property. And yet, apparently the Government has decided they should be taxed fairly heavily with 

Succession Duty Tax. 

 

Mr. Messer: — There’s a $200,000 exemption. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, Mr. Speaker, $200,000 doesn’t make much difference if you’ve got to keep 

it for the next 100 years to keep the family farming. It isn’t worth much that way. That’s why the tax on 

the family farm   

 

Mr. Messer: — About five per cent. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — No, no! That’s just what you know about it. If you add up machinery and 

livestock, 100 head of cows is worth about $40,000 these days, if you add that on top of land and 

machinery, you 



 

February 5, 1973 

 

 

351 

would hit the target pretty quickly. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we have the agricultural program of the Government that they talked about this 

afternoon — The Family Farm protection Act, The Foreign Ownership of Land Act, and we are not 

going to get a vote on the hog producers because the Government doesn’t think they are smart enough to 

be able to decide if it’s good for them. Then we’ve got a Land Bank in which we have political 

appointments from top to bottom, The succession Duty Act. The administration to run the Land Bank is 

$700,000 this year. So, Mr. Speaker, if you add all this agricultural program of the Government up, it’s a 

pretty sad state of affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — If it hadn’t been for the Federal Government assisting and Minister in Charge of 

the Wheat Board assisting, well, they (the present Provincial Government) would be in pretty sad shape 

altogether. 

 

Before adjourning this evening I want to say that I picked up an extract (some of the Hon. Members 

were with me on the committee trip) but I brought it home with me because I was afraid everyone may 

not have read it. We all know that the people opposite will certainly take the words of well-known labor 

leaders. I picked this up on our travels, a labor leader’s opinion of socialism by Samuel Gompers. I’m 

sure the Members opposite put a lot of faith in him. This is the way he starts out. He says: 

 

I want to tell you socialists that I studied your philosophy, read your works upon economics and not 

the meanest of them all, studied your works in both English and German. I have not only read them 

but I studied them. I have heard your orators and watched the work of your movement the world over. 

I kept close watch on your doctrines for 30 years. I have been closely associated with many of you and 

know how you work and what you propose. I know too what you have up your sleeve. And I want to 

say that I am entirely at variance with your philosophy. I declare to you that I am not only of variance 

with your doctrine but with your philosophy. 

 

Mr. Gompers goes on: 

 

Economically you are unsound, socially you are wrong, and industrially you are an impossibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sure with those words, that the Members opposite will be 

able to contemplate a well-known labor leader’s opinion on socialism which I am sure we on this side at 

least would believe wholeheartedly. With that, Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask leave to adjourn for this 

evening. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:10 o’clock p.m. 


