



















































Hansard: March 05, 1973


1317 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Monday, March 5, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to you and all Members 

of this House, two groups of students from Regina North West. 

 

The first group is located in the west gallery and consists of 56 Grade Eight students from Sherwood 

School. Their teachers Heather Hewson and Russell Marchuk are with them. This school is very close to 

my home and students from my immediate neighborhood are in this class and are in attendance in the 

gallery. 

 

The second group consists of 20 adult students from St. Pat’s Annex, Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Arts and Science. They are located in the Speaker’s Gallery with their teachers, Ruth Coulter and Bill 

Lewchyshyn. 

 

On behalf of all Members, a warm welcome to these citizens and their teachers and may their visit here 

be pleasant, informative, and an introduction to the democratic process. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Answer to Question on Farm Surveys 
 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like 

to respond to a question from the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) in connection with the 

Department of Agriculture officials holding secret meetings around the province to recruit people to 

inform on their neighbors. 

 

I refer to a question asked February 27 where the Member said he was receiving very disturbing reports 

that the Department of Agriculture officials are holding meetings quietly around the province to recruit 

people to inform on their neighbors. 

 

I have a copy here of the manual and the forms being used. They are interesting and such questions as, 

and I am continuing to quote the Member: 

 

“Does the farmer spend the winder in Florida?” Which is not a question on the questionnaire. “Is he 

living commonlaw?” Which is not a question on the questionnaire. “Does he or his wife work off the 

farm? Does he have some other business interest?” His age and so on He goes on and I quote: 

 

I would like to know are these surveys and these spy schools being held with the permission under the 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1318 

authority of the Minister of Agriculture? 

 

I told him that I would bring an answer to that question to the House at a later date. I should like to state 

that the farm reconnaissance survey, which is the one that the questionnaire is being developed for, is 

being carried out by the Agricultural Board members. No Government body gave guidance to the 

survey. Parties interested in the survey, namely, the University of Saskatchewan and both the federal and 

provincial agencies assisted by only sharing the cost and other needs that the district board members felt 

were necessary. 

 

The Department of Agriculture has always suffered from a lack of accurate and complete information 

about the types of farms and the changes that are constantly taking place. Federal census information 

does not supply information about the size of farms or the farmer’s increasing land base, what type of 

operator has increased livestock production and what age group is increasing livestock production. 

 

The survey originated from an idea by Mr. Darrel Rumpel, a Moose Jaw area farmer who is also director 

at large for his AG District. Working within his own RM of Redburn No. 108 a survey was done to find 

out if there was a problem, and if so, to what degree in relationship to age of farmers and the potential 

carry on of operators associated with farm units. 

 

The information gathered by the survey was generally held to be valuable. Farm organizations and 

several government agencies including Health, Education, Municipal Affairs, Central Planning and 

Research expressed support for a survey of that type covering the whole province. 

 

A committee of four farmers and Mr. Rumpel as chairman were selected to carry out the survey. A total 

of 76 RMs were selected and then approached by Mr. Rumpel and his field staff. The survey program 

was explained to each council member who was asked to participate. If the council decided to go ahead 

with the program they were left with the necessary forms. Each councillor filled out a questionnaire for 

each farm unit in his division. These were later collected and checked and coded by the field men. 

 

The information collected was not of personal nature or in any way related to the fiscal nature of a farm 

unit operation. 

 

1. Size and type of farm. Acreage owned and rented. Type of enterprise. Number and type of livestock. 

2. Changes in operation. Changes in the last five years in land base, land use and livestock numbers. 

3. Chief and additional operators’ ages, family responsibilities, resident on or off the farm, amount of 

time operator and wife spent on farm. Number of potential operators over 16 and interested in farming. 

 

Information which was collected is already basically common knowledge to anyone in the local area. A 

handbook was given to people conducting the survey in their areas. It suggested how best to answer 

some of the questions if some doubt did arise between those conducting the survey and those being 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1319 

asked to supply the answers. 

 

The response to the survey was exceptional and I should like to quote from a statement by the chairman 

of the committee, Mr. Rumpel, and he quotes: 

 

The response has been tremendous in most areas. We completed a large portion of the RMs with many 

councils and AG committees doing a fantastic job of calling on every farm unit in their division. They 

experienced tremendous co-operation from farm unit operators. In many cases the reeve, RM 

secretaries, most AG committee members and councillors, and most important of all, many of the 

ratepayers all felt this type of approach was long overdue. 

 

The only cause for concern among some of the farm operators is that the program is now perhaps 

going to be dropped and that the data that could be of great importance to farm operators will not be 

available. 

 

We did encounter a few small problems where we felt an individual tried to bring into the program 

party politics. In such cases we left them out of the survey because we did not want to create any hard 

feelings. Any RM that did not want to participate in the survey were also left out of the program for the 

same reason. 

 

In summary, therefore, Mr. Speaker, the questionnaire was designed to tell us what type of farm the 

operator was farming; what type and need of help and how many operators can we expect to participate 

in new programs. In the light of this information that I have made available to this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, I humbly ask that the Members of the Opposition endorse and co-operate with this program 

which is being carried out, not by the Government of Saskatchewan or the Department of Agriculture, 

but by local farm organizations in the province. 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, if I just may reply to the long delayed answer on this 

question by the Minister. 

 

You might recall that this was asked last Tuesday which will be one week tomorrow and we waited very 

patiently for the answer. You might note also that I don’t know whether the Minister has seen the survey 

manual, but if I may be permitted a couple of quick quotes from it. 

 

We would like to know if this operator has any family responsibilities, if he is married or living 

commonlaw. 

 

And again: 

 

He might spend the winters in a neighboring town or even Florida. Fill in the appropriate blank. 

 

You might note another place in this: 

 

We suggest that you use a pencil. It is easier to erase. Thank you for your co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we still believe that the questions and subjects in the manual and some on the form are 

objectionable 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1320 

to many farmers. We understand that the reception has been very poor, not good, as the Minister has 

indicated. We understand also and the Minister can correct me if I am wrong on this, that the person that 

he mentioned who is responsible for doing this survey is an employee of the Provincial Government of 

Agriculture and as such is responsible to the Minister and this makes the Minister responsible for the 

survey. 

 

Now it is one thing to have a survey done on the number of cattle in a municipality or something of this 

nature, and of course, we have no objection to this. This is perfectly in order. But it is quite another thing 

to have information of this type asked in a survey and in the hands of the Department of Agriculture, 

provincially, because we don’t know whether this NDP Government will use these for some of the Land 

Bank schemes or some of the other projects that they have in mind. I don’t think that he should be 

standing here trying to shift the blame on the rural municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Presentation of Tie to Mr. MacDonald 
 

Hon. Mr. Cowley (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I have a few 

words to say on a much lighter note. On Friday we were successful in taking up a very large collection 

over here and we have been able to purchase a very beautiful tie which I should like a page to pick up 

and deliver to the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). I hope that the Member will be able to 

keep it in his desk and when he is in a rush to get to work sometime in the future and forgets his tie, we 

will have the pleasure of watching him tie his tie in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to thank the Minister of Finance (Mr. 

Cowley). It is another typical example of the NDP give-away programs. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Re: Manual of Survey 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the member from Moosomin’s interpretation of the 

manual he referred to, I should just like for the clarification of the House to read all of what he referred 

to partially. It says: 

 

I would like to know if this operator has any family responsibilities. If he is married or living 

commonlaw. 

He is married. 

 

If for any reason he is supporting a family. 

He is married. 

 

If he was never married or widowed, divorced or legally separated with no one left to support legally 

and not 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1321 

including other persons. 

He is single. 

 

So it just asks what you take into consideration if you are married, as far as the questionnaire is 

concerned or whether you are single. 

 

Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture can make up all 

the new manuals he wants but we have a copy and we tabled it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Table it then. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We did, we already tabled it. And I challenge you to look at it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Exactly what the Minister said and not what the Member says. 

 

Tabling of all Documents Pertaining to Intercontinental Packers 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, on another point. It has come to my attention that Mr. A.E. Gedge of 

Saskatoon is both a member of the Board of SEDCO, the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation and has been for some months and is also the Comptroller or a senior financial officer with 

Intercontinental Packers. Now this is, to say the least, a serious conflict of interest and could even imply 

collusion between SEDCO and Intercontinental Packers. I ask the Premier if he will immediately table 

all correspondence and all documents pertaining to this deal. I think this is most serious that a member 

of the Board of SEDCO and a senior official of this company, for which the people of this province were 

just informed we paid $10.2 million which I think truth will show will be an outrageous sum, sits on the 

Board of SEDCO. 

 

This is a most serious situation and it casts a cloud over this sale. I think the Premier has a responsibility 

to table this document immediately. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The Leader of the Opposition will note that there are six motions on the 

Order Paper for Orders For Return discussing different phases of Intercontinental Packers. 

 

When a motion is on the Order Paper this precludes discussion at this time on it. The six motions for 

Orders for Return will give a wide range of discussion at that time and we cannot discuss it now. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at that and you listen to what I say, there is nothing in those 

motions, no relationship in those motions to the question that I just asked the Premier, that is to table all 

documents pertaining to this deal, including what part, if any, this man who is on both boards, is with 

both these companies on both sides of the fence, played in this role. I think the Premier has the 

responsibility to 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1322 

give this answer to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would advise the Leader of the Opposition that these Motions For Return do ask for 

the tabling of the documents. I don’t know what all is included in these documents, but your verbal 

question asking that all the documents be tabled, these ask for documents being tabled. So I would rule it 

out of order at this time and if you don’t get the information that you need at that time you can put a 

further order on the Order Paper for the information. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier then comment on this very, very serious . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I rule it out of order. You can’t comment on something that I have ruled 

out of order because it is already on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I am asking a totally different question if you will listen to me. 

 

I have asked if the Premier will comment. There is nothing in those questions that I have asked, nothing 

in those Orders For Return that says anything about the directorship. I am asking if he would now care 

to comment on the fact that this man is both on the Board of Directors for SEDCO and is a senior officer 

of this company and was involved or was he involved in the negotiations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the question asked by the Leader of the Opposition — question, if 

we can dignify it with that word — is whether or not Mr. Gedge or any other person serves both on the 

Board of SEDCO or is associated with the company doing business with SEDCO. 

 

In the case of Mr. Gedge the answer is, yes. And in the case of a good number of other people in the 

history of SEDCO the answer has been, yes. 

 

I want to advise the House that the current Board of SEDCO includes Mr. Turvey who is the President 

of IPSCO. I want to advise that House if SEDCO wants to make a loan to IPSCO and thinks it is good 

business, we will make a loan to IPSCO. I want . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Paid five times too much money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — You will have a full opportunity to debate the Intercontinental deal on the 

Resolutions that are on the Order Paper. I do not intend to do that, I intend to abide by the Speaker’s 

ruling. But I am now talking about this question of conflict of interest. And I am saying to you that there 

have been many instances where there was a potential conflict of interest. We believe there will be many 

others since we are frequently getting on the Board of SEDCO top businessmen of this province. They 

will have business interests. So long as they disclose those 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1323 

interests and do not in any way participate in the decisions made by the SEDCO Board I see absolutely 

nothing wrong with it and I, for my part, think that the Leader of the Opposition would be better advised 

not to smear leading businessmen in this province like Mr. Gedge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, they can pound all they want but they can’t drown out the truth. Let the 

Premier name one other instance where a member of the Board of SEDCO is also a senior official of a 

company where they bought 45 per cent or a major interest in the company. There is not one other single 

instance in the history of this province. You can’t name one. It is a conflict of interest and you have a 

responsibility to table those documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — You will have an opportunity to make a similar speech but that certainly was no 

question or a supplementary question. Of course he can say that in no case have we bought 45 per cent 

interest because this is the first time we have. But can he say that in a similar instance no loans have 

been made, of course he cannot. He knows and I know that on many occasions loans have been made to 

companies in which members of the Board have an interest and I review those minutes and I see time 

after time a director saying he is not going to participate in this decision because he may be auditor or 

because he may be associated. Now it may be that Members opposite assert that they ran SEDCO 

without any such conflict of interest. It may be. I don’t know whether that’s true or not. I say it wasn’t 

true before ’64; it isn’t true now and I make no apology for recruiting to that board the best businessmen 

we can get . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . . and if they happen to have an interest in a company having dealings with 

SEDCO, so long as these interests are disclosed, there’s no possible objection. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! We can’t permit this any further. I recognize the Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — I think it only appropriate that I should 

say a word or two since I am Chairman of the Board of SEDCO. I think the House would want to know 

that Mr. Gedge has been serving on the SEDCO Board as a Director since the beginning of this year, 

that he has attended two meetings of the Board, one in January and one in February. I think the House 

would want to know that Mr. Gedge did not participate in any way with the SEDCO Directors or anyone 

in the Government in the discussions within the Government leading to the decision to enter into 

negotiations with Intercontinental Packers Limited and did not participate in any way on behalf of the 

Government or influence the Government in 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1324 

any way in making a decision or influence the Board of Directors of SEDCO in any way in entering into 

this very sound contractual relationship with the Mendel family to buy an interest in Intercontinental 

Packers. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) is on record with his own words that he doesn’t want to 

check any facts before he opens his mouth because then he won’t have anything to say. He’s living up to 

his own reputation. He’s making accusations and allegations without any substance or fact and he is 

trying to blacken the name and reputation of the Mendel family as well as Mr. Gedge and he is not going 

to get away with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister can make a statement before 

the Orders of the Day then I can answer it. 

 

Let me say that I did not smear Mr. Gedge. I asked a question and if he is saying, which the Premier 

would not, that Mr. Gedge had absolutely nothing to do with these negotiations then I take that as 

evidence and I thank him and I wait for the proof when and if we get any of these documents laid on the 

table. 

 

As far as smearing the name of the Mendel family, again, I dispute that. I have not smeared the name of 

the Mendel family. I have said that they are a very respected family in this province, in this community. 

All I said is that when the facts are all out we’re going to find out that they sold an interest in this 

company to this NDP Government, they sold it for about two or three times what it was worth and 

you’re the suckers. They are the people that made a good deal for themselves and I don’t blame them 

and that’s not smearing them. If you people are so stupid that you paid $10.2 million for something 

that’s worth about $4 million, it’s not Mr. Mendel’s fault, that’s your fault. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think this has gone far enough. The Minister of the Environment . . . 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Foam Lake Curling Champions 
 

Hon. Mr. Byers (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, last Monday I advised all Members of 

the House that the Foam Lake Composite School girls curling team would be one of four teams 

competing in the Provincial High School Girls’ Curling Final. This Provincial Final Curling competition 

was held at Foam Lake last Friday and Saturday. High School rinks competing included Moose Jaw 

Central Collegiate and Saskatoon Nutana Collegiate, Meath Park High School and Foam Lake 

Composite School. 

 

It gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to announce to the House that the rink from the Foam 

Lake Composite High School, where I taught for a number of years, emerged as the Provincial 

Champions in the Provincial High School Curling competition to win the trophy donated by the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1325 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Byers: — This rink consists of Miss Susan Madill, Gloria Springer, Sarnia Scutchings and Angie 

Madill. At this time I would ask all Members of the House to join in congratulating this Foam Lake rink 

and the coach, Mrs. Ella Reynolds, on their victory, as well as all the young people who participated in 

this curling classic. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Yorkton Psychiatric Centre 
 

Mr. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question 

to the Hon. Premier. 

 

In light of the weekend announcement of the resignation of three out of four psychiatrists at the Yorkton 

Psychiatric Centre and the possibility of additional resignations (there’s only one left, I believe, up there 

who could resign) and apparent unrest in Weyburn and Saskatoon, would the Premier indicate to us 

whether he is prepared to activate a legislative committee to enquire into the situation, that apparently is 

deteriorating, in the psychiatric services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any proposal for a legislative committee other 

than the one dealing with North Battleford which I think is not relevant to the question asked by the 

Hon. Member. He referred to the situation at the Yorkton Psychiatric Centre where, according to reports, 

resignations have been tendered. The reasons given were, I think, dissatisfaction with salary and 

working conditions. I want to assure the people that I have been advised by the Deputy Minister of 

Public Health that the psychiatric services in the Yorkton area are being maintained and will be 

maintained. Senior departmental officials have already met with the Regional Director, Dr. El-Deiry and 

we will be meeting with him again on Wednesday to discuss these problems. If any Members of the 

House are interested, the salary runs from about $21,000 to $39,000. They rise fairly steeply depending 

on whether or not a person has a full Canadian specialist certification. The last increases were effective 

October 1, 1972 and were approximately 7.6 per cent. So I think that regard is being had to the salary 

aspect of the working conditions. I do not know whether or not there are other aspects of the working 

conditions which are being questioned by the psychiatrists who have apparently tendered their 

resignations and I say it is not the first time that this has happened in the Psychiatric Services Branch. 

It’s a fairly stormy area one way or another but I think that the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) 

does raise a good question with respect to the apparent difficulties in the Psychiatric Services Branch of 

the Department of Public Health and I will ask the Minister of Public Health to look into them and make 

a report at the appropriate time. 

 

Mr. Grant: — A supplementary question. I wonder if the Premier 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1326 

would be prepared to inform the House, tomorrow or whenever he is able to discuss it with the Minister, 

what provision actually is being made to supply services in Yorkton because it is quite evident that one 

man cannot carry on where there used to be four. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I’ll see if I can do that. The Minister is down in Swift Current today at a 

function associated with an opening of a Level IV institution there, Palliser Hospital. I have spoken with 

the Deputy Minister, Dr. Skoll, and I will raise this question to him and see if we can get an answer. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Ladies’ Curling National Victory 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, just before the Orders of the Day, I, too, 

would like to draw to the attention of the Members of the House an accomplishment over the weekend 

with respect to curling. It appears to be a sport that Saskatchewan people in some way or another have a 

monopoly in many areas. I refer to the winning of the national championship of the ladies’ curling title 

by Vera Pezer of Saskatoon. Vera Pezer’s victory is the third consecutive win. She won it first in 1970. 

Prior to that time Members of the House will know that this area was dominated by Miss Joyce McKee 

who had a very strong team and I’m advised now that Joyce McKee, in fact, is the lead on the Vera 

Pezer rink. I say, for the third time. It’s a tremendous accomplishment for the City of Saskatoon, for 

Vera and her curling team, and I’m sure all Members of the House would join me in congratulating 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — I, too, want to extend congratulations to the Pezer rink. 

My seatmate indicated to me that this was just another routine announcement of accomplishment from 

Saskatoon but my input is because of Lee Morrison who is part of that rink. She’s from the old home 

town of Semans and while we produce some pretty fine athletes we are particularly proud of Mrs. 

Morrison. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION 
 

Unemployment in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, on Friday last the Minister of 

Finance (Mr. Cowley) stated that with regard to the question on unemployment that, yes, we have 

estimates. He also made the statement, and I have a transcript if I may quote from the verbatim 

statement he made in the House . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think we can debate back and forth . . . 

 

Mr. Lane: — No, I’m not. I have a question, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1327 

Mr. Speaker: —  Order! We’ve had more than the required three today. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, we haven’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Oh yes, we have. We’ve had and we’ve spent an hour at it. 

 

Mr. Lane: — No, Mr. Speaker. We’ve only had two questions, one from the Leader of the Opposition 

and one from Mr. Grant. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I rule that we’ve had enough oral questions for today. We have no provision for 

it, it is done by courtesy and we’ve spent half an hour today. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Are you stating now, Mr. Speaker, that we are only allowed half an hour of oral questions 

a day? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m stating that the rules of the House do not provide for any oral questions. It is done 

just by courtesy and we have now spent half an hour and I rule that we have had enough today. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — On a point of order. To begin with, oral questions have been allowed in this House for 

many years. They were allowed when we were the Government and to say that in parliamentary 

procedure oral questions are not allowed, you might find that in some book, Sir, but you go look in 

Ottawa, you go to Westminster . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m not debating it. I am ruling that the oral questions, we’ve had enough for today. 

They are done by courtesy. You check the report of 1970 that was handed down and you will see right in 

that report, no provision was made for oral questions and the Speaker of the day said that they would 

always consider it to be a courtesy. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the first . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We’ve had two plus replies to others and I am ruling that’s all the oral questions I will 

permit today because we are now getting a further extension of them. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t wish to quarrel with your ruling but I should like to have a point 

clarified. It seems to me that it has been custom and customary for up to three questions for a number 

years. It is true that it is not written into the rules, this is correct, but by the same token it is a pretty well 

accepted custom and I think the impression shouldn’t be given that it hasn’t been customary for oral 

questions. This is my only point. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been customary for a number of years to allow two or three questions but I said 

there is no rule which provides 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1328 

for it. It has just been a courtesy of the House which has done so. I feel that we have had that courtesy 

today to the extent of half an hour. We have gone longer than usual. 

 

Mr. Lane: — On your ruling – is there any relationship between the fact that the Government has no 

policy on unemployment and your ruling me out of order? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the Hon. gentlemen know that question was not called for. There are no 

questions on the Order Paper so Government Orders. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Briar Curling 
 

Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I have something and I think the whole House 

will agree with it. As you know, the MacDonald Briar is opening in Edmonton today. The Saskatchewan 

men’s representative is a rink from Regina, the Harvey Mazinke rink and I know all Members here will 

join me in wishing Harvey every success and we know that Regina will be proud of him when he brings 

the Briar home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 60 — An Act to provide 

Financial Assistance to Encourage and Promote the Development and Expansion of the 

Agricultural Industry in Saskatchewan. (FarmStart) 
 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, it is again with pride and satisfaction that I speak to another Bill that 

the New Democratic Government is bringing in for second reading at this Session. This Bill, The 

Agricultural Incentives Act, 1973, will establish this Government’s new FarmStart program. It is my 

belief that this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is one of the most important pieces of legislation to be introduced in 

this Session. 

 

My colleagues and I, on previous occasions, have referred to the important need to develop 

Saskatchewan agriculture and more specifically, to create new farm units and increase total agricultural 

production in this province. 

 

Such development will benefit farmers with low income and inadequate resource bases. It will create 

new opportunities for the young people of this province to be gainfully employed in an occupation of 

their choice It will provide unlimited benefits to all Saskatchewan residents through the increased 

economic activity and through the increased employment opportunities which will be created in service 

and processing industries related to agriculture. 

 

Assuming that the need for agricultural development is accepted and needs no further elaboration, I 

would like to turn to the details of this Government’s agricultural development program and particularly 

on how The Agricultural Incentives Act 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1329 

fits into this program. 

 

Saskatchewan agriculture is faced with many problems peculiar to the industry. For a farmer to be fully 

employed today in a modern efficient agricultural enterprise which will yield an adequate income 

requires resources worth many thousands of dollars. The accumulation of the capital necessary to 

establish a viable farming operation forces farmers to save a large portion of their net income, to borrow 

money and in a short period of time repay loans resulting in the traditional pattern where farmers 

continue to live poor and die rich. 

 

The tremendous capital requirements have made it all but impossible for young people to start farming 

operations without extensive financial backing from parents or from other sources. The thousands of 

young people who have been forced to leave this province to obtain employment, the many who have 

accepted employment in jobs that they do not enjoy, and others who are working with parents but on 

unacceptable incomes, are to my mind and to the mind of Saskatchewan farmers and other people ample 

proof of the problems faced in developing new agricultural enterprises. 

 

A brief look at statistics will indicate the magnitude of this problem that we are now confronted with. In 

Saskatchewan in 1971 we had a total of 76,970 farms. Of this number only 22,603 farms sold over 

$10,000 worth of agricultural products. If we assume that roughly 60 per cent of the gross sales are 

needed to recover expenses, then only 22,603 farms in this province in 1971 had a net income greater 

than $4,000. 

 

The 1971 census also shows us that 23,840 farms had total agricultural sales between $5,000 and 

$10,000. Another 16,487 farms had agricultural sales between $2,500 and $5,000 and 13,773 farms had 

total agricultural sales of less than $2,500. It is evident, Mr. Speaker, from these statistics that the 

majority of Saskatchewan farmers need increased agricultural production if they are to achieve 

satisfactory income levels. 

 

To achieve satisfactory income levels it is necessary that farmers have adequate resources, resources at 

their disposal to establish an efficient production unit. The 1971 census figure on capitalization of 

farmers are not yet readily available. However, if we take a brief look at the 1966 census figure we will 

have an indication of what the capitalization of Saskatchewan farms was at that time. 

 

In 1966, of a total of 85,000 Saskatchewan farms, only 11,338 had over $100,000 worth of productive 

assets at their disposal, not necessarily owned but at their disposal. Another 27,807 farms had between 

$50,000 and $100,000 worth of assets for use. 31,479 farms had between $20,000 and $50,000 worth of 

assets while the remaining 15,062 farms had less than $20,000 worth of capital employed. These 

statistics, Mr. Speaker, are ample proof that a great many of our Saskatchewan farmers have an 

inadequate resource basis and inadequate incomes. Many other people have indicated a strong desire to 

establish farming operations but have been unable to develop satisfactory farm units. They have been 

unable to develop satisfactory farm units because there is an important need for diversification but the 

money is not available for them to get into that field. There is an important need for intensification of 

agricultural production but they have no resources in order to achieve that. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1330 

This province with its high dependence on wheat has for too long been vulnerable to the ups and downs 

of international farm markets. Wheat production is particularly adapted to mechanization and extensive 

types of farming operations. 

 

With new farming practices it is conceivable that all of our grain production be produced on 12,000 

farms with a total of 24,000 people gainfully employed. Grain production with its need for an extensive 

land base has exceptional high capital requirements. A basic problem in production requiring an 

extensive land base is that profits tend to be capitalized into land values. As incomes increase profits are 

used to bid up land values. Land values are, generally speaking, established by large farmers adding a 

half or a quarter section to an existing farm unit. These farmers can afford to pay high prices for their 

land because they have machinery, because they have buildings and equipment and they can obtain their 

living requirements from their present farming operations. All revenue generated from the new land 

acquired is available to repay loans on the new land. Farmers attempting to buy a whole farm unit who 

must meet all expenses including personal living from the unit cannot afford to match the high prices 

offered by established farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the real potential for beginning farmers lies in livestock production and in any type of 

intensive production which requires only a limited land base. In hog production period of high prices do 

not increase the value of hog farms as the price of land is increased when prices are high. Any farmer 

can acquire a new hog barn at the current cost of construction. For this reason livestock operations give 

new developing farms a much greater opportunity to compete with established farm units. Additional 

livestock production will increase our domestic markets for feed grains thereby reducing the dependence 

of our grain farms on international grain markets. Livestock production is labor intensive thereby 

creating employment for farmers. Increased production requires increased inputs, more processing, 

transportation and services, will create employment opportunities and incomes in yet other sectors of the 

economy in this province. 

 

Increased livestock production will require major capital expenditures on new facilities which will 

provide major stimulus to the construction industry. Now what this province needs, Mr. Speaker, is 

increased gross agricultural sales per acre of farm land. To achieve the goals of improved opportunities 

to develop economic farm units and increase livestock production, four basic needs of farms must first 

be satisfied: 

 

1. A farmer must have access to a package of resources which will enable him to operate a modern, 

efficient production unit. 

 

2. A farmer must have some equity or net worth. Owned assets give a farmer an incentive to better 

performance and provide a cushion against periods of low income. It has been shown that farmers with 

little or no equity face difficulty in obtaining a decent living in periods of depressed product prices or 

low yields and, on occasion, are faced with bankruptcy. A farmer who uses only borrowed capital and 

must pay interest and principal faces extreme difficulty if returns are low. 

 

3. A farmer must have the necessary experience and expertise for his type of production or must have 

access to 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1331 

adequate training programs. 

 

4. The farmer must be able to obtain information and counselling regarding the alternatives available to 

him to enable him to select the best package of programs for his particular circumstances. 

 

The New Democratic Government has long recognized the needs of farmers. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 

February of 1971, the New Democratic Party published its election platform in the form of a booklet 

called “New Deal For People” as proof of this Government’s intent to alleviate some of these problems. 

I should like to quote briefly from the “New Deal For People”. The first page of the document deals with 

provincial agricultural policies and I quote: 

 

The continuing degradation of Saskatchewan agriculture and the related decline of our rural 

communities are the most critical issues for the people of this province. The primary objective of the 

New Democratic program will be to create the conditions which will promote the maximum number of 

viable farms in Saskatchewan. 

 

I continue to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

As first steps in the New Democratic Party Government we will establish and Land Bank Commission 

which could purchase land offered voluntarily on the market at competitive prices and lease this land, 

guaranteeing tenure on the basis of need with the option to buy, with the objective of promoting the 

maximum number of viable family farms in Saskatchewan, and provide capital credit to farmers on 

terms at least as favorable as those offered to industry. Specifically to enact an Agricultural Incentives 

Act which will make available low cost credit with loan forgiveness features similar to those provided 

to industry for young farmers entering agriculture, for farmers making major shifts in production and 

for undercapitalized farm enterprises. 

 

In the section dealing with the federal agriculture policies the “New Deal For People” states and again I 

quote: 

 

The New Democratic Provincial Government will press the Federal Government to provide capital 

grants to assist farmers as is done for industrial development. 

 

I think you will find, Mr. Speaker, that these program and policy objectives are embodied in the new 

Agricultural Incentives Act which is now before you. This Government is now introducing a FarmStart 

program which will provide credit to farmers to assist in agricultural development and the establishment 

of new farm units. 

 

A second feature of the program will be the provision of capital grants to developing farms. It is hoped 

by this Government that the Federal Government will see fit to enter into cost-sharing agreements for 

the program. It is my sincere belief that the Land Bank program and the FarmStart program offer a 

comprehensive farm development program for this province which, Mr. Speaker, is unequalled 

anywhere else in Canada. 

 

Part of our agriculture development program is now in 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1332 

operation and is meeting two major objectives. One is to assist farmers desiring to dispose of land to 

obtain a fair and equitable price for their assets. Two, is to assist farmers in need of land but unable to 

buy land, to acquire land under long term tenure or lease arrangements. Such agreements make land 

available at an annual cost of five per cent compared with seven per cent or higher if the farmer were to 

buy the land, and in addition relieve him of burdensome principal payments. 

 

The response to this program has been overwhelming. More than 10,000 farmers attended public 

meetings about the operation of the Land Bank program. Over 1,500 farmers applied to sell land and at 

the end of the 1972-73 fiscal years the Commission will have purchased in excess of 400 farms. Some 

farms purchased will be leased to the owners’ sons. 300 of the farmers did not indicate a preference for a 

particular lessee and this land has recently been advertised for lease. The demand for leases has been 

even more astounding than the demand for selling. The Land Bank offices have been besieged with 

applicants. Forty agricultural representatives of the Department of Agriculture have been temporarily 

assisting the Land Bank counsellors to meet the demands. Some Ag Rep offices have reported as many 

as 40 inquiries by 9:00 a.m. the day after the land was advertised. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the response to this program is a true indication of the need for such a program. 

However, the Land Bank program was never intended to stand alone. We can only develop a healthy 

agricultural industry with a combination of development programs. The package of programs that we are 

introducing will go a long way toward establishing new farm units, increasing the economic activity in 

this province. The FarmStart program is designed to be complementary to the Land Bank program and I 

am sure that it will prove to be equally popular. 

 

Turning specifically to The Agricultural Incentives Act, Mr. Speaker, I should like to outline briefly the 

major points of the program which this Bill will introduce. The Agricultural Incentives Act, 1973 will 

establish a Crown corporation operating under the name of FarmStart which will administer the new 

FarmStart program. The FarmStart program as its name implies will start new farms and start existing 

farms moving in an expanding direction which will lead them into the main stream of agricultural 

production. The program will specifically encourage diversification and intensification of Saskatchewan 

agriculture. The FarmStart program is a comprehensive program with credit, grants, counselling services 

and management training. The specific objectives of the program are to assist farmers and potential 

farmers with low income and low equities to develop economic farm units and to stimulate a major 

increase of income and employment in the province by increasing livestock production. 

 

FarmStart credit will be available to persons who are receiving a loan, intend to make farming their 

principal occupation, who are Canadian citizens or landed immigrants, who after receiving a loan intend 

to establish a permanent residence in Saskatchewan for the duration of the loan, who have a net worth of 

less than $60,000, who now utilize productive agricultural assets valued at less than $100,000, who are 

now earning less than $10,000 per year and will use borrowed moneys for one or more of the following 

purposes: 

 

1. The purchase of breeding livestock where such purchases will result in a net increase in the breeding 

herd. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1333 

2. For withholding female livestock for a net income in the breeding herd. 

 

3. For clearing, breaking and regrassing of grazing land to increase grazing capacity. 

 

4. For seeding of cultivated land to perennial forage crops to increase feed supplies for increased 

livestock production. 

 

5. For the construction and/or renovation of buildings, improvements and facilities and the purchase of 

equipment to be used in the establishment or expansion of livestock enterprises. 

 

6. For the withholding of calves until they can be sold as feeder cattle. 

 

7. For the purchase of feeder hogs for hog finishing operations being established or expanded on a 

permanent basis where the farmer has shown evidence that he has access to a continuous supply of 

feeder hogs. 

 

8. For a limited amount of refinancing of existing loans bearing high interest rates and short repayment 

terms where such refinancing is necessary either to improve the cash flow of the farm business or to 

obtain better security, providing such refinancing leads to the development or expansion of a livestock 

operation. 

 

Provision will be made under the Act to meet the special needs of the irrigation farmers in the South 

Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project. Because of heavy investments in land development and irrigation 

equipment, and because of the depressed conditions facing all farmers in the period 1969 to 1971, many 

of the irrigation farmers have found that they are unable to get credit for specialty crops, livestock 

enterprises and other activities which are needed to raise the returns from their irrigated land. We must 

recognize that irrigated production requires larger amounts of capital than dryland farming. Efficient 

irrigation units must have several enterprises dove-tailing together. FarmStart will, therefore, recognize 

the special needs in that area and have special provisions for that need. 

 

For the general FarmStart program, the amount of credit available to an individual will be that amount 

necessary to bring the total value of productive assets available to him up to $100,000 provided the 

maximum loan does not exceed $60,000. Each loan applicant will be required to submit a detailed 

budget which indicates his potential to repay loans and develop an economic farm unit. Repayment 

terms will be a maximum of 15 years with special flexibility of repayment related to the prices of 

products being produced. Within a range of normal prices, normal repayment rates will be required. In 

periods of unusually low prices payment of principal, and in extreme cases, interest will be delayed and 

rescheduled. In periods of unusually high prices repayment rates will be accelerated. 

 

Depending on the nature of the farmer’s enterprises repayment may be made on a monthly, quarterly, 

semi-annual or annual payment basis. In livestock operations involving a breeding herd, the farmer will 

have the option of making monthly payments starting on the 19th month of the loan. In other types of 

livestock operations the farmer will have the option of making 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1334 

monthly payments starting in the 13th month of the loan. Interest rates will be six per cent for the life of 

the loan. 

 

Security requirements will generally be lower than those of existing credit programs. The objective of 

taking security will be to ensure that the borrower has an incentive to make a business a success. 

 

At first glance some may question the upper limits of loans and say that they are too restrictive. I should 

like to point out again that in 1971 the total farm assets in this province were valued at $4.6 billion with 

approximately 90,000 persons in agriculture. This amounts to an average of about $55,000 per worker. I 

think that most people are used to thinking in terms of a land base which requires relatively higher 

capital investments. I believe that while it may in some situations require more than $100,000 worth of 

land to provide full employment for an energetic worker in grain production alone, I believe that in the 

majority of farming operations involving livestock a farmer will be fully employed with $100,000 worth 

of assets. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, the program will encourage the establishment of multiple operator farm units. 

When you think of a three man unit which may be a father and two sons having total assets of $300,000 

you can see the potential for some large efficient co-operative organizations and operations. Some may 

criticize the limit of $60,000 net worth on eligibility. The truth is that the vast majority of Saskatchewan 

farmers have a net worth of less than $60,000. It is the belief of this Government that those farmers with 

a net worth in excess of $60,000 can obtain adequate credit from the Farm Credit Corporation or from 

other commercial sources. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the credit program will be particularly advantageous to those farmers who are 

capable of using credit to develop successful farming operations but who are unable to obtain the 

necessary credit because of rigid short term repayment schedules and high security requirements. 

 

FarmStart grants will be available to persons who are eligible for credit but who do not have sufficient 

equity or net worth to develop an economic farming operation. Such persons will be eligible for a grant 

of up to $8,000 provided that it can be shown that with the grant there is a potential to develop a 

profitable farming operation. A person with a net worth in excess of an upper limit yet to be established 

will be eligible for a grant of a lesser amount. A person in the higher net worth range will have his 

eligibility for grants reduced by $500 for every $1,000 his net worth exceeds the limit set for a 

maximum grant. The upper limit on the net worth will be established after further research taking into 

account the limited funds available and the large number of people who will apply for grants. An 

attempt will be made to use the funds where they are, in fact, most needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to illustrate eligibility for grants by using some hypothetical figures. If we 

assume, and I underline “if we assume”, the upper limit on net worth is established at $20,000 then any 

one with a net worth of $20,000 or less is eligible for the maximum grant of $8,000. A person with a net 

worth of $24,000 has a net worth which exceeds the upper limit by $4,000 and would have his 

maximum grant reduced by $2,000 from $8,000 to a $6,000 figure. At a net worth of 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1335 

 

$26,000 the maximum grant would be $5,000. A net worth of $30,000, the maximum grant would be 

$3,000. And at a net worth of $34,000 the maximum grant would be $1,000. 

 

FarmStart will not issue grants of less than $1,000 which in the example I have given means that anyone 

with a net worth of $34,000 is not eligible for a grant. 

 

The Government believes that $8,000 or less will not have the necessary impact to start a farm on the 

development process. Therefore, grants will only be given where the applicant applies and receives 

credit of at least twice the amount of the grant received. This means that to receive a full $3,000 grant, 

the applicant must also be approved for a loan of at least $16,000. Grants must be used for purposes 

consistent with the use of the loans. To ensure that recipients of grants do, in fact, intend to be full time 

farmers, grants will be conditional to the extent that a person must continue to farm one year for each 

$500 of grant received to earn his grant. A person who discontinues farming before fully earning his 

grant will be required to pay the unearned portion. It is my sincere belief, Mr. Speaker, that the 

FarmStart grants combined with the FarmStart credit will enable the development of many economical 

farms in this province which would not have developed without the FarmStart program. And the 

resulting increase in livestock production will benefit all residents of Saskatchewan both rural and 

urban. 

 

Negotiations are presently underway with the Federal Government regarding cost sharing on the cost 

program. I am hopeful that Ottawa will see the importance of the FarmStart program to this province 

and offer financial support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has said in its initial negotiations with Ottawa that if they do not see fit to 

contribute to this grant program that the Government will go on its own providing those grants to 

farmers which are so badly needed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — This Government, Mr. Speaker, is determined that it will not see the FarmStart 

program establishing farmers to remain on uneconomical units. For this reason the Department of 

Agriculture will be re-defining the role of agricultural representatives to make the local agricultural 

representative a counsellor and a credit advisor to the FarmStart Program. Farmers wishing to obtain 

information on development assistance available or wishing to apply for assistance, will contact their 

local agricultural representative who will provide them with the information they need to make such 

decisions as to what type of farming enterprise would be best for their farm, what scale of operation 

should be selected and will the operation be profitable. 

 

The Department of Agriculture will be employing 12 new regional agricultural development counsellors 

who may be called on by the agricultural representative to assist farmers to develop plans for proposed 

farming operations and also for supervising on an on-going basis. Some of the Members to your left, Mr. 

Speaker, say they believe in that. I hope that they will have the courage to express their willingness to 

support 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1336 

this legislation or be so bold as to tell the farmers in Saskatchewan that they oppose it. In due course we 

will be anxiously awaiting their remarks in regard to that. 

 

The Department of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is requesting the Federal Government to give special 

recognition to participants in the FarmStart program by providing special training under Canada 

Manpower training programs. If access to training programs is not guaranteed then this Government will 

take steps to provide any necessary training on its own. 

 

To round out the package, the Department of Agriculture is upgrading the level of many of its existing 

services. Additional livestock specialists will be available to assist all farmers to obtain the latest 

information on new production practices. Additional farm management specialists will be available to 

assist farmers in the planning and organizing or multi-operator business arrangements in planning for 

transfer of farm businesses from father to son and in budgeting and planning where new types of 

enterprises are being considered. 

 

In this area, Mr. Speaker, the former Liberal Government proposed or said that they had programs to 

establish farmers in intensified farming operations or diversification to livestock, yet they had no 

professional staff in the field to assist farmers in developing those kinds of enterprises. None 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — We will also be up-grading veterinary services. Engineering efforts for the design 

of farm buildings and equipment will be increased. Marketing research and development will receive 

special priorities to ensure the availability of adequate markets for increased production. Marketing 

activities will be aimed at increasing the level and stability of income to all farmers. Mr. Speaker, the 

Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) says there is nothing new there. There may not be anything 

new there since June of 1971 but there was a complete vacuum in that area prior to that time. 

Saskatchewan farmers were frustrated as to what they were expanding into without any guarantee that 

there were real endeavors being made by the Provincial Government to establish markets for their 

products. These items and many other additions to programs, establishment of new programs and 

re-direction of existing programs are all designed with the common objective of creating a sound 

agricultural industry in and for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to conclude by saying that I believe that the FarmStart program 

complemented by the Land Bank program and other activities by the Department of Agriculture will 

provide the most comprehensive agricultural development program that can be found anywhere in this 

continent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — My colleagues, Mr. Speaker, and I are extremely proud of the package of 

programs and I look forward to the support of every Member of the Legislative Assembly in endorsing 

The Agricultural Incentives Act. Having made these remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

The Agricultural Incentives Act. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1337 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): — It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) is 

bringing in an Act to set up a corporation which will bring together a number of incentive plans which 

have been in operation in the province over the years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — And mostly plans that were brought in by the Liberal Government. Now it may be a 

good idea to get these all together. This is perhaps something that should be done. We are not too sure 

that it requires a Crown corporation to do it. You will recall, for example, that the previous Liberal 

Government brought in The Livestock Loans Guarantee Act. This was a tremendous success. We 

subsidized the interest rate at a cost of about two per cent. The NDP refused to continue this two per 

cent subsidy although they did continue the livestock loans plan with no subsidy during the last year. 

Now I understand the loans under The Livestock Guarantee Act total something over $45 million. I 

believe the Minister announced this the other day. This plan certainly appears to have been far greater in 

magnitude than what he is talking about today in the FarmStart program. 

 

He announced that they are going to have loans, grants, counselling and management services for 

farmers. Well, of course, this is certainly nothing new. I don’t know where the Minister has been over 

the years. We have had all of these before. We had, for example, very substantial loans which provided 

grants for hog barn construction, hay shelter construction, grants for clearing and breaking, grants for 

construction of dugouts, tax rebates on grain storage facilities, grants for irrigation projects, farm water 

supply, grants for converting land to forage, grants especially to help people of native origin, many other 

types of grants over the years. 

 

Probably the major difference between the grants we have had up to now and the ones the Minister is 

announcing that in the past most of these grants have been available to all farmers. Now he appears to be 

putting some pretty substantial restrictions on who can get these particular grants. We note that they 

have discontinued such worthwhile projects as the irrigation project at Outlook. As I mentioned before 

they have in the past year not subsidized the loans in The Guaranteed Livestock Loans Act. Now loaning 

money at six per cent apparently they are going to subsidize it at about one per cent. In view of the 

Minister’s comments we will have more to say at another time. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 22 – An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a few very brief comments on this 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1338 

particular Bill, Bill No. 22. I regret that the Minister, in bringing in the amendments to this Act didn’t 

see fit to assume that the Government which is now well on the way to becoming a major land owner in 

the Province, did not see fit to assume the same tax liabilities as any other landlord in this regard. I 

would agree that the step he has taken here is a step in improvement insofar as previous legislation and 

assistance to the municipalities are concerned but I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that was at a time 

when the Provincial Government was gradually getting out of the lease business and the former 

Government were making cultivated leases as well as pasture leases available for sale. That policy has 

been stopped completely and, in fact, reversed. And as I say with the Land Bank and other policies the 

Government opposite intends on becoming a major land owner and landlord in the province. And for 

that reason the provisions that are before us whereby the Government will only be liable for a maximum 

of two years’ taxes just doesn’t seem equitable to me. I would hope that the Minister would reconsider 

and delete that reference to two years and just make it a provision for no time limit as far as the 

obligation for taxes are concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, in closing debate I just want to remind the Members to your left that 

it was this Government that first brought in any legislation that would provide for reimbursement of any 

taxes that were in arrears. The rural municipalities and local improvement districts in the province 

during the period of 1964 to 1971, repeatedly, and I stress and repeat, repeatedly made requests to the 

Government of the day to give some consideration to the problems of arrears of taxes. All their requests 

fell on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t until last year with the introduction of The Land Bank 

Commission Act that we as a New Democratic Government in Saskatchewan said we would pay up to a 

maximum of two years in back taxes to local municipalities and local improvement districts. To be 

consistent we said that this should be extended to all lands that are under control of the Provincial 

Government. 

 

I also want to make one short remark in regard to the statements that are made by the Members opposite 

that it is just now that the Government of Saskatchewan or the Department of Agriculture is becoming a 

major land owner or a major holder or administrator of lands in Saskatchewan. They know as well as we 

and other people in Saskatchewan that the Department of Agriculture, the Government of Saskatchewan 

has always been the largest land owner in the Province of Saskatchewan. It is not just now that we are 

moving into this field. And the reasons that we have continued through different ideological 

governments in the past to be a large land owner is that they know the merits of owning land and 

providing land to farmers who are not in a position to purchase land. So that trend is not a new one. We 

are simply accelerating and expanding that in recognition of the problems of land transfer in this 

province. 

 

So I want to close in saying, Mr. Speaker, that it is this Government that has responded to the requests 

that have been made by rural municipalities, local improvement districts in regard to arrears in taxes. We 

feel as they feel that they are in the best position to make a recommendation as to whether a lease should 

be terminated because of arrears in taxes because they live in the same neighborhood with them. They 

know what the reasons are for this lessee to be in arrears of taxes. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1339 

If it is because of poor crop conditions or because of return related to the international markets or 

circumstances beyond the farmer’s control, then they will make a decision and ask that the lease be 

extended and that termination be not requested. Because they are close to the situation, if the farmer is 

not legitimately trying to make a paying farming operation out of the land he is leasing from the 

Government and is in arrears in taxes they will make a recommendation to the Government to cancel, 

collect their taxes and thereby avoiding further hardship on the local taxpayers in that area and make that 

land available to a farmer who is in a legitimate position to make farming his full time occupation and 

be an asset to the community in which that farm lies. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly Act. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, these are minor amendments to The Legislative Assembly Act 

recommended to the Government by Legislative Counsel and the Legislative Assembly office. They are 

all purely technical in nature or at least we think they are purely technical in nature. 

 

The first portion of the Bill deals with the matter of the quorum in the Assembly. It deals with a conflict 

currently existing between the rules and the Act and brings these two in harmony. There is another 

trifling matter dealing with the mileage rate at which Members of the Legislature shall be paid. 

Currently the mileage rate is stipulated in the Act. The proposal is to tie it to the rate that is paid 

pursuant to The Public Service Act regulations from time to time so as to do away with the relatively 

trivial amendments from time to time. 

 

There are further provisions enabling Members to be reimbursed for the actual travel and other expenses 

while representing the Government of Saskatchewan. There is some little doubt as to whether or not 

there might be a conflict between that practice which has been going on for some years and some other 

provisions of The Legislative Assembly Act. 

 

There is a further provision authorizing Mr. Speaker to set fees in respect of Hansard and other items 

sold. The question arose as to who should set the fees and that has been resolved by indicating that it 

shall be Mr. Speaker. 

 

Other provisions clarify the basis on which amounts of money paid to Members for automobile travel to 

and from their constituencies shall be paid. This is also a tidying up of what we did last year. Similarly 

the Act contains a tidying up of the reimbursing of actual travelling expenses for Members travelling 

outside Saskatchewan and contains a correction of a provision setting a particular time, a purely 

technical correction. These are, as I have indicated, matters which do not make, so far as I am aware, a 

change in existing practice. They are changes made to tidy up existing practice and make it conform 

with the Act and the rules. I believe that the details of them can best be considered in Committee where 

more detailed explanations can be provided to Hon. Members. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1340 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly Act. 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments in reply to the second reading remarks of 

the Premier. I can certainly concur with everything he has outlined. It is primarily a question of tidying 

up a few things that were perhaps left uncovered from last year. I note with interest the one section that 

perhaps is new. I think it is a good move, the question of covering travel or other expenses of someone 

other than a Cabinet Minister I presume who might represent the Government outside the province. I 

think this is a question that should be clarified. There are others that the Premier himself pointed out that 

might better be discussed in Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 50 — An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): — I have only one or two additional comments to make on this Bill, then I 

am sure that many other Members on both sides of the House would like to speak on this very important 

Bill. For example, some of the Members, perhaps the Hon. Member for Notukeu-Willow Bunch, Mr. 

Engel and the Hon. Member for Maple Creek, Mr. Flasch, would like to speak on it. They are from 

cattle country. I should like to know how they are going to explain to their constituents, their farmers at 

home, that this Bill provides for a licence for anyone who wishes to raise livestock. Perhaps the Hon. 

Member from Shaunavon, Mr. Oliver, the Hon. Mr. Wood from Swift Current would like to explain to 

their farmers that he is guilty of an offence if the farmer has no licence and also that he must prove 

himself innocent if he is charged with some offence such as this or some infraction of these laws. This is 

certainly a direct opposite to the basic principle of British Law and I hope that some of these Members 

will get up and explain their position on it. The Hon. Member from Assiniboia, Mr. Lange, and the Hon. 

Member from Gravelbourg, Mr. Gross. I see he is there. Perhaps they would like to get up and explain 

that this Bill provides that the Government can tell one of their stockmen where and when he can deliver 

his produce, his cattle. I should like them to get up in the House and state their position on this, if they 

are in favor of the Government being able to tell a stockman when and where he can deliver his calves 

or the other products of his farm. I certainly hope that later in the day in the debate all of these Members 

particularly the farm Members and especially the Members who are representing areas which are largely 

cattle raising or stock raising areas will speak. I hope that they will get up during the debate and explain 

their position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) for bringing in this 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1341 

particular Bill. I was hoping that the Member for Moosomin would stay in his seat because I was quite 

interested in what he had to say. He can’t take it, that’s about what it amounts to. 

 

The Minister did a very good job the other day in talking about what the Bill will do, the potential of it, 

the real opportunity, Mr. Speaker, at this particular time and the real necessity of bringing in a Bill of 

this kind. I was rather amazed at the Member for Moosomin, he seems to be developing a chronic mood 

of opposition. He always finds himself in a very difficult if not impossible position. He talked about 

some of the real tough measures of the Bill. I suppose I have been around this province about as long as 

most Members in this House and it dawned on me that we had some kind of a natural products 

marketing Act dated some time back. So I went and checked it out. I found that the session of 1945, Mr. 

Speaker, brought in an Act respecting the Transportation, Packaging, Storage and Marketing of Natural 

Products. It had some very important things to say. It said in part, I am going to quote verbatim. 

 

Marketing includes advertising, financing, buying, selling, assembling, packing, processing, shipping 

for sale or storage or for any other purpose and offering for sale and includes transportation in any 

manner by any person. 

 

I am quoting from the Act of 1945. 

 

Natural product means any product of agriculture, forest, sea, lake or river, animals including poultry 

whether alive or killed, skins and pelts of fur-bearing animals, meats, eggs, dairy products, grains, 

seeds, fruit, fruit products, vegetables, vegetable products, honey, tobacco, lumber and any other article 

of food and drink wholly or partially manufactured or derived from any such product. 

 

I am quoting from 1945. So the fact remains that the Member for Moosomin certainly is not abreast of 

what has existed in Saskatchewan for a long time. I checked a little further. I found this Act had been 

up-dated some time in the 1950s and it included the original statements practically verbatim. If you 

check the 1972 records, you will find that it is again up-dated containing almost identically the same 

clauses, the same statements, the same powers and the same purposes as it did in 1945. It seems to me 

that if we have lived with an Act since 1945 it must be a pretty good Act because if it was as bad as the 

Hon. Member from Moosomin tried to make out the other day, then we would have suffered from it for 

a very, very long time, something like some 30 odd years. 

 

Now the idea of trying to discredit this Act certainly shows that the Liberal Party is out of touch, out of 

date and completely irrelevant. 

 

I did some checking on another Act, Mr. Speaker. I was rather amazed that the Member from Moosomin 

didn’t refer to this Act. I am now holding in my hand the Canadian Wheat Board Act which goes back to 

a very long time. I find some very mandatory and some very compulsory and some very 

freedom-destroying clauses in this Act. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1342 

The Board may, notwithstanding anything in the Canada Grains Act, but subject to direction if any . . . 

 

Contained in an Order of the Governor-General-in-Council by order do a whole host of things. 

 

Prescribe forms and manner of completing permit books, prescribe the manner in which application for 

permit books shall be made, prescribe the manner in which deliveries of grain under a permit book 

shall be made, prescribe a plan on a railway as a delivery point, determine whether for the purposes of 

this Act two or more farmers may qualify as operators, fix from time to time quotas of each kind of 

grain that may be delivered, notwithstanding anything in this part, prohibit the delivery of any kind of 

grain or receive thereof by any elevator or grain company or any individual, exclude any kind of grain 

of any grade or quality, require any kind of grain or quality thereof to be received by any elevator or to 

be delivered into railway cars. 

 

This is the Canada Wheat Board Act. Then you have some very strong statements and some very strong 

regulations in this Act. 

 

Except as permitted under the regulations no person other than the Board shall export or import grain, 

transport or cause to be transported from one province to another any kind of grains, sell or agree to 

sell wheat, oats or any products thereof situated in one province for delivery to another, buy or agree to 

buy wheat or what products . . . 

 

And so on. This is a Liberal Act, good when the Liberals introduce it, terrible when we do it. Then I 

looked under some regulations. 

 

No person shall mutilate or deface a permit book. Any holder of a permit book shall at the request of 

the police or police officer or any inspector appointed by the Wheat Board deliver such permit book to 

the police officer or the inspector. Where a permit book is delivered to a police officer or inspector 

appointed by the Board the police officer or inspector or any person acting on behalf of the Board may 

retain possession of the permit book for a period not exceeding 15 days. Where a permit book has been 

delivered to a police officer or inspector appointed by the Wheat Board he may in place of returning 

the permit book issue a permit to deliver and hold the book. 

 

And so on. This is an Act that was written by the Liberal Government at Ottawa. Yet the Hon. Member 

from Moosomin gets all excited about amendments to an Act that has been in the province and in force 

since 1945. 

 

I tried to check the records of 1945 but unfortunately there are no Hansards that record the speeches that 

were made. I checked some of the news releases and very interestingly a gentleman by the name of Mr. 

Proctor representing the Moosomin constituency made a speech in which he condemned the former CCF 

Government for introducing a Bill with such sweeping mandatory powers. He talked about freedoms, he 

talked about the very same thing that the Member from Moosomin the other day 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1343 

was talking about. You know, you people haven’t moved beyond 1945, you haven’t thought beyond 

1945. Very interesting. I happened to pick up the other day a statement by the Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture in their annual policy statement, under hog marketing, they had this to say: 

 

That the Prairie Provincial Hog Marketing Agency co-operate in seeking a prairie-wide marketing 

agency for the marketing of hogs. That the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission undertake to 

develop a market oriented agency for both domestic and export markets for the marketing of hogs. 

That the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission secure the co-operation with marketing agencies 

in at least one of the adjacent prairie provinces and seek a prairie-wide marketing agency for the 

marketing of hogs. 

 

The Canadian Federation of Agriculture. They have something else to say in the news report that went 

out across the Province of Saskatchewan. They say, in part: 

 

The Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture deeply regrets that it is being accused of misrepresenting 

its policy position developed by its members and is now involving itself in partisan politics. We are 

getting somewhat tired . . . 

 

I am quoting from the newsletter of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. 

 

. . . of the very obvious political manoeuvring aimed at obstructing the creation of a more rational 

marketing system. The hog producers of Saskatchewan must recognize the real motives of certain 

groups who want to scuttle the plan. Saskatchewan hog producers must dig in and begin doing 

something effective in the marketing field if they are to have a viable operation. There is more to 

raising hogs than just opting in and out. 

 

I am still quoting from the Federation. 

 

Depending on the conditions of grain sales, there is a great potential for viable year-round hog 

operations. Several countries have made enquiries, as an example, Japan has been indicating that its 

needs for pork supplies amount to or about one million carcasses a year. The key to the Japanese 

market which they themselves have made very clear is continuity of supply. In other words, not just 

one million hogs, but one million hogs on a yearly basis. There is a great need for an awareness of 

production, promotion, marketing development and supply stability. Lack of knowledge and apathy of 

the people is one of the real problems in all this. 

 

And I say the lack of apathy and knowledge of the Liberal Party is the greatest of them all. 

 

They say there is need for a wholesale educational program, to tell the full story, then the Federation is 

ready to go to work on behalf of the producers. I am sure they are going to count the Liberal Party out 

on this one. 

 

The Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, Mr. Speaker, went out and made some . . . 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1344 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Larson: — Yes, if the Members opposite are concerned about the vote there will be one in 1975. 

Just keep right on opposing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — Just keep on opposing the FarmStart, opposing the Land Bank, opposing The Natural 

Products Marketing Act. There won’t be two of you left to stand up for a count after 1975. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — You are on the right road. We are very happy to see you take this trail. What is the 

difference between a marketing board and a commission? A very enlightening article that I would 

suggest, particularly the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) so some reading about. It explains the 

difference between a marketing board and a marketing commission. You know, the two have some very 

separate and distinct roles, yet the Member for Moosomin, and I assume all Members on that side, don’t 

know the difference. I suggest that you read the whole article. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would never be accused of saying anyone was a liar. I would never stand accused of 

saying that the Liberals are liars. The truth, Mr. Speaker, is something like a basket of eggs. You have to 

handle them very carefully. If you don’t you will have a tragedy. I will say this, that I would be very 

careful turning the basket of eggs over to the gentlemen opposite, I would be very careful. 

 

I think for too long, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan have lived under this chaotic and this 

boom and bust business of livestock production. For too long, we have gone along without knowing 

where we are going. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has taken a very positive and a very clear-cut stand 

with regard to what we need by way of marketing. 

 

They have been on the record for several years for orderly marketing. The boys opposite don’t seem to 

know what they want. The Farmers’ Union in their annual convention for years have begged and 

pleaded for some form of orderly marketing in livestock products and all the farm products that we grow 

and offer for sale. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Even Intercon. 

 

Mr. Larson: — Yes, even Intercon, that is right. You know, for too long we have had this boom and 

bust situation. It has demoralized farming industry to where you are not able to tell from year to year 

whether or not you ought to go into one product or the other. Too many times we have seen farmers go 

wholesale into hog production, into cattle production, only to lose their shirts when the bust comes. This 

is obviously, Mr. Speaker, what the Members opposite support. 

 

I call on them to state clearly and distinctly to this Legislature and to the Province of Saskatchewan, are 

you for or are you against orderly marketing? Come out clearly and 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1345 

distinctly and make your position clear. 

 

You know the other day the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) lost his tie. I suggest and predict, 

Mr. Speaker, that if you keep jumping from one side of the fence to the other you are going to wind up 

without pants on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — So make up your minds, Hon. Members. Are you for or are you against orderly 

marketing? This is the issue that is at stake. There is no point to continue to try to be on both sides of the 

fence. 

 

I could go on for a long time, Mr. Speaker, but I want to say in conclusion that for the first time, and I 

have been around the province for a long time, I can see some hope in the direction that agriculture and 

farming is going. This Natural Products Marketing Act is a part and a very important part of that 

direction. No one knows any better than I, and several other Members sitting in this Assembly, what this 

boom and bust cycle can mean. Any stability that we can bring in and this Government is trying to bring 

it in, ought to be welcomed, ought to be supported and ought to be promoted by everyone who thinks of 

the future of agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

I challenge the Members opposite to stand up and vote against this Act, vote against FarmStart, vote 

against the Land Bank, then we will certainly not see too many of you around. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, 

I will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult to follow a man like the Member for Pelly 

in his most capable method of telling you about orderly marketing in this province. 

 

Farm organizations in Canada have been demanding legislation for many years which would permit 

them to organize their marketing in such a way as to give them added bargaining power. For too long, 

Mr. Speaker, farmers have been conned into believing that open markets are the only way in which their 

products can be sold at the best advantage. 

 

We are not entering into a new era of marketing strategy in which larger food processors, and in many 

cases, foreign governments are demanding a guaranteed supply of high quality products from our farms. 

Without some form of organized assembly private packers have no way in which they can guarantee 

these long term supplies. As time goes on, Mr. Speaker, this method of purchasing food supplies will 

continue to become more centralized. 

 

The only way in which producers are going to be able to have any strength at all in the market place is 

through collective action as proposed by this Act. Through marketing commissions provincial groups 

can centralize their marketing power. Through interprovincial action with other provinces they can 

further strengthen their position. International traders are very adept at using the divide and rule formula 

where they can play one market against another for their advantage. Only 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1346 

through collective action by provincial agencies can we hope to come out with a fair price for our 

products over any extended period of time. Because large scale international markets are demanding an 

ever increasing supply of red meats, we in Saskatchewan are confronted with a real opportunity to 

increase our production at good prices. 

 

However, it is very doubtful whether the production required to ensure these sales can be achieved 

unless producers have an assurance that they have some long-term stability to encourage them to make 

the investments required. Obviously, to get stable production we must have reasonable assurance of a 

stable market which we believe can be achieved through the development of marketing commissions. 

 

We believe that the erratic opting in and out of livestock production over the years has been the result 

mainly of lack of stability in the markets. This kind of production isn’t good enough if we are going to 

have long-term markets. If we are going to stabilize our rural population at anywhere near a satisfactory 

level, it is essential that we search for ways and means to increase the income from the present land 

base. 

 

The only real way to do this is to increase livestock production. In order to get additional farmers to 

make the added financial commitment required to bring this about, we will have to have a reliable 

market system which will not only sell what they can produce but search out new markets in both the 

domestic and export field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed unfortunate that the Federal Liberal Government in their haste to hold down the 

cost of living has seen fit to open up our borders to imports of cheap and often subsidized red meats and 

poultry products. As a direct result of this action our poultry producers, in particular, are being very 

severely hurt. Egg prices, which are not satisfactory at best, have dropped drastically as a result of 

importation of cheap products from Europe and then United States. 

 

Repercussions are so severe, in fact, Mr. Speaker, that egg and broiler producers are not placing orders 

for chicks because they can’t afford to operate at present prices. I urge the Federal Government to 

immediately review their actions in this regard so that poultry producers can have some hope of 

recovering their costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some people will say that the powers provided to the Commission in this Bill are 

unnecessarily severe, yet we have for many years been operating under the terms of the Canadian Wheat 

Board Act as very ably presented by our Member for Pelly. 

 

These regulations are every bit as severe as those contemplated in this Bill. If the Commission is going 

to be effective it is going to need the administrative teeth to withstand those who seek to circumvent it. 

 

We in this Government are dedicated to supporting farm organizations in promoting orderly farm 

marketing. We can only hope that the Members opposite will finally repent. I believe producers in the 

province are determined to have a Commission that works to their benefit. I believe they will support 

our action proposed in this Bill. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1347 

I will therefore be voting against the amendment and for the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I was very interested in some of the remarks that the Member for 

Pelly (Mr. Larson) made. I am sorry that he is not here. He talked about a vote in 1975 and the Members 

opposite, of course, enjoyed that remark quite well and they laughed quite heartily. 

 

I enjoy hearing laughter like that, Mr. Speaker, because if they remember during the last session they 

laughed at what the Liberals were saying. You may remember as well that the Members opposite 

laughed prior to the Athabasca by-election. Yes, they also laughed during that by-election, Mr. Speaker, 

but who had the last laugh? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The electorate of Athabasca laughed the NDP right out of the North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, if they continue on with legislation like this, let them laugh. We will have 

the last laugh in 1975. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — As well, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Pelly went on to say that the Act which we have 

before us now is already in existence and this is quite right. The Act was also in existence prior to 1964. 

But let’s look at that Act prior to the time the NDP started to play around with it. 

 

At that time, prior to 1971, the producers must request a marketing board. As well, once the producers 

had requested a marketing board and before any of the limitations that are listed in that Act could be 

implemented, the producers were allowed a vote and that vote had to be a 60 per cent vote in favor. As 

well, Mr. Speaker, if 60 per cent of the producers voted in favor of such regulations then the producers 

themselves had the control of how those regulations would be introduced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Let’s look at what has happened since the NDP started playing around with The Natural 

Products Marketing Act. 

 

First of all they decided that under a Board, the way this Act was presently set up, there is no way that 

they could implement a board. We can’t go to the people and ask them for a vote. This is why they are 

refusing them a vote now in the Commission. So they changed the Act? They changed the Act and said, 

“Look, we will form a commission.” By adding a commission this will allow the Government to set 

something up. This will allow the Government to appoint the members on that 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1348 

commission. This will allow the Government to implement regulations that are included in this Act. This 

will allow the Government to say whether the little people in the province want a commission or not. 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, where big brother comes out and says this is what the people want and 

you are going to get it whether you like it or not. 

 

I notice the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) smiling and nodding his head. He must be in agreement 

with what I am saying. This, Mr. Speaker, is the difference between what the Liberals did when they 

were in government and what the NDP are doing now. They are depriving the producer of any 

commodity, whether it be hogs or cattle, the right to voice their opinion as to whether they want that 

commission or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — They are denying the people of this province an opportunity adequately to understand 

what is going to be contained in that commission. 

 

You attend some of the commission meetings that are being held throughout this province now. The 

people that are attending those meetings on behalf of the Government are not able to answer questions 

because they don’t know what the answer is. And yet the Minister stands up in this House and says that 

he is informing the people. Votes are held at each one of these commission hearings and if he would 

have the guts to attend one of these he would realize that there hasn’t been anybody who has voted in 

favor of what he has asked for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. He says that the Minister hasn’t got the guts 

to attend the meetings. I have attended meetings in the province and for clarification purposes, we never 

told them what the commission was going to do. We are seeking some advice from the producers. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister is quite correct. He did attend one. He attended one up 

at Tisdale in his own constituency. They gave him such a rough time up there that he is afraid to go and 

attend any more in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, as has been said there is no way that we are going to let this Government 

rush this Bill through the House. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture and the Members opposite have stated that the people of this province want 

this Bill, that the people of this province want this legislation. I maintain that we have 44 ostriches 

sitting on the Government side of the House, they are just sitting there with their heads and ears in the 

sand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Why don’t they go out and 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1349 

listen to the people of the province? And if they have been listening why don’t you allow them to vote? 

If you have nothing to fear as far as this marketing commission is concerned, give them the vote, let 

them see democracy in action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many more things which I should like to say in regard to this particular piece of 

legislation. There are many more things which I think have to be said about as vicious a piece of 

legislation as we have ever had before us. Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The Department of Education Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make one or two comments regarding this 

amendment to The Department of Education Act. My colleague from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) 

mentioned the other day that he thought that this Bill would be better held until we have the regulations 

under the new cablevision proposal of the Government opposite. 

 

We have waited for several months since the announcement was made that the province was going to go 

into the cablevision industry and to date we haven’t had any further details. I think the fact that this 

amendment is so closely linked and related to the cablevision system which will eventually be 

established in this province, I believe that my colleague was on a good wicket when he suggested that it 

should be held until such time as we see those regulations. 

 

This is a significant step and one that is causing concern to the people of this province. We have had 

many groups write, phone us and tell us that they would like to know more about what the Minister is 

recommending because there are a lot of implications involved in this particular amendment even 

though it is rather short. 

 

I don’t think that the people are concerned in particular because they oppose television programming in 

our schools. They all recognize the value of this trend in educational circles today. They recognize that it 

is a growing trend, however. The concern that is being created by this bit of legislation is the fact that 

Minister is taking, like most Ministers opposite, unto himself unlimited power in the manner in which 

education television will be administered and controlled in this province. 

 

I think the fact that the Minister announced at an earlier occasion that they were prepared to pay 100 per 

cent of the cost of providing this television equipment shows that they are not prepared to wait until they 

could make agreement with the school boards that wanted it on the normal basis that they usually 

participate, 50 or 60 per cent. It was evident from the Minister’s statement that he wanted to be in a 

position of having no excuse why schools would not have this equipment 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1350 

because, as he said later in his press release, it would be too bad if the schools had this equipment and 

didn’t use it. And then he went on to say, “Therefore, we will of necessity have to go into the 

programming of programs.” And this is where the concern among the people of Saskatchewan is being 

created. The fact that the Minister is going to go into the TV business. If it were the school boards that 

were going to have some say, if it were the parents and the students and the teachers that were going to 

have some say then I don’t think this concern would be there. But it is the Minister who is going to have 

complete control over the TV programming in the schools of Saskatchewan and this is what is creating 

the concern today. 

 

We all recognize that today radio broadcasting and radio school broadcasts are under the control of the 

CFTC and if this was true that cablevision would be regulated entirely by the Canadian Radio Television 

Commission we wouldn’t have the concern that we have but there is nothing to say, in fact, it is obvious 

from comments made by Members opposite that cablevision will probably be regulated by the Province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’re crazy! 

 

Mr. Guy: — No, I’m not. If it’s not true then why don’t you come out and say so. The Minister is not in 

his seat today and he has not made it clear. In fact, what’s happening in television today I think is 

becoming the concern of a great number of people across the country because it appears that there is an 

upheaval in handling educational TV. It appears that the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation are taking 

the approach of selling all educational programs to a visual education Toronto based private company. 

That would mean then that schools would have to purchase all their television from a private company 

and I think that it is regrettable with the CBC being a public company in taking this attitude. I think the 

teachers are concerned. 

 

Mr. Faris: — Tell them in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I don’t care whether it is in Timbuctu, Ottawa or anywhere else. I say that it’s unfortunate 

that the CBC is taking this position. If Members opposite would keep their big mouths shut, particularly 

the Member from Arm River (Mr. Faris) who is better spreading the communion wine up at Pine House 

than he is sitting here in the Legislature, we’d be somewhat better off. 

 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of personal privilege. I have had to correct the garbage from the 

Member from Athabasca in regard to that previously. I had him withdraw that once and I request that he 

withdraw that again. It is a completely false allegation. 

 

Mr. Guy: — If the Minister says that he wasn’t spreading it around well then obviously he must have 

had some other method of handling it. I’ll withdraw that statement. If the Members opposite would sit 

still and listen instead of always trying to enter the debate things would go better. They are going to have 

lots of opportunity to enter the debate but they want to enter the debate at the same time that I am 

speaking. Even the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) doesn’t do that very often. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1351 

But I said, Mr. Speaker, that it is regrettable that the CBC is going to sell all the educational TV 

programming to a private operation and we don’t agree that this is in the best interests of educational TV 

across Canada. It is for this reason, with this upheaval taking place, that we believe the Minister should 

delay this amendment until this whole question of educational TV can be sorted out, particularly in 

relationship to our own position here in Saskatchewan and our own cablevision company which I 

understand the Government is going to move into very shortly. 

 

Well now, of course, the other matter of concern and I am sure the Minister should recognize this, is the 

failure of the Government in these amendments to provide for any input by school boards, by parents, by 

students, by teachers or by ratepayers. Now under these amendments TV equipment can be forced upon 

any school system without any discussion with the school board, teachers, students, parents or anybody 

else concerned and I think in a day when we should be trying to get more autonomy and more local 

input into our educational program this is a backward step. I am sure the Minister recognizes this. There 

should be a provision in these amendments whereby the local people can determine the content and the 

use of this media in their own school system rather than having the Minister make decisions without first 

consulting the local schools and the local people involved. When you consider this lack of local 

participation and control in addition to the unknown factor of cablevision as it is going to be handled by 

the Government opposite, we think that the Minister would be well advised to leave this amendment on 

the Order Paper until such time as the whole question of the cablevision regulations and rules that are 

going to be followed in Saskatchewan become known and he has time to listen to some of the school 

boards and some of the people involved in educational circles who, I am sure, must be putting some 

pressure on him to have some local input rather than having everything in the hands of the Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to speak in support of this Bill 

because it is a Bill that is going to put Saskatchewan in the forefront of education and that is as it should 

be. 

 

I am greatly disturbed by the tenor of the remarks of the Members opposite. I am sorry that the Member 

from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) isn’t in his seat because he again started off in a very hysterical 

manner in regard to this Bill suggesting that all sorts of new powers and so on were being given to the 

Minister. Anybody who has studied the present legislation and this legislation will see that, in fact, this 

is not true. Anybody who knows how schools operate or will operate in regard to the use of these video 

tape machines know that whether they use those machines or not or what they show on them, what they 

record and play back on them, is a local decision, a local responsibility. It is now and this legislation 

makes no change in that whatsoever. 

 

I was rather pleased that the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) should raise this matter of the CBC 

policy with regard to selling out the educational television material which it prepared – much of it 

prepared at the cost of all of 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1352 

the taxpayers of Canada by the CBC. Now it is being sold to a private concern and if a local school 

should decide to record some of this material on television they will be put in the position where they 

will have to pay this private company to show again educational television programs that were produced 

at the cost of the taxpayers of Canada. This is absolutely ridiculous. Not only that but some of those 

television broadcasts that schools would have to pay to show again, were not only produced by the CBC 

but also in co-operation with Departments of Education right across Canada. In other words, here is 

possibly a film that has been produced partly by the CBC, partly by the Department of Education here in 

Saskatchewan, that Saskatchewan schools will have to pay to show again. Now this is absolutely 

ridiculous. This, of course, is the CBC which is a Crown corporation of the national Government. That 

Government is at this time, as we know, a Liberal Government, similarly the CRTC is a Liberal 

Government agency. Now let’s be perfectly clear about this. They are laying down guidelines right now 

for radio and television and cablevision broadcasting. If there is anything wrong with those regulations 

you let your friends in Ottawa know about it because they are laying down those regulations. I think it is 

extremely regrettable that we should have this sort of hysterical reaction on the part of the Opposition in 

this field because it is a venture that takes our schools and our province into the forefront. I think that 

when we look at the possibilities in the area of cablevision, for instance, the tremendous opportunities in 

regard to education, all the Members of this House should co-operate in this regard. 

 

When we look at the grants that made available video tape machines for the schools in this province I 

would think that all the Members of this House would be pleased to see this and would congratulate the 

Minister, particularly if you read that release carefully to see that most of these machines were put out 

into the rural areas where these are going to be a tremendous aid to diversify the kind of educational 

opportunities those children will receive. There are also exciting possibilities for this type of video tape 

machine in regard to our regional library system. There is a very real possibility that by utilizing the 

present structure of regional libraries, which this year this Minister has extended right across this 

province, that we will see that these video tape machines could be used in each local library. Then a 

person living out in some remote part of the province could order a course in some very theoretical sort 

of subject for which you are not going to be able to get a large number of people in order to form a class. 

But that person would insert it themselves in these very simply operated video tape machines and 

undertake an educational program in which they are very largely their own instructor. This is an exciting 

possibility and it is a possibility made possible by the use of 20th century technology and I am pleased 

to see our library system, our school system bring in this sort of innovation. 

 

Now I think that in regard to the distribution of this sort of material it is extremely important that this 

power be within this province and be in the Department of Education. There is no question whatsoever 

that the Department of Education is not going to take upon itself a monopoly in the distribution of this 

sort of material. The problem is that the CBC selling out these already established educational materials 

to private interests, that unless the Provincial Government gets into this kind of production and 

distribution there is a possibility that 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1353 

every time one of these educational films is shown in a classroom that school board is going to receive a 

bill from this outfit down there in Ottawa. Now that is completely unacceptable to us. We think that 

when the taxpayers have already paid for that production, the distribution should likewise be very 

largely in the hands of the Department of Education and through that means we hope to have this sort of 

media right throughout the province. I am hoping that later on in this Legislature we will be debating 

cablevision. We have heard very conflicting comments from the Members opposite with regard to their 

position in regard to cablevision. I hope that in either this debate or in a later debate they will clarify 

their position. It is not germane to this Bill but our position is very clear. 

 

I am very pleased to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, it is rather interesting to listen to the Member from Arm River 

(Mr. Faris) on Bill No. 27. If we listen to him then there is no reason why the Government should have 

this Bill before us. He says there is very little change between it and the old Act. I think Mr. Speaker, we 

should read the present clause that has been there for some time and is now being replaced. That clause 

reads as follows: 

 

The Department will have the control and management of kindergarten schools . . . and may make such 

arrangements as the Minister deems necessary for the development and co-ordination of educational 

broadcasting and for that purpose and subject to the approval of the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council 

make arrangements with any person or with the Government of Canada or with the Government of any 

Province of Canada or the agency or any of these governments. 

 

Now I think that is pretty broad coverage and that has been there. That is the question I ask the Member 

for Arm River and the Minister and Members opposite. Why are they changing that? Why? Do they 

want more power? We haven’t yet learned from the Minister or indeed from the Member for Arm River 

why they are seeking the powers that are being spelled out here now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have less fear of the Bill insofar as the objectives of education are concerned were 

it not for some announcements earlier this year by the Minister of Communications or Government 

Service (Mr. Brockelbank) whichever it is, with respect to cablevision and the possibility of that in this 

province. I certainly have words to say in that respect and I would ask leave to adjourn the debate at this 

time. I would again ask the Minister if he would consider leaving this Bill on the Order Paper until such 

time as we see the legislation that is coming in with respect to cablevision because the two issues are 

very definitely related. We have seen this Government move into the land business, we have seen them 

into the hog packing business here last week, and I am telling you, Mr. Speaker, before they move any 

farther into the business of making the minds of our youngsters in this province we want to hold this Bill 

up and have a look at it. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1354 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that 

Bill No. 48 – An Act respecting Assessment and Taxation in School Districts be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned debate on this particular Bill when it was last 

up for debate, there were several question with respect to a number of sections that weren’t clear on first 

perusal. I must thank the Minister for allowing me to contact a couple of his officials to clarify some of 

these point. There is nothing further that I have to add, Mr. Speaker, that cannot be dealt with when we 

come to Committee study of this Bill. Accordingly, I will support the Minister in this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Motion – Rail Line Abandonment 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney 

(Premier): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government that no railway branch line abandonment be 

considered in Saskatchewan before all the alternatives are thoroughly studied and the social and 

economic costs to producers, businesses and communities be ascertained and, further that no 

abandonments be allowed without the prior agreement of the Government of Saskatchewan and, 

specifically, that no abandonment be authorized until 1980. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): 

 

That the following words be added to the motion: 

 

And further that the railroad companies be obligated to: 

1. Provide a high standard of service on present lines. 

2. Provide adequate maintenance and improvements on rail lines and equipment so that a high standard 

of service can be maintained. 

 

Mr. Kramer (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate 

last day I had brought some facts to the attention of this House which rather brought into question some 

of the debate that had been carried on in the House earlier, especially the debate by the Hon. Member 

from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) who stated that nothing had been done prior to 1964 and that the former 

Government of Saskatchewan prior to 1964 had sat on its hands and done nothing. I think this document 

that I quoted from and which records the minutes of a historic meeting on November 22, 1963 chaired 

by the former Minister of Industry, Hon. Russ Brown answers that allegation. It was opened by the 

former Premier at that time, the late Hon. Mr. Lloyd and there were a number of people who identify 

themselves clearly with our party, former New Democratic MPs, Members of the Legislature. I pointed 

out to this House that there was not one single well-known Liberal who attended that conference. There 

were none. The former Leader of the Opposition at that time, the now Senator MacDonald, who speaks 

very loudly even in the Senate about a deal for Western Canada, they didn’t even know there was a 

problem in those days. The 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1355 

historic fact is, Mr. Speaker, that it was the action of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Government of 

that day that brought about the discontinuance of wholesale railway abandonment. We have to thank . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The horse was gone. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The only thing that’s gone is the minds of the Members of the Opposition. The horse 

may be gone as I said the other day but there is a portion still remaining across the floor, the most 

unsavory portion of the horse, if I may suggest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we need belabor that point any longer. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

farmers of Western Canada have been robbed for years, for the last 70 years by the railroad lobbies, the 

wealthy railroad lobbies of Eastern Canada. They have been robbed and they have been allowed to rob 

Western Canadian farmers and businessmen. They have been allowed to rob them by preceding Federal 

Governments, both Conservative and Liberal. The wealthy lobby of the CPR has continually held sway 

and determined what shall happen in Western Canada. The millions and millions of dollars that have 

been taken, duped Western Canada through these railroad lobbies, St. Lawrence Seaway lobby, the 

export-import companies. These are the reasons. The depopulation of Western Canada lies squarely on 

the shoulders of former Liberal and Conservative Governments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, why in this day and age do we have the meagre Port Churchill shipments, 

except for the lobby? Why do we not develop that tremendous harbor? Why is it that the Russians are 

breaking into the Arctic circle with year-round shipping? The Port of Churchill is not in the Arctic 

Circle. Last winter the Russians made history breaking through 20 feet of ice in 60 below zero weather. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Trying to get away from the Chinamen. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, that’s about as wise as other remarks that have been made by the Members 

opposite. 

 

They are trying to develop their North and they are developing their North, Mr. Speaker. But we, 

because of a few greedy, wealthy Liberals and Tories in Eastern Canada, in Toronto plus some other 

influences from south of the line, have allowed the West to rot in poverty because we have not been 

allowed to develop the resource, the great resource that is the Churchill harbor. The blame lies squarely 

on these people opposite who only give lip service as I said the other day, who only give lip service to 

the Churchill route. They give lip service to this motion and present an amendment with tongue in 

cheek. I say, Mr. Speaker, that once in a while somebody gets up at Ottawa and says something sensible. 

Once in a while even the other day the former Primer Minister, Mr. Diefenbaker actually talked about a 

railroad in the North and I can agree that this should be looked at rather than a pipeline. I would 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1356 

say that a new railroad that would not only bring minerals from the North West Territories into the 

Churchill area and so on, makes more sense to me than a pipeline that will not stand up because it has to 

be supported from the permafrost because of the heat generated by a pipeline. 

 

A railroad, Mr. Speaker, does not require that kind of support and a railroad in the North is feasible. I 

congratulate the Hon. Mr. Diefenbaker for bringing that suggestion to the House. At least it’s worthy of 

study rather than, Mr. Speaker, the puling, quibbling, whining kind of suggestions that come from these 

Members in the House here and their counterparts in Ottawa. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, Western Canadians have been robbed and it’s time that we stood up and were 

counted on both sides of this House in order to stop that wholesale robbery. It is time that we put an end 

to the waste and duplication that has existed in these roads. The duplication, not only in the railways, in 

the phoney competition that exists there at times, but there are other costs, Mr. Speaker. For instance, 

can you think of anything more ridiculous than a government at Ottawa continuing to pay millions of 

dollars in subsidies to keep the railroads going? Gradually they are withdrawing more and more 

services, demanding again of the Saskatchewan Government that we build better highways, stronger 

highways to carry that tonnage on our highways. So here we are providing even greater subsidies to the 

railroads, being forced to build more expensive highways at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer 

so that the truckers can bring greater competition to the railroad so they can lose more money and we 

can be forced again to pay more subsidies. No one but the Liberal and Conservative Governments could 

contrive anything as stupid as that. That is the kind of a theatre that we’ve been operating in and again, I 

say, Mr. Speaker, it’s high time that something was done about it. It is high time that something drastic 

was done about this costly duplication and this continuing demand for less responsibility on the part of 

those people who actually made billions of dollars out of the original development through the 

giveaways of former federal governments in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in supporting this motion and I certainly hope that it will receive the full 

support of all Members of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the applause. It is ironic that I have to get up right 

after the Member from North Battleford spoke because I resent very much that he refers us to something 

left over from the horse. You know, if he was apparently sober he would not say these things. I just 

wonder if he ever has sobered up. 

 

The other day when the Member from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) spoke, the Member from North Battleford 

(Mr. Kramer) got up and told him that he wasn’t telling the truth and, in fact, if it wasn’t parliamentary 

he would call him a liar or to that extent – I’m quoting verbatim. And he said that Liberals had never 

done anything regarding railroad abandonment and he referred to a document that was put out by the 

late W.S. Lloyd which was backed by a number of NDPs. Despite that, Mr. Speaker, railroads 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1357 

were abandoned in Saskatchewan. Since 1964 when you look through the Debates and Proceedings you 

find that in Volume 1, session of 1965, George Leith moved a resolution which says that this House 

strongly urge the Government of Canada to permit no abandonment. I won’t quote all of the resolution. 

His speech and the resolution on pages 385 to 387 was supported by the Liberal Government at that 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Then later on in the same session, the Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley spoke on the 

motion and the following year in 1966 the Minister of Labour, the Hon. L. Coderre spoke against 

railway abandonment. Then in 1967 we again have Mr. George Leith from Elrose move, seconded by 

G.B. Hooker, a resolution on page 558 of the Debates and Proceedings of the session of 1967. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, you know, sometimes I think that you have lost control of the House. When 

I want to speak I should like to speak and when those fellows want to speak, let them come up and 

speak. 

 

Then later on in 1967 the Hon. D.T. MacFarlane, the then Minister of Agriculture, spoke on railway 

abandonment, and later on George Leith again. So right through the Debates and Proceedings, the fact is 

not where are they but how effective they were when they spoke against the Federal Government. They 

convinced the Federal Government that there should be no railway abandonment. 

 

Now who are really the ones who are not behind the farmers on rail abandonment? It is the farm 

organizations. We have the weakest farm organizations that ever existed in Canada and I want to name 

them. First we have and who makes the most noise, the ones that I have the least sympathy for and that 

is the National Farmers’ Union of Canada. But this fellow Atkinson he can get up and blow and if he 

could suck as well as he can blow, you know, we would have every railroad in the United States in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Here we have Atkinson who represents 20,000 farmers. He gets more publicity than the 

Wheat Pool and the Canadian Federation of Agriculture. But then again, we have one of the weakest 

Federations of Agriculture. This man Boden, I don’t know whether he is tinted or whether he is red. 

When he comes out with statements they don’t have any effect, they appear to be so socialistically 

inclined. He goes after the Hog Producers Association that they shouldn’t voice any opinion. He was all 

in favor of the Government setting up this commission and now the Hog Producers have opted out of the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture. All to the credit of Mr. Boden. Well, then we have the Wheat Pool. 

The Wheat Pool, you know, they are sitting in their offices trying to cancel out as many delivery points 

as possible saying that the reason we are doing it is because the railways have threatened to take out the 

railway. Well, that’s a bunch of garbage. Over in my constituency the Carlton Line 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1358 

which is a very familiar line is up for railway abandonment in 1974, maybe 1980 but the Wheat Pool has 

already built a tremendous elevator at Rosthern two years ago to make sure that all the farmers of Laird, 

Waldheim and that area are going to haul to Rosthern. They have told the CNR take it up, we don’t want 

it and they go around and say it is the Government or it’s the CPR. 

 

Well, that’s our farm leaders who should be more honest than what they are. They are just not honest 

with the farmers. As a matter of fact I told Mr. Boden one day in my office that the Wheat Pool was 

sitting in their office and trying to have about 60 to 70 delivery points in Saskatchewan. And he said that 

was a bunch of garbage. Well, you know it isn’t. I challenged him. Their lawyer told me that this is what 

eventually they wanted and I told him that if he ever found out that this wasn’t true that he should let me 

know. To date he hasn’t let me know whether that statement was made or not. That statement was made. 

 

The Wheat Pool are looking at as few delivery points as possible and you fellows all know it. They have 

closed out Osler, they have closed dozens of places and they bought out the Federal Grain Company and 

what is happening, they are closing out about 50 per cent of those elevators and farmers in many, many 

areas are blaming the railways for it. 

 

The United Grain Growers is trading with the Wheat Pool, the Wheat Pool is trading with Pioneer and 

these are facts. I don’t care whether this costs me one vote or not, I want to put these gentlemen on the 

spot. You people know that this is true, this is happening today and who is instrumental in having the 

railroads wanting to pull out. Nothing but the farm organizations themselves. Elevator after elevator has 

been closed and in many cases I am quite convinced that many farmers are for railway abandonment. 

They are absolutely for railway abandonment. We have 125,000 farmers, maybe 150,000 forty years ago 

in Saskatchewan and we were in the horse and buggy days. Surely to goodness I farm five times as 

much land as my father did with four sons and I haven’t got as much work as he had. Certainly if those 

things applied to the farmer today, surely we are all geared for a different kind of a setting. 

 

I agree, I agree with the principle – I don’t agree with the method of the way the farm organizations are 

handling this situation. I agree with the Wheat Pool that many points should be closed but I don’t want 

to go around and blame the railroads for doing it, the CP or the CN. This is a form of farm efficiency. 

We talk about schools, we talk about railway abandonment, then the first thing that you should have 

considered is why have we less farmers in rural Saskatchewan today. I think you can go back, I believe, 

to 1947 when the larger units came into existence. That was the first step of diminishing the rural 

population. That was step number one and if we want to keep the railroads, if we want to keep the 

station agents and if we want to keep the elevator agents, it is also fair to say that we should want to 

keep that little red school house out on the farm. That’s the only way we are going to keep the 

population in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t care how many Bills the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) brings into Saskatchewan about 

FarmStart, or you can call it SEDCO or Hog Barn Grants, that won’t keep one more 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1359 

farmer on the farm than it does today. No, Sir. There is a trend away from the farm. We have 

unemployment today in the country second to none, six or seven per cent in Saskatchewan. I have 

neighbors who are in the dairy business and they want to get some farm help. They can’t get it. No. As 

long as the Federal Government with this great sin hanging over their heads about the Unemployment 

Insurance and the Provincial Government’s sin hanging over their heads that we would sooner pay 

welfare. So a farmer can’t get any labor, no, he can’t get it. This glorified manpower situation that is 

provided for us, set up there to give some civil servants a high-paying job, they are not worth the salt 

they eat. We’ve got to pay for it, nobody gets any help from them. 

 

These are the problems that we are facing today. The railway abandonment resolution, I can say this 

with sincerity, that if the farm organizations were honest with the railroads and the farmers there would 

be no abandonment. But they give a public appearance that they don’t want any railway abandonment 

and behind the doors and under the tables they have made all kinds of deals and the Wheat Pool is 

supposed to be a farm organization run by farmers. Well, I believe I have told this at one time but I will 

refresh the memories of those who haven’t heard it. 

 

My father organized the Wheat Pool in 1928 at Osler. Forty years later my brother, president of the 

Wheat Pool at Osler was informed by the hierarchy in Saskatoon that they wanted an executive meeting 

of the committee in Osler for the next day. This was set up, the Pool officials came down and do you 

know what they told him? As of September 1, 1969 or 1970, I forget the year, there will be no Pool 

elevator in Osler. This is a farm organization. You know these things happen in Russia and they 

happened with the Wheat Pool. I’m a member of that Wheat Pool, I have no vote. They just closed it out 

and this is the way they are closing out station after station. If you recall what we see in the Western 

Producer, the great big ad – ‘you buy wheat flour, you haul to the Wheat Pool elevators and you haul to 

the mill at Saskatoon, this is farmer-run, farmer-decision and farmer-owned’. Baloney! It’s no more 

farmer-owned than Intercontinental Packers. 

 

So when we talk about railway abandonment I think we should get some sense into it. There is reason to 

believe that there are railways in Saskatchewan that need to be abandoned. I know that if the Attorney 

General was the owner of the railways in Saskatchewan he would pull up half of them and I think I 

would do the same. I certainly would. It only makes sense, you have done it with the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company, those lines that were not beneficial or were not making any returns, you 

dropped them. Why? I have every reason to believe that the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

should also give service, non profit service. But where you didn’t see profit you dropped them and I 

think it was the right thing to do. Are not the railways the same? Why should we pay subsidies? The 

Pool is looking at it, the United Grain Growers and other companies are looking at inefficient lines. 

When you have an elevator agent who is buying 100,000 bushels of grain a year when he could be 

buying a million, why pay his salary? It costs at least $10,000 to operate an elevator. The farmers have 

to pay for it. So there are many areas where railway abandonment is in order. In all of these 

commissions that have been set up, commission after commission, and this Government is certainly one 

of the 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1360 

ones that believes in commissions. When they bring in a report, I’ll bet you Mr. Attorney General 

doesn’t read half of them. You don’t implement one per cent of the recommendations. And I would quit 

setting up commissions. As a Government you should have the guts to do what you think is right and if 

it is wrong the people will kick you out and let somebody else run it for you. With all of these 

commissions, they are not worth the paper they are written on. I can refer to the Johnson Commission on 

the administration of Government which was set up in 1965. It cost way over $100,000 and the only 

thing that was brought in was the Central Vehicle Agency. I don’t think half the Cabinet Ministers read 

the report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I am right. If I read all the reports that I got in the mail from the Federal and Provincial 

Governments, I would be reading till kingdom come. There is no way how I can read all the garbage that 

this Government is sending out. There is no way how I can read all the garbage that the Federal 

Government is sending out. Plus a lot of other corporations that are sending out garbage, it isn’t worth 

the paper it is written on. Let’s do what is right in our opinion. You know, my thirteen year old daughter 

knows which railways should be taken out. No problem at all. You start from the south, you leave one, 

and you take one out, you leave the other one in. In the north the same way and you are going to have a 

happy medium. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — There is no problem whatsoever. But here we have commission after commission. You 

read the reports. You know I remember when Mr. Hooker told us about a meeting they had in the south 

where they had a meeting about railway abandonment. They told them, oh, there were so many cans of 

cream that were shipped out of this area, so many cattle. The railway people they are not fools, they had 

their accounts with them. Out of 1,000 head of cattle the railways got one. Out of so many cans of milk 

the railways maybe got ten cans a year. There is no argument whatsoever. How many hogs are raised in 

a certain area is no reason because hogs are not shipped by rail in general. Cattle aren’t shipped by rail, 

most of them are flown out, first class. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — So there are many, many areas where we need just the ordinary farmer’s common sense. 

Things will straighten out. Let’s not always get these commissions that cost the public piles and piles of 

money. And I think we would have a far happier country if we did this. 

 

I must say that I will support a reasonable railway abandonment. As I said, I think it is quite simple for 

any thirteen year old to find out which ones they are. I would support that kind of a program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1361 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is a little difficult to follow the usual lucid address by the Hon. 

Minister from the Battleford (Mr. Kramer) We note that the Hon. Minister now has his cast removed 

from his hand. If he got it the same way that the NDP have done anything about rail line abandonment, 

he broke his hand by sitting on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the resolution proposed by the Government opposite, moved by the Hon. Premier (Mr. 

Blakeney) it’s the first admission in this House that the NDP Government favors rail line abandonment 

in Saskatchewan. This resolution makes it quite clear that the Government opposite is asking for help of 

the Federal Liberal Government to help it out in the next two elections by putting off rail line 

abandonment until 1980. But after that the NDP say it is okay, Mr. Speaker. They say then after 1980 go 

ahead, we will have complete control at that time. We won’t have to worry about the issue. It is the first 

admission, Mr. Speaker, it is the first admission that the NDP are trying to stir up a political issue to try 

and cover up their own sins. Because it was under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, that rail lines were first 

abandoned in Saskatchewan. It was the Liberal Governments in Saskatchewan and Ottawa that stopped 

rail line abandonment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP are trying to fool the people of Saskatchewan and cover up their 

own mistakes and their attempts at political sleight of hand should be of interest to every Saskatchewan 

voter. Because the only time that rail lines were torn up and abandoned in this province was when 

Members opposite were the Government prior to 1964. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t help the farmers then 

and they are not helping the farmers now. They are trying to pass the blame for their own mistakes onto 

someone else. They are the only party that closed down rail lines in Saskatchewan. 

 

The resolution which the Premier of this province proposes will allow the railroads to abandon after 

1980 and further, Mr. Speaker, will allow the railroads to not maintain their lines until that date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have proposed an amendment to this resolution. The only Member opposite who is 

going to vote in favor of it is the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). Does this mean, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Premier and Members opposite favor rail line deterioration in Saskatchewan? Certainly it does, 

Mr. Speaker. That is what they are going on record as favoring. Does this mean that the Premier favors 

rail service deterioration? Certainly it does if we take this resolution, Mr. Speaker. Does it mean that the 

NDP favor planned obsolescence of rail transportation in Saskatchewan? Certainly it does. That is what 

this resolution asks us to support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we urge the Government, the Members opposite to support our amendment and to show 

that you are really sincere when it comes to rail line abandonment in this province. We ask the Member 

for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley to support our amendment and go on record as being opposed to rail service 

deterioration. We ask the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) to support the amendment, to show that 

you are opposed to rail service 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1362 

deterioration. Because if you are not then the cost of buying the CPR will probably be only about $2 

million if things deteriorate at the level they are going. We ask the future engineer of the Roy Romanow 

Railway to go on record as being opposed to rail service deterioration. And above all, Mr. Speaker, we 

ask and we urge the new president of the RRR to go on record and vote for the amendment of the 

Members in Opposition and show that you are really concerned about rail line abandonment, and that 

you don’t want to see rail service deterioration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government’s resolution says that they favor rail line abandonment but not until after 

1980. They say that they are in favor by that resolution of rail service deterioration. That resolution says 

that the Members opposite favor obsolescence of rail transportation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if the Members opposite are really concerned, really concerned about the rail line abandonment 

problem in Saskatchewan they will heartily endorse the amendment proposed by the Members on this 

side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) made the comment, “Can we think 

of anything more ridiculous”. Well, can we think of anything more ridiculous than the Government 

motion, Mr. Speaker, that asks this House to go in favor of rail line abandonment? That is the most 

ridiculous resolution that has come before this House. 

 

We have heard comments, Mr. Speaker, by the Minister for Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). 

He kept saying when the Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) kept referring to people who had 

brought resolutions before this House. What happened to them? We will certainly be interested in 

watching what happens to all the people on the Government side who spoke in favor of this resolution of 

the Premier’s. Because if history is a good teacher it certainly will indicate that there will be very few 

Members opposite back after 1975. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we hope and we urge that the Members opposite will put some thought 

when they bring this resolution before the House next sessions. We hope that they will put some thought 

into their programs on what their position really is when it comes to rail line abandonment. We hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that common sense is going to be the governing factor when it comes into the rail 

transportation system in the Province of Saskatchewan. We hope that there will be common sense 

brought in a resolution next session or the Government again will try to work its way out of a problem 

they created. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government’s policy now favoring rail service deterioration is against the interests of 

the people of Saskatchewan. We urge the Government opposite to show that they really care and support 

the Liberal amendment and reject the foolish position taken by the Hon. Premier. We hope they will 

come forward with some common sense proposals and we can discuss this on a rational basis in the next 

session. We hope that the Government opposite quits this cheap political approach to this problem. Mr. 

Speaker, I have some more comments and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1363 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek that Bill 

No. 34 – An Act to amend The Hospital Revenue Act, 1966, be now read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, during debate on this Bill the Members of the Opposition raised 

primarily two questions. One was that in our development of the Community Health and Social Centres 

there was a lack of consultation on our part with the nursing profession and the medical profession. Mr. 

Speaker, it is interesting to note that all of a sudden the Members of the Opposition are concerned about 

consultation. You know, when it came down to hospital closures during 1968 and ’69 the word 

consultation didn’t appear in the Liberal dictionary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — I ask them when they were closing those hospitals one after the other, did they 

consult the nursing profession? I ask them when they closed hospital after hospital did they consult the 

medical profession? Mr. Speaker, they did not even consult the boards of the hospitals? What they did is 

issue an edict and ordered those hospitals closed. Now they are concerned about consultation, Mr. 

Speaker. Now they are concerned about consultation. What they did is they dictated the closure of the 

hospitals one after the other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder who the Hon. Members from Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) 

or the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) were talking to when they were making 

enquiries about consultation. Because certainly whoever they were talking to they were not talking to the 

people with whom we have had consultation. Very meaningful consultation. Let me draw to the Hon. 

Members’ attention that back on August 27 we had a session with the medical profession where we 

discussed the Community Health and Social Centres. We asked for their views on the Health and Social 

Centres. Mr. Speaker, on October 2 I had a joint meeting with the Saskatchewan College of Physicians 

and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Medical Association and the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses 

Association. At that time consultations were held and their views were sought for and were given. They 

asked us to provide them with a manual and it was provided. Mr. Speaker, the only question that the 

nursing profession raised when we discussed the Health and Social Centres was the new role that the 

nurses would have in working in the Health and Social Centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members say that we did not consult the medical profession. Interestingly 

enough, Mr. Speaker, how is it that the whole program of Health and Social Centres is reprinted in the 

Quarterly Medical Journal? They received copies and they made comments to us and they made 

representations. Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of the Members the comments and the 

views expressed by the medical profession in regard to the Health and Social Centres. 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1364 

In a letter submitted to myself on December 8, signed by Dr. Bergen, what do they say? They say: 

 

We endorse this effort of co-ordination and hope that it will soon also occur throughout the total health 

system. 

 

In summary they say: 

 

The Community Health and Social Centres concept is an alternative method of providing co-ordinated 

health and social services to communities by the provision of an out-patient department without a 

hospital. We think the concept is good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what the medical profession said about the community clinics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — They endorse the concept, but, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members say we haven’t 

consulted. We did consult the medical profession. We did consult with the nursing profession. We also 

discussed the matter of the Health and the Social Centres with the Pharmaceutical Association because 

they, too, are interested and concerned about it. But most of all, Mr. Speaker, we consulted the people in 

the community. And community after community endorsed the proposition. True there are those who 

were reluctant. They would have preferred to have the hospitals opened. But we did not feel in those 

communities where the Health and Social Centres were offered there was a need to open the hospitals at 

this time based on the population and based on the problems of getting physicians recruited in those 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other argument that was presented by the Opposition is in regard to the financing of our 

hospitals in the province. During the month of January we were reviewing our budget and reviewing the 

budgets of the hospitals. After taking the total review we found that the hospitals in the Province of 

Saskatchewan asked for an increase in their budgets on the average of 16 per cent over the year 

previous. I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that in 1972 we increased the budgets to the hospitals in the 

province on the average by over 13 per cent. We reviewed the budgets of the hospitals. We felt that in a 

number of instances their requests were not justified. In fact, I can tell you that one hospital got carried 

away with itself and asked for an increase in their budget of 55 per cent over the year previous. We 

called meetings in the City of Regina and the City of Saskatoon and we invited all the hospital board 

chairmen and the administrators to those meetings and we discussed with them their budgets. We 

advised them that we are prepared as a Government to increase the budget for this year for hospital 

operating costs by nine per cent. We thought that this was a reasonable figure. We thought that at this 

figure we can provide a good level of care in all our hospitals. Interestingly enough, in my discussions 

with all the hospitals during the two meetings that I held no one questioned our proposal for a nine per 

cent increase. We did say that there may be, in some cases, a need to take a look at the hospital 

employee staffing. This question is not a new one that I have raised with the hospital. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I draw to the 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1365 

attention of the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) when he was Minister of Public Health in 1970 

when I spoke on the hospital question I made reference to this in my speech. 

 

I note with interest some of the figures the Minister has quoted. In 1963 the last full year of CCF 

Government administration of the hospital plan, there was a total average staff complement of 9,290 

for that year. 

 

In 1969 this figure rose to 11,111, that is the figure that he provided me with when we were considering 

the Estimates. I note, Mr. Speaker, that after a further check on that the figure wasn’t that high, it was 

10,858. An increase, at that time I quoted 1,823, the actual figure was 1,568, an increase of 16.9 per cent 

in the number of employees in our hospitals. This must be contrasted with the number of hospital beds 

and patient days of care. At the end of 1963 the number of hospital beds in Saskatchewan stood at 7,307, 

the number of beds increased to 7,410, an increase of 103. I noted that the number of days of care had 

declined and the average length of stay had dropped but the significant thing was the sharp increase in 

the employment while the number of hospital beds and length of stay had been declining. I raised the 

concern at that time that there was a need for us to take a look at the constant increase in the number of 

employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can point out that in one of the hospitals, for example, in 1961 they had 968 employees, 

by 1971 that hospital increased its staff to 1,373 employees, an increase of 42 per cent. In that ten year 

period, in fact, there was a reduction in the number of beds, there was no reduction in the hours of work. 

I’ll give you another example, one hospital employed 150 employees in 1961, ten years later the number 

increased to 245, a 48 per cent increase with no increase in beds and no reduction in the hours of work 

for employees. 

 

The story repeats itself in a number of other instances. In fact, in Saskatchewan during the last ten year 

period we have seen the staff in the hospitals increase by 26 per cent, the nursing staff has been 

increased by 40 per cent. Mr. Speaker, particular reference has been made to Saskatoon. I want to point 

out that in the Saskatoon hospitals they have had over the years a larger complement of nursing care 

than any other hospital in the Province of Saskatchewan. The City Hospital had as direct hours of 

nursing care to patients 4.5 hours per patient per day, compared to St. Paul’s 4.12, compared to Grey 

Nuns of 3.62, Regina General 4.14. All that we have asked the City Hospital in Saskatoon to do is come 

down to a level where other hospitals are providing care of the same nature. It is as a result of this that 

there may be some reduction in the nursing staff. Mr. Speaker, during my meetings in January I 

specifically asked the hospital to review the matter of staffing. In saying that, I also advised the hospital 

that we are not going to be asking them to cut staff, to create lay-offs, but to take a look at whether some 

of the vacancies that exist should be filled. 

 

The Members of the Opposition have asked how many reductions there will be throughout our entire 

hospital system. The best that our people are able to determine, based on the money that we have 

approved, perhaps 160 in total, which I believe is not a large reduction in staff that we are proposing 

and, in fact, there will be no lay-offs in the hospitals. The only thing that will be taking place is that 

some of the vacancies that 



 
March 5, 1973 

 

 

1366 

existed for a long time will not be filled. At the same time, I want to advise the Hon. Members who have 

raised the question in regard to Regina General Hospital, while there are going to be some reductions in 

some areas, on the other hand because of new programs that are being introduced, there will be increases 

in the number of staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be providing $116 million to operate the hospital system in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. we are going to be providing over $11 million more this year to operate the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan than was provided last year. One other area that we are concerned 

about is that the employees who are working in the hospital earn a decent income. I need not remind this 

House of the kind of conditions that prevailed in the hospitals and the kind of wages that were paid to 

the hospital employees during the Liberal administration. Last year when we took office that was the 

first item we had to deal with. We did provide for substantial wage increases for the employees. Today 

most minimum wages in the hospital are $2 an hour in unionized hospitals. The hospitals are back in 

negotiations this year and we will be providing funds to improve the wages and the working conditions 

of hospital employees. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I am going to make every effort to ensure that our hospital system is 

efficient. I am going to make every effort to ensure that there is no waste. I am going to make sure that 

there is no duplication, also that there is no unnecessary buildup of staff. I think we owe it to the people 

of the province to ensure that we are operating a most efficient hospital system in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. This is what we propose to do in the year ahead. Mr. Speaker, I ask that the Members 

support the Bill that is before us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:29 o’clock p.m. 


