



















































Hansard: January 29, 1973


17 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

January 29, 1973 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Statement on Foreign Ownership of Land Committee 
 

Mr. J. Wiebe: (Morse) –— Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to address a 

question to the Premier of the province (Mr. Blakeney). Last Thursday at a press conference he made a 

statement and it was reported in the Leader-Post on Friday regarding the Foreign Ownership of Land 

Committee. In that statement he said: 

 

The Committee only recently formed its recent recommendations and I have informally seen only a 

draft copy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am a member of that Committee and to this date there have been no recommendations 

made, nor any formal recommendations made. Now either you were trying to mislead the public or the 

chairman of that Committee is trying to mislead us. Would the Premier kindly make clear to this House 

what recommendations he was referring to? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, I should have thought that the Members of the House 

would know by now that I am not responsible for what appears in the Leader-Post. I simply decline to 

take responsibility for anything that appears in the Leader-Post. I am not now suggesting that this report 

was improper. What I said to the press conference was that my understanding was in response to a 

question of whether or not legislation would be forthcoming at this Session with respect to the foreign or 

corporate ownership of farm land. I said I had no idea whether legislation would be forthcoming. The 

Government proposed to await the recommendations of the Committee. I, for my part, had not seen any 

recommendations from the Committee. I had been advised by members of the Committee informally 

that the recommendations were likely to proceed along certain lines. This is what I informed the press 

conference that I had no idea whether the Committee would be recommending legislation and 

accordingly was unable to predict whether or not legislation would be forthcoming at this Session. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, on what lines had you received this information 

of this Government that before Government Members on a Committee make recommendations that that 

recommendation has to be approved by the Premier or by Cabinet. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — May I say that it is assuredly not the policy of the Government that that be the case. 

As a corollary the Government feels perfectly free to reject legislation made by legislative committees 

because they are not previously cleared by Cabinet. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

18 

Clipping from Western Producer on Market Plans 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct 

a question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). I have in my hand a clipping of November 30, 

1972 from the Western Producer – “Market Plans for all Products favored by the Saskatchewan 

Government.” In view of what Mr. Messer said at the Livestock Association Convention last week – 

“Messer says no dice to Hog Vote”, there is general concern by sheep producers and cattlemen that there 

is now in the process of organizing a marketing commission or board. Is it the policy of this Government 

that in the future marketing commissions or boards that no vote of the producer will be given and that 

they will continue to ram this particular marketing commission or board down their throats? 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer: (Minister of Agriculture) — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what speech the Hon. 

Member is referring to where I said that the Government’s intention was to move forward with the 

implementation of producer marketing boards and commissions, but I have said that and it is the 

intention of the Government to move forward with producer marketing boards and commissions. As you 

know some will have a vote and some will not. 

 

In reference to the sheep producers, Mr. Speaker, I am under the understanding that they are pursuing 

the formation of a commission by their own instigation without a vote. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. That’s fine if the sheep 

producers want to do it on their own. If some of them are being allowed a vote why, Mr. Speaker, are 

the hog producers denied a vote? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to get it perfectly clear for the Members opposite that the decision 

of the Government to pursue the hog marketing commission was made on the direction from 

representatives from the Hog Producers Association, the Saskatchewan Swine Breeders Association, the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the National Farmers Union and the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool. If one of those organizations chooses to change its mind after it gave the Government its 

recommendation then it answers to its own organization. We do not have to alter our original plans after 

they gave us guidance and recommended a commission. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Minister to please answer the question. Will 

future marketing boards or commissions of all agricultural commodity production in this province be 

given the opportunity of a vote of the producers involved or will they not? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, the opening for those who wish to have a board or commission is always 

there. Some will choose to have a producer marketing board, that will be done by a vote. Others will 

choose to follow the commission route such as the hog marketing commission and the route that the 

sheep producers 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

19 

are now talking about following. There will always be the option of either a board or a commission by a 

vote or without a vote and the Government responds to those who profess to speak for that given 

commodity, and which route they wish to recommend. 

 

Land Bank Commission 
 

Mr. E.F. Gardner: (Moosomin) — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. In 

view of the fact that $10 million to $13 million is being spent to purchase land for the Land Bank, will 

the Minister tell us by what method the details of these transactions will be made available to the 

Members of the Legislature who, of course, represent the taxpayers. In other words, will he instruct his 

official to give the Members of the Legislature this information or will we have to put hundreds of 

questions on the Order Paper, or will we have to depend on word that we get locally which may or may 

not be always correct? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I think that these kinds of questions could be best answered if they were in 

fact put on the Order Paper. I said that the inauguration of the initial sale that the Land Bank 

Commission was involved in that it was not going to be the practice of the Land Bank Commission 

identifying or at that time revealing the sale price of the land but it was the intention of the Government 

to give consideration to publishing the prices paid for all land at the end of a given operating year. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South) moved, seconded by Mr. R. Gross (Gravelbourg): 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Stephen Worobetz Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please your honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which 

Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) had indicated that he is going to be nice from the 

start. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I notice, Mr. Speaker, that in the Star-Phoenix the other day, the editor requested that the 

Premier possibly give the Leader of the Opposition a pat on the back. I would recommend the pat ought 

to be much lower than the Star-Phoenix indicated. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

20 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — And something just a little stronger, too. Mr. Speaker, also while we are on the Leader of 

the Opposition I noticed that he had a rather cool reception the other day as he appeared on 

“Counterpoint.” He did seem to have a few of his statistics mixed up. Some of his constituents in Prince 

Albert violently disagreed with what he had to say in the past and they just couldn’t find too much to 

agree with him in what he was saying at the present. I think that not only did have his statistics mixed 

up, he also had a considerable number of highways mixed up. And as the people of his constituency 

requested of him he ought to give a little bit of credit where credit is due in that he shouldn’t go about 

crying about something – a good idea that the Government had thought of and that he didn’t have the 

ability or the initiative to think of and that is the Land Bank. So, I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of 

the Opposition will of course spend his time at looking at government legislation and use constructive 

criticism that I am sure that he will do, for the benefit of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne, I want to thank the 

Premier for the honor that he has bestowed upon me and the constituency of Nutana South which I have 

the privilege to represent. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I should like also to extend congratulations to the Member for 

Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor), and the Member for Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski) and the member 

for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) on their appointments to the Cabinet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — These people certainly received the respect not only of the Members from this side of 

the House but also received considerable respect from the Members on the other side of the House in the 

last session. And I know that in following the activities of these three departments that these Members 

have shown that they are responsible individuals and that they are dedicated to democratic government 

in this province. 

 

I should also, Mr. Speaker, at this time, congratulate the Member, I can hardly see him, from Athabasca 

(Mr. Guy). I hope that his contribution in this House towards democratic government will be as much as 

I know would have been the contributions of Bob Dalby if he were in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been much political activity in this country since our May adjournment. We have 

seen since our May adjournment the NDP sweep to an unprecedented victory in B.C. Premier Barrett, 

like his counterpart here in Saskatchewan, has shown that he is a man of action. Almost immediately, 

Mr. Speaker, Premier Barrett gave $200 pensions to senior citizens. Mr. Barrett made it absolutely clear 

that natural resources development is going to take on a new direction and Mr. Barrett, like our 

Government here in 1971, restored free collective bargaining to laborers and teachers. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

21 

On October 30 the people’s message was made absolutely clear to all politicians. We have been told, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that the people are fed up with forked-tongued politicians; they are fed up with 

promises made and promises broken; they are fed up with politicians who constantly criticise but have 

really nothing constructive to offer. It was the people of Canada who forced parliamentarians to get 

down to the business of solving the problems of this country and to forget about some of their partisan 

politics and to devote their attention to these problems. 

 

If the Ottawa Throne Speech is any indication of the type of legislation that is forthcoming, the people 

of Canada can take credit for electing a minority government. One should not forget, however, that it 

was the NDP and more particularly, David Lewis, who brought to the attention of the people of Canada 

many of the serious problems that exist today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was Lewis who talked about the problem of foreign ownership. It was he who demanded 

higher pensions for senior citizens. Lewis deplored that inequitable taxation system. He pointed out the 

unfairness of the transportation policies for the Prairie Provinces. Lewis decried the ineptness of the 

Liberal Government to control unemployment and inflation; and he demanded a better deal for our 

Western farmers. We are pleased, Mr. Speaker, that many of these problem areas are dealt with in the 

Throne Speech. 

 

Although, Mr. Speaker, we in this House are not faced with the precarious situation of having a minority 

government, I wonder if I dare ask or suggest that this House strive for consensus government. I would 

hope that we make it our goal, all the Members of this House, to introduce and pass legislation which 

will benefit the electorate. Let the Government be flexible enough to seriously consider suggestions 

made by the Opposition; and let the Opposition be statesmen enough to suppose government legislation 

which in the end will benefit the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I know that this is a tall order to ask of the Members of this House and 

maybe I have to look at the more experienced Members to show the leadership. I know that there are 

many sincere politicians on both sides and I think if we put our heads together that we can carry out this 

particular goal. Too often, Mr. Speaker, when governments are elected they become divorced from those 

who elected them. Once in office they no longer seek the people’s advice and very often they do not 

disseminate information to them. I want to say that this Government in my opinion, is open to change. It 

does seek the advice of others and it is more ready to discuss, to debate, to reconsider and to amend. 

 

We believe that the citizens of this province have much to contribute and that they want to be involved 

in formulating those policies that will affect their lives and that will adequately meet, I hope, the 

challenges of the 70s. 

 

This Government, Mr. Speaker, has demonstrated its faith in the people of this province. At the last 

session this Legislature was asked to establish committees on Welfare, 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

22 

Agriculture, Liquor and Business. These committees have held hundreds of meetings and have listened 

to literally thousands of people of this province. Recommendations coming forth will reflect, in my 

opinion, the wishes of a large segment of the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In addition to these, various committees, such as kindergartens, trustee-teacher 

bargaining, community colleges, Land Bank and others, to further seek the advice of the people. 

 

I also know, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier and his Cabinet Ministers have been very generous with their 

time. They have made themselves available at many public functions and community meetings. Many 

Saskatonians have indicated to me personally that they appreciate the opportunity to meet with the 

Government. This same feeling was given to me as a member of the Welfare Committee as we went 

about this province this summer. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that because these consultations have taken 

place and because we have a cross-section of opinion, that most of the proposed legislation from the 

Throne Speech once it is enacted will be well received by the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, before getting into the gist of the Throne speech I want briefly to review 

some of the activities carried out in a few departments since our adjournment. 

 

This past summer the people of Saskatchewan witnessed a memorable event with the staging of the first 

Saskatchewan Summer Games in Moose Jaw, the largest sporting event in our history. During the five 

days, 1,300 athletes participated. In the summer months prior to the games nearly 15,000 Saskatchewan 

young people were involved in local and regional playoffs. This, when we in North America are 

justifiably concerned that our society is becoming a society of spectators where only the talented few 

perform for the entertainment of the passive and inactive majority. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the key 

word to the summer games was ‘participation’. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It is encouraging, Mr. Speaker, to know that the new Department of Culture and Youth 

under its capable leadership, a department which is concerned with quality of life, that the department is 

endeavouring to increase the opportunity for participation in sports. 

 

Still on sports, Mr. Speaker, but not concerned particularly with any department, I want at this time also 

to congratulate the Knights of Columbus of Saskatoon. The Knights of Columbus staged a very 

successful event in the eight Saskatchewan indoor games with took place in Saskatoon on December 29 

and 30. Approximately 1,280 athletes from 15 states of the United States, five other countries and most 

of the provinces of Canada participated. I should like to inform the House that eight Canadian records 

were broken as well as 39 Saskatchewan open and native 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

23 

 records. The Knights of Columbus Indoor Games have received international recognition. This is borne 

out by the fact that invitations were sent directly to the Saskatoon meet to Diane Jones and two other 

athletes to participate in the International Non-discriminatory meet in Africa this coming April. In 

addition to this, Mr. Speaker, the Knights of Columbus annually sponsor the special olympics for the 

handicapped. I hope that all Members in this House will join with me in congratulating the Knights of 

Columbus for much of the volunteer work that they do on these events which otherwise would probably 

be left undone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I have already alluded, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) and 

congratulated him and I think that some of the significant changes that have been made in his 

department have shown that he is a very capable and industrious individual. 

 

I want at this time, Mr. Speaker, to commend the Government for moving the mental retardation 

program from the Department of Health to the Department of Social Services. It might not be very 

significant to many people but the Minister of Social Services established a new co-ordinating agency 

called Core Services, which should result in a more integrated focus on the problems of the retarded. 

 

Core Services is an attempt to find a better means of expanding the relationship between the retarded 

individual and the community and to better co-ordinate the various government departments now 

involved in providing these services 

 

I am certain that all of us are also aware of the strong negative feeling that is held by a fairly large 

segment of the public concerning social service programs. In my opinion this feeling is due in large 

measure to the lack of information and the misunderstanding of the department’s programs 

 

Therefore Mr. Speaker, I personally was very pleased when the Minister decided to correct some of the 

misunderstanding and to supply the public with more information. Basically he has done this in two 

way. Firstly he scheduled a series of public meetings and Mr. Speaker, there has already been some 

criticism from the Opposition in what the Minister has done. But let me say this, that anytime a 

democratic government attempts to inform the people of programs that are available and things that 

rightfully belong to them no government should be criticized for doing this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Some time ago the Minister of Social Services also announced a community training 

residence in Saskatoon. Initially some people were very apprehensive about such a residence located in 

their area. However, let me say as a Member for Saskatoon I know that many of these fears have been 

allayed because of the success of the program. Surely no one would deny an offender another chance 

through probation and work-training programs to work out his problems and a new way of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister also has made some significant 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

24 

changes in the adoption procedures. He has broadened the Aim Centre program to include any child who 

is a ward of the Minister and who many have difficulties being adopted because of physical disabilities, 

medical problems, learning problems or intellectual disadvantage. 

 

In order to meet one of its election promises of preserving rural Saskatchewan this Government has 

altered the criteria as to the location of Special-Care Homes Development. The old criteria, Mr. Speaker, 

called for a hospital in the immediate area and a minimum support of 5,000 people; the new criteria will 

permit the development of special-care home facilities in communities without a hospital and with as 

little population support as 3,500 people. 

 

We were also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the Government is fulfilling another election promise by 

assuming part of the cost of nursing home care. The Government has adopted a program of assistance 

which will provide financial relief for guests in all special-care homes that are not now receiving 

financial benefits from other programs administered by the Provincial Government. Effective March 1, 

1973, the Government will provide financial assistance to eligible Level III guests at $144 per month. 

Eligible Level II guests will receive assistance of $54 per month, and interim assistance will be available 

for Level I guests of amounts up to $30 per month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, during the last session one of the Members referred to this Government as 

a government of action. One needs only to examine the many pieces of progressive legislation that have 

been enacted and the steps that this Government has taken since it was elected to realize how accurately 

that phrase describes this Government. Time will permit me, Mr. Speaker, only to mention a few. In 

agriculture, this Government established the Land Bank to assist in the transfer of family farms. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — This Government also set up a committee to investigate the foreign ownership of 

agricultural land. It has established a hog marketing commission. In taxation, this Government removed 

the tax on all meals up to $2.50. It increased property improvement grants from $12.8 million to about 

$23.3 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In civil and human rights, Mr. Speaker, they established an office of the Ombudsman, 

reduced the age of majority to 18. It set up a Human Rights Commission, it set up a Human Resource 

Development Agency. In Health, Mr. Speaker, very progressive legislation, it abolished deterrent fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Soon chiropractic care will be included under Medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

25 

Mr. Rolfes: — People 65 years and over no longer pay health plan premiums. This Government 

removed hospitalization utilization fees. This Government permitted global budgeting for Community 

Colleges. This Government removed estate tax on mental patients. 

 

In the area of Labour, Mr. Speaker, this Government overhauled the Labour Standards Act; passed on 

Act respecting Technological Changes and it removed Bill 2 and thereby restored free collective 

bargaining to this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — We are not afraid to admit it, Mr. Speaker, we also raised the minimum wage to $1.75. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Other pieces of actions or legislation have been passed. This Government set up and 

Electoral Boundaries Commission; established new departments of Culture and Youth, Northern 

Saskatchewan, Consumer Affairs and Environment. 

 

In Highways, Mr. Speaker, Operation Open Roads and Operation Main Street provide for oil treatment 

for all main streets and highway access roads of small urban communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Housing, Mr. Speaker, this Government raised grants from $500 to $800 and increased 

the maximum allowable income from $7,000 to $9,000. Mr. Speaker, these are only a few of the 

activities that this Government has done. I wouldn’t be afraid to compare our record in the first two 

sessions to all the sessions the Members opposite had when they were in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, the Department of Education was no exception. It brought in a $1 million 

bursary scheme to assist needy students to finance their post secondary education. It implemented a new 

grant formula which brought greater equity in educational opportunities and which, Mr. Speaker for the 

first time put separate schools on a sound footing. The Department has abolished the pupil-teacher ratio 

and has striven to give more local autonomy to boards in making education decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, just the other day, the Dean of Education, Mr. Kirkpatrick, told the people 

of Saskatchewan, don’t panic about the lack of jobs that might be available for teachers. He said, “I 

noticed that in 1972 the Province hired 170 or 172 more teachers than it did in 1971.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Many of us, Mr. Speaker, are 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

26 

concerned about the physical fitness of our young people; we are certainly pleased that the Minister 

appointed a physical education consultant. 

 

Equally important, Mr. Speaker, was the appointment of an agriculture consultant whose job it is to 

develop a new course which adequately emphasizes the role of agriculture in our school program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government is committed to decentralization and we were very pleased that the 

Minister of Education has decentralized some of his office staff and sent them out to the regional offices. 

I hope that this particular procedure will be continued because I believe that the people at the regional 

level will have more accurate information and will be better able to help local boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we listened to His Honour’s Speech from the Throne, we were impressed by the fact 

that the economy of this province particularly in the agriculture sector had continued its recovery in 

1972. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the past year was the best year ever for retail sales in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Saskatchewan retailers, Mr. Speaker, had a boom year in 1972, taking in $127 million 

more than they did in 1971. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is going around this province telling everyone that this 

Government is conducting a war on business, that we are driving businesses out of this province and that 

the economy is in a depressed state. Mr. Speaker, the only one that is in a depressed state I would say is 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, he knows, we know and I know that the people of this province know that 

what he is staying is simply not the truth. The facts tell another story. 

 

As I have mentioned, Mr. Speaker, 1972 was a good year for retail sales, $127 million more than in 

1971. Also, Mr. Speaker, we have noticed that there are approximately 9,000 more people in the 

working force today than there was a year ago. There are many firms that have either expanded or 

started new businesses in this province . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Even Degelman’s. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, time will permit me only to mention a few of these businesses. I am sure 

that my colleagues will mention many of the others. In Saskatoon the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Limited 

expanded their rapeseed processing plant $3 million. Outlook Bakery, $60,000 expansion. Agra 

Industries of Nipawin $1 million expansion. Copeland Farms Limited at Rosetown, $48,000 expansion 

to their seed cleaning operation. New bakery at Buffalo Narrows, $77,000. Arborfield Dehydrating 

Limited, $140,000 expansion. Intercontinental Packers, $4.5 million over 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

27 

three years. Great Plains Mushroom Farm Limited, Lumsden, $70,000 expansion. Watson Meat 

Processors Limited, $75,000, Saskatchewan Co-op Creamery Limited of Yorkton, $3 million. 

Poli-Twine Company Limited of Saskatoon, $800,000 expansion. Manitoba and Saskatchewan Coal 

Company Limited, $3 million in 1972. Interprovincial Pipe and Steel Corporation, $4.4 million 

expansion. Mr. Speaker, these are only a few of the many firms that know that the war on business is 

only a figment of the imagination of the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Admittedly, Mr. Speaker, many of these businesses and expansions are relatively small 

and don’t make for flashy big headlines, but they do produce jobs and they do sustain the economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — This province, Mr. Speaker, has a wealth of untapped resources that have not been 

developed. Even under the former government’s giveaway policy there was no stampede of private 

enterprise coming into this province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was hardly a trickle. 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, there are four main obstacles that interfere with the development of 

resources in this province. They are: 

 

1) severe climatic conditions; 
2) long distance from markets; 
3) grossly unfair freight rates and other transportation problems, and 
4) inflexibility of the policies of the Department of Regional and Economic Expansion. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if we could only find the man who has negotiated with the maker of the weather and 

realize how well he has negotiated we could send him to Ottawa to negotiate better freight rates and 

transportation and possibly to get more flexibility in the Department of Regional and Economic 

Expansion then this province would be well on its way. 

 

The recent energy crisis in the United States has vividly brought to our attention the fact that our 

resources are limited and that newer and better ways must be found to harvest them. This Government 

believes that the development must be aimed at maximizing benefits for people rather than profit for big 

business and its promoters. 

 

As I stated previously, this Government has faith in Saskatchewan people and we believe that we must 

play an active part in developing our own resources. Therefore, we were happy to see reference made to 

expanding the activities of Saskatchewan Forest Products and the establishment of a Crown corporation 

which will enable this Government to participate in exploring for oil and gas. 

 

Recent announcements, Mr. Speaker, by the government, that a careful study will be done on the 

ecological and sociological 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

28 

effects of building a hydro-electric dam on the Churchill and Fond-du-Lac Rivers is a step in the right 

direction and shows this Government’s concern for the people in the vicinity and for our environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — We encourage our Premier and the Ministers to continue their effort to maximize the 

utilization of our forest products. It is our hope that the new plans to harvest the forests will decentralize 

the various projects; that the projects will be labor intensive and that a balance will be struck between 

profits earned and the effects of such operations on the immediate environment and the lives of the 

people in the vicinity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must seek growth and development of our natural resources, but not by ruining a 

natural heritage for generations to come. I realize that the Opposition has already criticized us for 

establishing a Crown corporation for the express purpose of government involvement in exploration for 

oil and gas. They maintain that the government has no business investing public funds in such a risky 

affair; that the government is competing and meddling in an area that has, up until now, been 

exclusively preserved for private companies. It is, however, a fact, Mr. Speaker, that we cannot be solely 

dependent upon private industry. When the going gets rough and opportunities are brighter somewhere 

else, they pack up and leave to make an easier buck somewhere else. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

imperative that this Government get involved in the exploration in order that it can better direct and 

control the exploration, utilization and marketing of our oil and gas. We cannot permit this province to 

become solely an exporter of cheap, raw materials and the importer of high-cost processed goods. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It is evident from the Throne Speech that this Government is placing heavy emphasis on 

maintaining a balanced and vibrant agricultural economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — The New Grants Program should assist the small family farmer to expand his operation. 

It should encourage others to enter the farming industry and it will stimulate the economy in other 

sectors so that we should enjoy another upswing in the economy of this province for 1973. 

 

My colleague from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross), will further elaborate on the importance of establishing an 

agricultural basis for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were equally impressed that more funds will be provided for the development of 

northern Saskatchewan. Provisions of community sewer and water facilities and the construction of 

better homes will greatly improve the living conditions of people of Indian ancestry. 

 

We are pleased that we will continue to emphasize new programs for tourism in terms of numbers of 

tourists and the 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

29 

amount of revenue received, 1972 was even a better year than Homecoming ’71. With the added 

impetus of funds and planned expansion of tourist facilities 1973 will accelerate this upward trend. 

 

This province, and more particularly the North, has a great potential for the relaxation and entertainment 

of our people. Let us hope that our tourist facilities are capable of accommodating the many people who 

will visit the province to help us celebrate the Centennial Year of the RCMP. 

 

We were pleased, Mr. Speaker, to hear that the Speech from the Throne mentioned the Silver Broom 

International Curling Championships to be held in Regina in March and I am certain that all of us look 

forward to the visit of Her Majesty the Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh. Both of 

these events will do much to make our celebration of the 100 anniversary of the RCMP a resounding 

success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In the New Deal for People, Mr. Speaker, we stated that taxes should be levied on the 

principle of ‘Ability to Pay’ and that if we were elected we would shift taxes from property to income. 

We clearly indicated that we would raise the personal income tax and corporate tax and use the revenue 

to reduce property taxes for school purposes. This is exactly what the government has done, it is, Mr. 

Speaker, a tax shift. 

 

We were pleased, therefore, that the Speech from the Throne made reference to property tax relief. 

However, since the Opposition, including their leader, have some difficulty to explain clearly this tax 

shift to the electorate and are describing it as a tax increase of anywhere from 3 per cent to 9 per cent, 

depending on who is telling it, I want briefly to explain the increase. Very simply, the Government 

increased the Saskatchewan individual income tax from 37 per cent to 40 per cent of Federal tax 

payable. Calculated as a percentage of personal income, this would amount to an increase of less than 1 

per cent of personal income. 

 

The tax increase means that the single taxpayer earning $4,000 per year will pay an additional $1.04 per 

month, whereas his married counterpart, with two children, will pay only 2 ½ cents per month. These 

increases, Mr. Speaker, are a far cry from 3 to 9 per cent bandied about by the Members opposite and I 

might mention right now that I was very disappointed with the Leader of the Opposition saying to a 

retired senior citizen that he would have to pay anywhere from 8 to 9 per cent because of the Provincial 

Government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did you say that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Shame, shame! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It is important to remember that the Property Improvement Grant greatly increased the 

number of people who were eligible under the Homeowner’s Grant. In fact, the people of Saskatchewan 

received almost $24 million. The Premier and the Finance Minister have already indicated that the 

Property Improvement Grant will be substantially increased again this year. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

30 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I know, Mr. Speaker, that the increases in the Property Improvement Grants will far 

more than offset the slight increases in personal income tax. 

 

In addition to this, the government, through the new school grant formula, increased grants to school 

boards, over $13 million last year. This increase in school grants made it possible for many school 

boards to improve school facilities and school programs and at the same time maintain the mill rate. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, there were many school boards who even lowered their mill rates. 

 

The shift from property tax to income tax is a principle that most Members of this Assembly and the 

majority of the people in Saskatchewan strongly endorse. 

 

It is evident that the government is planning some major changes in the field of education. Although 

some of us are disappointed that we are not asked to pass legislation concerning the implementation of a 

province-wide kindergarten program, we are pleased that legislation will be introduced affecting the 

university, community colleges and collective bargaining for teachers. 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, too much emphasis in education has been placed on preparing people for 

the world of work. On the other hand, too little emphasis is given to developing the individuals who can 

readily adapt to life’s changing conditions, who can think critically for themselves and who will accept 

their social responsibilities once they leave our educational institutions. 

 

Education is not a process which you switch on at Grade one and you turn off at Grade 12 or university. 

It begins before a child enters school and should continue throughout his adult life. Somehow we must 

begin to identify individuals with problems much sooner than Grade one and that is why, Mr. Speaker, I 

wanted to have kindergartens implemented this year. I am confident, however, that if the pilot projects 

prove successful, and the Minister is already expanding these pilot projects, that this government will 

give serious consideration to implementing a publicly supported kindergarten program next year. 

 

We were also, Mr. Speaker, pleased that the government is considering changes in The University Act 

since we have annually in our budget $55 million and I believe only 18 per cent of our young people 

from ages 18 to 24 are utilizing these institutions. They taxpayer is beginning to question the 

justification of some of the offerings at our universities and they are having second thoughts about the 

hug amount of money annually spent on a relatively small portion of our population. 

 

One of the more interesting and significant items mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, is that 

which relates to community colleges. Hopefully, the proposed legislation will emphasize that 

community colleges be developed in response to the needs and wishes of people in local communities. 

Furthermore, the major priority should be placed on programs, not on physical facilities. The community 

college is an exciting ideal, intended to provide a range of learning opportunities in 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

31 

personal enrichment and community education for adults, with special emphasis on rural areas. 

 

Depopulation, poverty and cultural disintegration are undermining what was once a strong sense of 

community. Community colleges, properly established, could restore and maintain that sense. 

 

We have also been told, Mr. Speaker, that legislation will be introduced respecting collective bargaining 

for teachers. It is my contention that this legislation would not be necessary at this time had the former 

administration consulted all the people involved, both teachers and trustees, when they implemented 

area bargaining in 1968. And I want to say at this time that any new legislation that is introduced must 

guarantee free collective bargaining for teachers and at the same time it must provide for a strong role 

for local government in education. 

 

In the field of health, we are also very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is going to give 

assistance for hearing aids and will make provisions for dental care of children under twelve. 

 

The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, will welcome the news of the new Residential Tenancy Act 

which should solve some of the more difficult problems that landlords and tenants have to contend with 

today. It is my hope that the new Act will provide for some mechanism to control the ever-rising costs of 

rent. That it will attempt to remedy the problem of abuse of security deposits and the abuse of property 

and finally, that it will provide for some standard lease form 

 

Mr. Speaker I am sure that all of us are concerned about the lives that have been lost due to the misuse 

of all-terrain vehicles. We were pleased that legislation is forthcoming which will regulate the use of 

such machines. The new legislation should place more responsibilities on adults to supervise these 

young people and it should place some restrictions, I hope, on where young people are allowed to 

operate these machines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were pleased to hear that legislation will be introduced to control election expenses of 

candidates in political parties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In a democracy the amount of finances at the disposal of any candidate or party should 

not be a significant factor in determining whether the candidate, or his party, are elected. Putting a 

ceiling on election expenses would, in my opinion, make it possible for more people to seek public 

office. All candidates and parties should have an equal opportunity to present their platforms before the 

electorate and should allow the electorate to make their decision on the personal capabilities of that 

individual and his party platform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am personally pleased that the Speech from the Throne made reference to pension 

supplements for superannuated employees of the government and teachers. Many of our superannuated 

people have spent 35, 40 or 45 years of their lives only to find out that they have to live in poverty after 

they are superannuated. It is my sincere hope that this 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

32 

Government will continue what it did last year and substantially improve the position of our 

superannuated people and will give more than what the former administration did in their seven years. 

 

As far as accidents are concerned, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all of us agree that it has been a disastrous 

year here in Saskatchewan. One can postulate many reasons as to why the significant increase in 

accidents and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that all the Members of this House will support the establishment 

of a legislation committee to investigate the reasons. 

 

Housing corporations – the Speech from the Throne gives clear evidence that this Government will 

continue to place high priority on preserving and improving the quality of housing in this province. 

 

Saskatchewan’s present housing stock, Mr. Speaker, is in an inferior condition It is estimated that of 

approximately 55,000 units in Saskatchewan, over 20 per cent of the total housing stock, are in need of 

rehabilitation and renovation. About 70 per cent of these units needing repair are in rural areas in small 

communities in the province. And in these smaller centres and farm areas the percentage of inferior units 

is twice as large as in the major urban centres of this province. It is likely that many of these dwellings 

cannot be economically rehabilitated and that alternative housing will have to be provided. 

 

Saskatchewan, in the past, has placed heavy emphasis on federal initiatives policies and expertise in the 

development and delivery of programs. However, very often the federal programs and priorities have not 

been in conformity with provincial objectives and priorities. The Federal Government’s programs have 

often been directed mainly at major urban centres. As a result, many of Saskatchewan’s residents have 

no access to programs providing feasible alternatives to their current and often inadequate 

accommodations, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased therefore that this Government has seen fit to establish 

a Housing Corporation that will make it possible for low or middle income families to have the own 

housing and for senior citizens to make repairs which are really badly needed. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Corporation, I hope, will become a lender of last resort for persons seeking 

mortgage financing who are unable to obtain financing through private lenders or the Central Mortgage 

and Housing Corporation. It is anticipated that such a program will be utilized mostly by persons in 

smaller centres and rural areas where private lenders and CMHC are not very active. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech gives a clear indication that this Government believes in a healthy and 

vibrant agricultural economy. This Government believes that the basis for all of our economy in 

Saskatchewan must be a sound, diversified, agrarian economy. 

 

It is evident from the Speech from the Throne that this Government under the capable and dynamic 

leadership of Premier Allan Blakeney is providing a new sense of direction and purpose in life. 

Furthermore, the Government has shown that it has confidence in the people of this province to find 

solutions to the many complex and disturbing problems of today. It is obvious that this Government has 

established its priorities and has 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

33 

decided on the course that it will take. It is equally as obvious that the people of this province have had 

and will continue to have a significant voice in charting the course that this province will take in its 

attempt to meet the challenges of the 70s. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move, seconded by the Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross), 

that a humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor. 

 

Mr. R. Gross: (Gravelbourg) — Mr. Speaker, it is with both pride and honor that I rise this afternoon 

and on behalf of the people in the Gravelbourg constituency second the Address-in-Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne. I am sure they would like to join with me in thanking our Premier (Mr. Blakeney) for 

according me this privilege. 

 

This Session represents another important milestone in the history of this province, in that many issues 

which will be debated and legislated in the next few months, will help our New Democratic Government 

in drawing us closer to the economic and social goals which we have committed ourselves to. However, 

before dealing with the Speech itself, I should like to offer my sincere congratulations to three Members 

of this Government, who since the last session have been elevated to the Cabinet. I am sure I join 

everyone on both sides of this House when I say the additions of the Hon. Ed. Tchorzewski, the Hon. 

Elwood Cowley, the Hon. Alex Taylor, will mark tremendous significance in the operation of the 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — All three of these men have in the past displayed their capabilities as representatives of 

the people. And the immense contribution I am sure they will make will be long remembered by 

everyone. 

 

I should also be remiss if I did not offer words of welcome to the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) 

who again has joined the ranks of the Opposition and will undoubtedly join with his colleagues in 

offering their traditionally myopic views of the operation of this Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — I know we all look forward to his personal interpretation as to why he was returned to 

this House. However, I hope, that with his views comes the realization that his constituents will expect a 

level of performance equal to that expected of all Members of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also feel I should touch on some of the significant political developments which have 

taken place in the last year since we sat in this House. The results of the recent federal election on the 

heels of a provincial vote in British Columbia both reveal that month by month more Canadians are 

changing their political philosophies and are looking towards the New Democratic Party as the only 

alternative to traditional old line parties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

34 

Mr. Gross: — In 1968 Mr. Trudeau promised us the Just Society and when the people of Canada 

realized that the phrase was nothing more than just that, they weighed the issues carefully, went to the 

polls and brought back a minority government. And if the recent Speech from the Throne is an indicator, 

Canadians can feel proud that they have voted the way they did. Increased old age pensions, tougher 

controls on foreign investment, prospects of a more equitable taxation system, a promise to re-examine 

transportation policies, and more consumer protection are but a few of the issues which the present 

Government will act on. Not because there are some new attitudes within the Liberal Party but rather as 

a result of the parliamentary structure in which David Lewis and his New Democratic MPs are holding a 

balance of power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Prior to the federal vote, the people of British Columbia also went to the polls and the 

results, of course, are now history. The 20-year administration of W.A.C. Bennett was replaced with a 

dynamic new administration, an administration which has already made more response to the needs of 

the people than governments of the past in two decades. In 1968 the people in that province accepted the 

scare tactics of Mr. Bennett. But even as early as then the writing could be seen on the wall. When Mr. 

Bennett said he reason for 1968 triumph was because he was plugged into God, we all found the remark 

humorous. But, Mr. Speaker, I am sure Mr. Bennett is not quite so boisterous now after Dave Barrett 

and his New Democratic colleagues kicked out the plug, severed the connection and put the Province of 

British Columbia back on the road to social and economic justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Increased pensions for senior citizens, collective bargaining for trade unionists and 

teachers, auto insurance and a brand new deal for resource development are but a few of the positive 

steps this NDP Government is taking and the faith which was entrusted by the people is already being 

rewarded. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, the people of British Columbia find the change refreshing following 

20 year of rule by a government incompetent in meeting the needs of people. I am sure they felt much 

like the people of Saskatchewan did following the provincial election here. Mind you, the people of 

British Columbia were much more long-suffering than the people here in our great province. They gave 

their old government 20 years to respond to their needs but in Saskatchewan such was not the case. 

Seven years of Liberal rule was enough and the results speak for themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Mr. Speaker, the record of this Government since assuming office is a record we on this 

side of the House are proud of. The new confidence which people have in the destiny of Saskatchewan 

shows very clearly that the programs and policies which have been adopted in this House since 1971 are 

accomplishing the results which were desired. During the past ten years we in Saskatchewan found 

ourselves disturbed greatly by the direction our economy was moving. The big swing to centralization, 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

35 

the massive depopulation in rural areas, the sagging economic picture, were forces which the former 

Government failed to come to grips with. It was obvious that the only way to check this regression was 

to bring in an administration which was willing to take the steps necessary to change that situation. We 

realized that the first thing which had to be done was to concentrate on our agricultural community in a 

province where 80 per cent of all economic activity is generated by this sector of the population. We 

view it vital to do whatever possible to protect and strengthen this great industry. Despite attempts by 

the federal Liberals to disrupt things by foisting upon us such infamous programs as LIFT, the Task 

Force Report, grain income stabilization, and last but not least, proposals on the Small Farms 

Development Program. Our Government, in spite of the Federal Government is succeeding in putting 

agriculture back on the right track. 

 

What were some of the factors involved in the notable upswing in the farming community? Without a 

doubt, Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank program must be considered as the major reason for the new 

confidence which is unfolding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Despite attempts by our friends to your left, Mr. Speaker, to distort consistently and to 

utilize any ploy for the sake of their own political interests and despite warnings by the Hon. Leader of 

the Opposition that the program will signal the death rattle of the NDP, it is absolutely amazing that the 

program should be so well accepted by so many people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — We know land tenure was a serious problem, we know something had to be done and 

unlike the former Government, we came forward with some answers. One only has to listen to our 

Opposition friends really to understand how desperate they are when it comes to performing the duties 

of the Opposition. You would think that they would feel it necessary to help in any way possible to build 

legislation, to help and assist the family farmer. When the Land Band legislation was introduced the 

Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) assured this House his party would offer constructive 

criticism and would forward positive alternatives and amendments. But yet, if that was their sincere 

intention, we had to wait until just last Friday for them to think up an alternative. Surely, the comments 

made recently by the Member from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) can’t be interpreted as positive alternatives. 

 

I should like to quote an article from the Leader-Post, front page, January 17 edition: 

 

Mr. Wiebe said the rental reduction indicates Saskatchewan farmers do not have confidence in 

the Land Bank. It also shows that Land Bank Commission is having a difficult time finding 

young farmers interested in renting the land under the terms of the Land Bank regulations. He 

credited the rental fee reduction to Liberal opposition against the Land Bank. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

36 

Mr. Gross: — This is correct, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal Opposition is totally against the Land Bank. It 

appears obvious to me that they have not learned their lesson yet. It is easy to criticize, they are masters 

at it, but when it comes to constructive criticism, that is a virtue which continues to evade the rank and 

file of their Members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — The next time voters of this province go to the polls they are going to remember how the 

Liberal Party has viewed this program and they will, I am sure, reward them with another term as the 

official Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — When the promise of a Land Bank program formed a major plank during our election 

campaign, we realized something had to be done to ease the serious transfer problems that were facing 

farmers in Saskatchewan. It was this party and Members on this side of the House that realized 

something had to be done to facilitate easier transfer from one generation to the next. We promised to 

make it easier for older farmers to retire with dignity and to give a lot of younger farmers the 

opportunity to make farming their profession. And, Mr. Speaker, the response to this program has been 

such that every Member on this side of the House is proud to feel they were part of a government which 

was able to accomplish so much in such a short period of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Our friend, the Hon. Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) says there is not interest in this 

program, that the Government is finding it extremely difficult to find people to lease the land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Might I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that either he is deliberately trying to mislead the public or 

he is guessing, and when I find that not once has he contacted Land Bank officials at their head office to 

get any information, I tend to convict him of being ignorant of the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — He says there is no interest in our Land Bank program, no interest. Yet if that is the case, 

I wonder how he with the rest of his colleagues interpret the fact that Land Bank officials have been 

unable to keep pace with all the inquiries to sell or lease from interested people? 

 

Let’s look at some of the facts that are now present with the Land Bank Commission. The Land Bank 

Commission have accepted 1,300 offers to sell. Of the 1,300 offers to sell, 650 appraisals were 

completed. 593 offers were made, 382 offers were accepted. 98 were direct line descendable 

transactions. This brings to a total of $10,767,583 expended so far in the 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

37 

program. I would advise Mr. Wiebe that these figures have been taken since Friday last. The six regional 

Land Bank offices have been swamped with enquiries, the phones are ringing off the wall at the main 

headquarters and there have been literally lineups at the Regina office at the Administration Building. I 

really don’t know how the Land Bank people could cope with any increased disinterest. 

 

This program is accepted by the people. It will work to the advantage of our economy and, just as 

important, it will make a tremendous contribution towards strengthening the social fibre of rural living. 

In my own constituency alone activity generated by this program is significant. In the Rural 

Municipality of No. 103 a large farm unit was purchased by the Land Bank and from this three separate 

parcels of land will be made available to farmers either to make their present units viable or enable a 

younger farmer to start up. In the Rural Municipality of 105, the Commission has completed an 

agreement involving a father to son transfer and another agreement to purchase was recently accepted. 

Another such agreement has been reached in the Rural Municipality of 133 and two more direct line 

transactions have been completed in the Rural Municipality of 135. All this activity, Mr. Speaker, in the 

short time the Commission has been in operation, yet, there seems to be no interest, so says. Mr. Wiebe. 

 

An. Hon. Member: — Liberals hate farmers! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Is it any wonder we on this side of the House fully support this program when daily we 

see transactions completed, transactions which will build to make rural Saskatchewan life stronger for 

all. the Throne Speech of last Thursday is another indicator this Government will not relax following the 

success of one major program. Planning and research is intensifying daily as our Agriculture Minister 

and his department look ahead for new methods of improving the agricultural economy. The reference 

made to the introduction of an Agricultural Incentives Act, FarmStart, low interest loans and other 

assistance to promote secondary industry coupled with market development is proof positive of the 

concern we feel and commitment we are honoring to ensure that the family farm unit in the small rural 

community continues to play a meaningful role in a rapidly changing society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased with the commitment of this Government to initiate the discussion on 

transportation problems which are imposing ever increasing hardships on the people of Western Canada. 

The threat of this increased hardship especially in relationship to rail transportation is a serious problem 

which must be reckoned with and I am pleased this Government once again has taken the lead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — I am sure we remember the form CCF Government of this province which led the fight 

against the MacPherson Commission Report of 1959 which recommended massive abandonment of rail 

lines and elevator points. That report brought in by the Conservative Government of John Diefenbaker 

was later put into legislation by none other than a Liberal Government in the Transportation Act of 

1967. Because of strong opposition from the CCF and later the NDP the Government agreed to postpone 

the 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

38 

implementation of such plans until 1975. That is only two years away and if these plans proceed it will 

mean the beginning of the end for our prairie way of life. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What has Davy said about that? 

 

Mr. Gross: — Nothing! Mr. Speaker, I am sure at least Members on this side of the House are prepared 

to fight this insane policy and with or without help from the Opposition benches we will not stop until 

we have won our case. 

 

Let’s take a look at these proposals. There are 8,500 miles of railway track in Saskatchewan alone. The 

railways plan to abandon 3,000 miles, more than one-third of the total; of the 2,700 elevators 800 are 

slated for closure and of the 540 communities served by branch lines, probably 300 will die. I ask you, is 

this the kind of future we want for our province? Furthermore, a particular case in my constituency is the 

railway between Neidpath and Burnham on the Gravelbourg subdivision of the CNR. This stretch of 

track, about 13.8 miles has been deteriorating since it was built until it reached a point where trains 

could only go over it when the ground was frozen. Service has steadily deteriorated and no train has 

come into Burnham since mid-December of 1971. As a result, farmers have been forced to deliver to 

alternate points, generally to Swift Current which involves at 15-mile longer haul, and some even to 

Neidpath. The CNR has now taken up the tracks on the siding for the purpose of loading trucks out of 

the elevator. Even if this is within the letter of the law, as the tracks in the branch line itself still remain 

it appears to be abandonment in default with no notice whatever having been given to the elevator 

company, this community or the Provincial Government. This along with general plans of Federal 

Liberal Government is just not acceptable and I am glad this Government will take necessary steps to 

fight this insanity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — I cease to marvel at the insensitivity which the Federal Government continually displays 

in matters relating to Western Canada in general and to western agriculture in particular. The 

appointment of Edgar Benson as the new head of the Canadian Transport Commission is another 

example of their insensitivity. The former head, Jack Pickersgill, never impressed us with his 

understanding of Western problems and when he was elevated to the Senate a number of westerners 

including our Premier recommended a westerner be appointed to this key transportation post. Instead 

Mr. Benson, an Ontario chartered accountant was given the call. Perhaps it will take another by-election 

similar to Assiniboia before the Federal Government will get the message. The trend towards 

centralization with the emphasis on efficiency even at the expense of tearing down life styles and 

imposing tremendous social and economic hardships on thousands of people is just not acceptable by 

any standard. If the recommendations of the MacPherson Commission are implemented that is exactly 

what is going to happen. I hope every Member in this House will unite to protest in the strongest of 

terms to the Federal Government and for the sake of rural life on the Prairies I hope each Member is 

directed by his conscience and not by his politics. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

39 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Mr. Speaker, I guess what I really am saying is that no price is too high to pay to protect 

rural life on the Prairies. It is at times discouraging when our Provincial Government comes forward 

with programs to assist the agricultural economy and then on the other hand it has to fight the Federal 

Government to insure the efforts are not in vain. 

 

This Throne Speech shows our concern and the commitment of this Government in the agricultural field 

and is to be commended because it shows where we stand when it comes to the family farm or the small 

rural community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commitment of this Government to establish a Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is 

significant and will no doubt make an immense contribution towards improving the situation which has 

been a serious problem for older people, low income, middle income families and younger people of this 

province. Besides helping to provide better housing accommodations for our citizens, hundreds of new 

jobs will be created in the process which will further bolster our economy. In the past we have seen the 

Federal Government’s housing program in operation, we have clearly identified its inadequacies and yet 

for some reason every time we attempt to get changes made those requests usually fell on deaf ears. 

However, the recent election seems to have changed all that and there is a new attitude in Ottawa which 

is not only welcomed but long overdue. What a difference an election can make. 

 

By joint co-operation we will be able to offer assistance to our senior citizens to help them make 

improvements to their homes, we will be able to make it more attractive for younger and low to middle 

income people to finally realize the goal of having adequate accommodation and in the process of all 

this we will have filled the need which has been prevalent for many years. I know we shall be able to 

proceed with this program with the unanimous support of the Members of this Assembly. 

 

Another very important part of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was, of course, the commitment of this 

Government to make major moves over the next few months to implement major changes in industry, 

trade and tourism. It is well accepted that the typical free enterprise Liberal approach to industry has not 

worked the benefit of the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — It is evident that the people who in the past have seen the results of Liberal 

mismanagement will welcome the approach taken by this Government and will welcome the progress 

which this Session will record in this vitally important area. Mr. Speaker, it is always interesting to hear 

our Liberal friends jump up every session, every year and point their fingers across at us making light of 

such things as a box factory or a shoe factory. Their tired old line is not so funny any more, and I think 

they realize that people don’t share their enthusiasm for reverting back to events decades ago. It would 

be just as easy to bring out the skeletons from their closet and remind them of their wasteful spending, 

their mismanagement, their sellouts and their arrogant approach to development, but rather I should 

hope 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

40 

they would see that the people of this province demand more sensible approaches to industrial 

development. Before our friends across the way start harping at this Government about past 

performances they should take a look in their own closet and once all the skeletons are cleaned out, for 

instance, the Meadow Lake Pulp Mill, the Big River Sawmill, then perhaps their credibility will be 

enhanced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased this Government doesn’t have the urge to run after 

multi-million dollar business just for the sake of grabbing big headlines. I am pleased we refused to 

enter into bad financial agreements with multi-national corporations which might settle here if the price 

is right. When the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) says that the approach of both parties to 

industry is the best example of philosophical difference, he is correct. We approach it differently and we 

feel we act in the good conscience knowing the majority of the people of Saskatchewan share our views 

and support our approach. A Liberal Government consistently overlooked the opportunities in our 

agrarian culture when they sat on this side of the House and I am pleased this Government is not 

prepared to make the same mistakes. For too long we have accepted as the answer to produce a product 

and allow it to be shipped out of the province, processed, brought back to be sold to the same people 

involved in the primary production. We in the Government do not believe this to be the right answer and 

we are going to change this cycle. By emphasizing and encouraging the establishment of secondary 

industry, by placing a heavier thrust on the processing industry not only shall we be able to encourage 

Saskatchewan people to further develop their individual resources but we shall also be able to generate 

what it takes to improve the economy of this province. We shall know that that answer does not lie 

solely in setting up huge plants to process our goods but we must work hard to earn our spot in the 

market place. We must be more aggressive go out into the world and capture a share of the action. The 

reference in the Throne Speech to a major emphasis being placed on research for the purpose of market 

development is a major undertaking itself. I know that the Members on this side of the House are excited 

about the prospects in their field. In the Pacific rim along there is a fantastic opportunity for us in 

Saskatchewan in the future. 

 

There are of course other problems associated with this type of development. I alluded to the 

transportation problem and I am confident that we will be able to take steps necessary to negotiate the 

changes which are needed to assure that the industrial base within our boundaries is expanded in future 

years. Some of the darker moments we have gone through will scarcely be remembered by the people of 

Saskatchewan in the future. 

 

During the past election campaign our party promised to take steps to promote and encourage the 

development of a viable tourist trade in the northern part of the province. This Speech pays respect to 

that commitment that during the Session major steps will be taken to ensure that that promise will be 

honored. This Government, Mr. Speaker, is not prepared to rush headlong into this field and due to the 

nature of the tourist industry it is vital that the necessary planning precede development. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

41 

Planning appeared to be an activity that the former Government of this province refused to take 

advantage of. However, I feel we have no intention of making the same mistakes they did, in fact, I feel 

that no amount of planning could ever allow us to follow the same footsteps or make the errors that they 

were guilty of, daily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure we can still recall Members opposite rising day after day during the last session 

and crying loud about how this Government was not allowing industry in our province but was even 

allowing it to by-pass, they even went so far as to say there was a stampede to get out of this province. 

They criticized what we were doing, they condemned us for what they said we were not doing and for 

anyone who happened to be in the House and was not aware of the actual situation I am sure the feeling 

of doom and gloom overcame them. 

 

Fortunately such is not the case. Our last industrial portrait gets a brighter and better picture each day. In 

industries that have been attracted by the Department of Industry, 19 new ones were established, 29 

industries were expanded and 15 industries in the province have made definite plans to go ahead. In all 

53 business ventures creating some 1,507 new jobs have been developed in the province in the past 12 

months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Not bad for a province with a government which according to our Liberal friends was 

tearing down the confidence of the business sector of the economy; not bad for a province, which 

according to Mr. Steuart was on the skids because of a socialist government. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we should not be too hard on our Liberal friends because I am sure now that 

they have had some months to think about it and some time to assess the progress which has been made 

and watch our economy pick up, they will agree all those past emotional outbursts were unnecessary and 

that they really didn’t mean all those nasty things they said about this party. 

 

In particular, Mr. Speaker, I am sure we all look forward to later in this debate when the Member for 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) rises in his place and admits that he was wrong about many things he said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I can hardly wait! 

 

Mr. Gross: — I am sure we all remember quite vividly his loud and long cry that industry was leaving 

us almost daily and emergency debates should be held to see if something couldn’t be done to stop this 

massive exodus. 

 

I am sure we remember in particular when he was upset that the House would not allow an emergency 

debate to see if something couldn’t be done to present Degelman Industries of Regina from closing its 

doors. He accused the Government of not caring about what was happening and he continually painted a 

picture of doom and gloom. Well, I’m sure that the Hon. Member from 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

42 

Milestone was happy to realize his vociferous emotionalism was really quite unnecessary because 

Degelman’s didn’t close after all. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they were so concerned about the economic 

climate in Saskatchewan they not only remained open, they have made a major expansion of 33,000 

square feet to their business which will be on in 1973. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — And the list goes on and on. I won’t reiterate what my friend from Saskatoon Nutana 

(Mr. Rolfes) said on this subject but I do want to say that I, for one, don’t expect to hear any more doom 

and gloom hysteria from the Opposition benches on this subject ever again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — It is evident by now, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is serious about checking the 

trend which has been spreading throughout the nation of allowing business activity to become 

concentrated and controlled by fewer and fewer giant corporations. Our efforts to assist small businesses 

which will definitely benefit more people has been welcomed. The Throne Speech pays further attention 

to this in the fact that further steps will be taken to assist smaller businesses. 

 

The new Assistance Branch was set up during the last session. It will be expanded and more assistance 

to ensure that these enterprises continue to operate under a favorable economic condition. By expanding 

the operation of this branch and by decentralizing its operation, I am confident that it will be more 

effective in meeting the challenge of offsetting some of the serious problems which affect their 

operations. The emphasis this Government continues to place on matters relating to consumers and the 

emphasis which we have placed on Culture and Youth are only a priority which we intend to continue to 

develop. What is viewed as an intricate part of our overall program to ensure that our social and 

economic climate is enhanced. In the past there has been a tendency on the part of governments to 

discount the contributions made by people wishing to protect their cultures and guard their life styles. As 

you know, the cultural heritage found within the boundaries of Gravelbourg constituency are of 

immense significance. Government has a responsibility to protect and enhance this heritage and this 

Government concurs with this philosophy. 

 

I would hope that in the months and the years ahead, all avenues are explored to ensure that more 

opportunities are made available to the youth of today to give them the opportunity to utilize the talents 

they have to enable them to make the contributions to our society which they are qualified to make. It is 

not enough to talk about it. It is not good enough to say that we are recognizing this area. The attitude of 

our Government shows that we are sincere and we look to the day when programs which we initiate are 

copied by other provinces in the pacesetting manner in which we proceeded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Mr. Speaker, one could go on and on in commenting on 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

43 

the Speech. Time does not permit any Member in this House to be able to reflect all the positive aspects 

contained in the document. I would be remiss, however, if I did not offer some brief comments on the 

other areas which I have not touched on. 

 

This Government’s commitment to further reduce the property taxation for school purposes is good 

news for the citizens of the province and despite continual attempts by the Opposition to misconstrue the 

intent of our program, despite attempts to tamper with the facts and twist the truth, I feel taxpayers in the 

province are thankful for the steps we have taken and are in complete agreement with the approach 

which has been adopted. By increasing the Property Improvement Grants we will be able to further 

assist those people who in years past have been burdened with ever increasing taxation load. 

 

I am sure that legislation that will be introduced this Session relating to landlord and tenants will go a 

long way to eliminate many of the problems which have been imposed on both parties. I feel that this 

type of legislation has been long overdue. 

 

Citizens, I am sure, will welcome the commitment of this Government to do something to control 

electoral expenses for political parties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — In the past, we have had certain parties spending millions of dollars which have been 

pumped into party coffers as a result of certain considerations. Hopefully, this legislation will eliminate 

many of these abuses, while at the same time, ensure that the amount of money spent does not dictate 

and determine the success or failure of a candidate seeking public office. 

 

While I am on the subject of electoral reform, I am sure that the Members on both sides of this House 

will welcome recommendations of the Electoral Boundaries Commission when they submit their report 

to this House. The Opposition Members in particular should welcome the report because they must take 

the responsibility for the necessity of redrawing the boundaries. If ever the principle of representation of 

population was abused, our friends on the other side of the House would get full marks. 

 

The attention paid to our senior citizens and young people is also significant. Providing hearing aids for 

our people at reduced rates, instituting a comprehensive dental program for our younger citizens shows 

that there is something for everybody in this Speech. We do not discriminate when we legislate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — This Government, Mr. Speaker, has a sincere concern for everybody and we will 

continue as we have in the past to reflect this concern through policies and programs designed to benefit 

the majority. It would be folly to think that no mistakes will be made. The period from 1964 to 1971 is 

proof of that. This 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

44 

Government feels and has shown, by involving people in the formulation of policies and programs, that 

fewer mistakes will be made and our legislative course will be made much smoother. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens of this province, for the first time, feel they have made their individual 

contributions to government. There is a tendency for people to feel alienated by governments that don’t 

listen. This feeling is being lessened by the attitude of the present Government which does listen. Unlike 

the Liberal Party, we feel the people should have a say in how programs are structured. We feel that they 

have a valuable contribution to make and we feel they have justified our feelings by accepting this 

philosophy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, I am proud to be a Member of this Government. I am proud to think 

that I, through the people of Gravelbourg constituency can contribute to the development of policies and 

programs which will enhance the social and economic well-being of this great province. I only hope, and 

I am very sincere about this, that the Members of this Opposition are as enthusiastic about this province 

as we are on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — It would be refreshing to be able to rely on the Opposition for constructive attitudes 

towards legislation this House deals with. For the most part, we have heard speech after speech in which 

Liberal Members in this House preach doom and gloom, in which they criticize but don’t offer any 

alternatives and in which they revert to almost any tactic to score political points but they let the public 

down in matters of real importance. Often we hear that a strong Opposition makes for a better 

government. We have heard arguments both supporting and opposing this philosophy. We shall let each 

Member of this Assembly decide for himself on that argument but I would be remiss if I did not impart 

some sort of wisdom for our friends in the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they chose a new leader they promised a new approach. That new approach has not 

arrived. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — However, during this session they have a chance to recapture some of their lost 

credibility. However, if they choose to ignore this advice and continue on their usual course, they might 

as well get used to sitting where they are because I am sure the people of Saskatchewan will readily 

endorse a 99-year lease on the space they occupy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Mr. Speaker, I might conclude by saying that it is my hope that in the months ahead all 

Members of this House will unite to help this Government build programs and policies in the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan. It is no easy task the responsibility that is entrusted to us by the 

people we represent but it must not be treated lightly. The future is 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

45 

only as bright as we can make it. True, there are going to be obstacles, there are going to be problems, 

but I would hope that we are big enough to overcome individual political differences to work towards 

the goal we all strive to achieve. We live in a great province, the possibilities are limitless and we owe it 

to ourselves and the rest of mankind to do everything in our power to alleviate some of the hardships, 

eliminate the inequalities which exist and pursue the ideals which are at our disposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride that I second the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, my first words on entering this debate 

must be one of condolences to the Hon. Member from Kinistino. I hope he has fully recovered. I should 

just like to caution the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) – I wonder if a man who can have a traffic accident fifty 

years from the nearest highway all by himself is really the man to make chairman of the Traffic Safety 

Committee to study that problem. 

 

Why don’t you sit over in your own seat – I see it’s colored red. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne Debate gives us the chance, the opportunity, of course, to 

criticize the record of the Government, to look at the Throne Speech and bring forward some positive 

alternates and positive suggestions of our own. 

 

Before I take a look at the Throne Speech, I should like to deal for a few minutes today with some of the 

remarks by the mover and the seconder, both of whom I think did a very credible job. The Hon. Member 

from Saskatoon Nutana (Mr. Rolfes) attempted to make the rather dull unexciting year and a half of the 

NDP sound just the opposite. I found some of the things that Mr. Rolfes had to say very interesting and 

rather ironical. He began by saying very sanctimoniously that he hoped and he believed that the people 

of this country were getting fed up with politicians who made promises and didn’t keep them. In fact, his 

own phrase was “politicians who talked with a forked tongue”. That’s very interesting because we just 

won a by-election in the land of the forked tongue as far as the NDP are concerned, up in the far North. 

And if what the Hon. Member says is true, and I hope it is, then I think that his Government, the 

Government he supports is going to have a rather short life on that side of the House. But then he called 

for a common approach to some of the problems that face the people in Saskatchewan by Members on 

both sides of the House. And I agree with him and share those sentiments and we will be giving the 

Government as I am sure they will be giving us, the opportunity to do just that as this Session develops. 

I found one thing rather interesting. He congratulated the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) on 

his efforts to decentralize education and he said the Minister of Education had even decentralized some 

of his staff. I don't know exactly what that mean. I know he discovered three or four Liberals in there 

and he didn’t decentralize them, the decapitated them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Then he went on to list the industries brought in, 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

46 

theoretically, by this Government. I will deal with that in more detail tomorrow and I will prove that of 

the very few new industries or expansions of present businesses that have happened the last year and a 

half, they happened in spite of the NDP and they had absolutely nothing to do with about 90 per cent of 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In fact, I think we shall put a question on the Order Paper to find out the ones that the 

Hon. Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) was talking about. I think it was 53 new businesses or 

industries employing 1,500 men that this Government is responsible for. 

 

Then the Hon. Member for Nutana listed all the wonderful things that are happening. I listened and I 

was quite impressed. Retail sales are up, income for farmers up, price of hogs, price of cattle, price of 

wheat, all up. This is great! I expected him in his new role as an honest politician who is going to give 

credit where credit is due, I was waiting for him to turn east along with all the Members on that side and 

thank Otto Lang. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — For the grain sales, the highest price for wheat we have seen in years, for the hopper 

cars, for the two-price system. Not only Otto Lang, but Pierre Trudeau, and now we’ve got another one 

to thank, another one to thank, a fellow called Whelan, Eugene, that is. Ed’s got better blood in him than 

I though a few months ago, but no, not a word, as usual, not a word of credit to the Federal Government, 

the millions and millions and millions of dollars this Government received in equalization grants that 

have made some of their programs possible. If we are enjoying better times in the last year in this 

Province, if retail sales are up, and they are in this Province, it’s no thanks to the NDP. It’s thanks, of 

course, to the policies of the Federal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He talks about election expenses and so did the Hon. Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Gross) and I find this really refreshing. The NDP are now going to put a limit on election expenses, now 

that they’ve got their hand on the public purse! Now that they’ve got their hand on the public purse and 

they are spending like drunken sailors on political propaganda, now they say, “we are going to limit the 

expenses”. The Hon. Member from Gravelbourg said, “I hope this means that Members will not be 

limited.” I though he was going to be honest and say, I expect it will limit the number of Liberal 

Members that will get elected, because I predict that when this Act comes in, that Opposition Members 

will have a tough time facing the propaganda of that Government. The dozens of people whom they 

have put on the payroll to grind out the political propaganda, the hundreds of thousands of dollars they 

are spending of taxpayers’ money, blatantly, arrogantly spending to enhance their own political party. 

And the hundreds of people they have put on the payroll. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

47 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, we’ve got a list of them. In fact, we’ve even got pictures of them up in the 

Athabasca by-election. It is very interesting how many of these people they hired suddenly, when the 

Athabasca by-election came along. Take time off, leave of absence – we don’t know yet, with or without 

pay. Then in the BC election more leave of absence with or without pay. You could have shot a cannon 

off here and you wouldn’t have it a new civil servant. We are going to find out, if they will tell us the 

answer, if they will tell us the truth. But I find it interesting. Now, they say, “We are going to limit 

election expenses”. Fine, limit election expenses, but do it honestly. I’ll believe it when I see it. 

 

Then we turn to the Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) and he talked about David Lewis. I guess 

we are going to hear a lot about David Lewis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I see we have one of the Members who survived, one of the Members of Parliament 

who survived, I think he survived. You can tell the Members of the New Democratic Party who survived 

the election, when they come here and sit in the back benches, the ones that didn’t survive you will find 

down in the office on the NDP payroll. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — So, David Lewis got 18 per cent of the vote, about as good as they ever get nationally. 

He is going to give us increased old age pensions and all this wonder legislation. Well, I sat down there 

and watched them. Don’t you try and kid anybody. Pierre Trudeau could walk over there and he could 

insult David Lewis three times a day and he couldn’t drive him out of the Liberal camp. The NDP are 

trembling in their seats in Ottawa. They know that if there was an election tomorrow, they would almost 

be wiped out just like they were back in 1958. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I must admit I sat down there and looked down at those people when the vote of 

confidence came in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is very upsetting to a man of my calibre to be so heckled. 

 

I watched them cast their vote of confidence, and I don’t know who was more nauseated on a matter of 

principle. They were sitting there voting for what? I’ll tell you why they were voting, because they know 

that if there is an election tomorrow they would be turned out. Mind you I don’t think the ones from 

Saskatchewan have to worry because they can all come back here and get jobs at $17,000 or $18,000 a 

year, but they know that that won’t last very long so they feel much safer back in Ottawa. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

48 

Then the Member for Gravelbourg turned to the Land Bank. He said, why don’t you fellows on that side 

get in touch with the Land Bank and get information. Well, we have been in touch with the Land Bank 

and we have been in touch with the Minister. We haven’t found anything out. I phoned the Minister and 

asked how much they are paying for land as this is public money and he said, “Why I’m not going to tell 

you.” I don’t know after I listened to him today if he is going to tell us in the House. Public funds, $10 

million of public funds, and we don’t know yet. Certainly we have had no co-operation from the Land 

Bank officials or the Minister to find out anything about the Land Bank. 

 

For the information of the Member for Gravelbourg, on Wednesday or Thursday, the Member from 

Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) phoned Mr. Wesson, who, I believe, is the head of the Land Bank 

administration and he asked him for a copy of the lease form. He was informed last Wednesday or 

Thursday that they haven’t signed any leases, because they didn’t even have a lease form approved yet. 

The Minister gets up in this House and he says, let the Opposition talk to our administration. We have 

talked, for example, to the Crop Insurance administration and we tried to find out information that a civil 

servant should be prepared to tell an MLA, the Opposition or supporter of the Government, something 

about the changes that are taking place in certain contracts, or if individuals who had a crop insurance 

program contract still have one or not. What were we told? We can’t give you that information, you will 

have to check with the Minister. 

 

So don’t tell us, Mr. Messer, in this House, to check with your officials. Go back and tell your officials 

exactly what information they should give us and what information they shouldn’t and let us know. I 

fully agree that no MLA, Government supporter or Opposition, should be able to phone up members of 

the administration and find out certain information. We shouldn’t be able to, we should have to ask for it 

in this House. And if that is the way it is with all information, fine, you tell us the rules and we will play 

the game. But don’t tell us to phone your administration and then instruct your administration to give the 

member from Gravelbourg or the NDP Members information that they won’t give to us. That is exactly 

what has happened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am just going to say one word about rail line abandonment. You know it is very 

interesting, and I think you back benchers who haven’t been here very long and won’t be here very long, 

I predict, might find this little statistic rather interesting. The only time any rail line has been abandoned 

in this province, the only time, is when we have had an NDP Government in Regina and Conservative 

Government in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — During our seven years in office there was not one line torn up or abandoned in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech there are some things that I will deal with tomorrow but now I 

should like to talk for a minute about the proposed dental program for our children. We welcome this. I 

don’t think you have to be in this province and 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

49 

taking an interest in what goes on for very long to recognize that probably 60 or maybe 70 per cent of 

our children especially those living in the outlying areas or in the far North, do not get and have not yet 

received, adequate dental care. In fact, in many cases they receive no dental care at all. 

 

Now any step that will bring dental care, good dental care, to these children we will support and is a step 

in the right direction. But I caution the Government, I hope as they develop this plan that they will take 

advantage of the co-operation that has been offered by the College of Dental Physicians. I hope that the 

program keeps in mind high quality. After all it is not the dentists that we need to be worried about and 

it is not the reputation of the NDP, or whether we did it or should have done it, the question we are 

dealing with is the dental health of our children. If you are going to do this, the quality must remain as 

high as is possible under these conditions. We will support it. 

 

We have heard disturbing rumors that the College of Dental Surgeons are not co-operating and are not 

happy with this program. I hope this is wrong. I am not saying that this is true and I hope it is wrong. I 

hope that when you announce the program, Mr. Minister of Health, you will be able to say that you have 

their full support and I hope they will give you their full support. They do have a responsibility in this 

area. 

 

The same goes for the traffic safety. You say that you are concerned, as we are all concerned and I am 

sure that you are, about the unbelievable rise in traffic fatalities and the accident record of the last year. 

One of the things that concerns us is that when we were the Government we made it automatic that 

drinking drivers were suspended for at least six months. This was automatic. Before that they would be 

suspended for six months and then next thing you know a court or someone else would grant them a 

partial license and we got tough and the accident rate dropped. Now the accident rate has started back up 

again. Maybe it is time to get even tougher. I see that you are implementing a Review Committee that 

will review some of these cases. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Who is on that committee? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, you have some experts on there. There are one or two people on there that I 

understand have real experience having lost their licenses. Maybe they will have great sympathy, I don’t 

know. Yes, there is one of them on there that is an expert on that so he will bring . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Father Gorski . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, well you named him, I didn’t. He has great expertise in walking every now and 

then for six months, at least once anyway. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Who is that? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Father Gorski, that is who that is. Your expert that you put on everything, your socialist 

priest. Anyway just let me say this, that is not the point that I brought up. I wanted to bring it up for this 

point, that I hope that you have the courage, if people are caught drinking and driving – drunken 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

50 

driving – no matter who it is, as we have, whether it is on this side of the House or on that side, priest, 

minister or anybody, I hope you take their licenses away from them. I hope that you don’t water this 

program down because if you do, I predict that you will see the thing emasculated and accidents on our 

highways and death on our highways will start to rise even faster than they have. 

 

I don’t think this is any time to be getting easier. They know the rules. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Speak to Otto Lang. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Speak to you about it, you are the one who is watering the program down. When we 

were the Government and said if you drink and drive you will lose your license, no ifs, buts or maybe. 

You have the power, Mr. Attorney General. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You don’t know what you are talking about. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh yes, I know what I am talking about. Are you telling me that when we were the 

Government we didn’t instruct the Highway Safety Traffic Board that if anybody was convicted of 

impaired driving or drunken driving he automatically lost his license for six months. We did it and we 

had the right to do it. Are you trying to tell me that you now have not set up, or are not considering 

setting up an appeal board so that certain people can appeal the loss of their license for six months, they 

can appeal to this Board and get a partial license, then you are watering it down and quit lying. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think that the Attorney General can answer the charges in a debate at a 

later time. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, let me say this. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition said to the Deputy Leader of the 

Government, “You are lying” I heard him. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — If the truth hurts, I am sorry. I said, quit lying and he was lying. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) just now said that I was lying. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Just proves that he is not alone. He has company over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I hope that we can get the debate off without starting name calling, 

because we should like to have a good debate. But charges made by one Member can be answered by 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

51 

another one in debate unless the Member rises and asks if the Hon. Member will be permitted an 

interruption. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Thank you. And that brings up a good point, Mr. Speaker. You see the Attorney 

General jump up and gets all white in the face and starts pounding his fist and demanding. That is what I 

want to talk about today is the arrogance of that Government in 18 or 19 short months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let’s talk about the Attorney General. He has been a bit quiet this year, but he got a bad 

press in Saskatoon. He hasn’t learned that if you say stupid things they are going to put them in the press 

and you are going to get a stupid press. So the press in Saskatoon, what did they do? They had the 

intestinal fortitude to print what he said, so what did he do? He said, you people keep giving me a bad 

press and I will put in a press council. I will convince my colleagues to put in a press council to have 

some control over you. 

 

Honest Roy, the man who says that he is going to protect the human rights, the human rights of 

everybody. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Otto Lang . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well turn East and bow to Otto Lang then if you love him so much. If he said it then he 

was just as wrong as you are. Otto Lang said that he would like to see voluntary press councils. You said 

if they wouldn’t have voluntary press councils you would put it in for them. 

 

Then we look at the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), who is an outstanding example of arrogance. 

He hasn’t been here long. Hasn’t been a Minister very long. The Hog Vote – Messer says no dice to hog 

vote. He stood up in the House and said, “If they change their mind let them answer to their own 

members, these hog producers.” 500 hog producers asked the Minister to give them a vote. What did he 

say. He said, “No, I won’t give you a vote.” 

 

If this program is so good, if this program has the support of the Wheat Pool, the Federation of 

Agriculture, the Farmers’ Union, the hog producers, the swine breeders, what have you got to worry 

about a vote? You are the people that talk about consulting the public. You are the people that talk about 

letting the public be heard. You are not concerned, if you say they are all supporting you, then I 

challenge you. Put it to a vote. 

 

You are afraid to put it to a vote and do you know why? You are paying off the Farmers’ Union and 

some other people. You said you would put this in without a vote. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Rubbish! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Rubbish, yes it is rubbish. You bet it is rubbish. It is rubbish and it is arrogance and you 

should be ashamed of yourself. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

52 

Well let’s take a look at the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). I went to Ottawa to do something that 

the Premier should have been doing, trying to get a little action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — First he says, “Mr. Messer said, that Mr. Steuart should have asked the Provincial 

Government for its views on the Federal program before going to Ottawa.” Well I knew their views. He 

said that I was going down in a vacuum. I went down there on a DC 9 as a matter of fact. His temper, 

well he has a short temper these days. It is great to be young and an NDP Minister. Mr. Messer said, “I 

think the agreement would have been signed months ago.” And here he is talking about the Small Farms 

Federal Program. “If the Leader of the Opposition would get off the bloody political bandwagon and 

allow us to come to some bloody agreement.” Well maybe he was misquoted. Well let’s talk about the 

bloody efforts of the bloody Minister of Agriculture. You have had over a year and do you know what 

you have done? You have stalled, you have obstructed, why? Because you don’t want the Small Farms 

Development Program. You don’t want it because it would show up the Land Bank. 

 

You have said from day one that you are afraid of it . . . it hasn’t been amended at all. It will not be 

amended. Do you know why you don’t want it, Mr. Messer? I say that you will knuckle under. I predict 

that you and the Premier will knuckle under and you will be afraid not to sign. You want to control that 

plan. 

 

I have advised the Federal Government not to touch you or your administration because I predict now 

that you will sabotage it. You asked the Federal Government to give you the right to first refusal for the 

Land Bank. You said that if the Federal program buys a piece of land, we want to buy it for our Land 

Bank. Why? Because you want to own and control the land, and you know it. 

 

Now when it looks as if it is going to go in they say, “Oh there is only one little objection we have to it,” 

according the Press – and maybe the Press was wrong. Every time the Premier gets cornered and makes 

a foolish remark or a bad remark, he says, “I’m not responsible what goes in the Leader-Post.” Well, Mr. 

Premier, you don’t say it quite as nicely as that but that is the general way you say it. 

 

What did the Premier say? “We just have one little objection.” The trouble with the Federal program is 

that every time they have a land transaction there is one less farmer. Well, that is not necessarily so. A 

farmer can have his son lease a part of his land and he can sell the rest of his land to the son, just the way 

you did with your first land transaction from Father Wolfe to Son Wolfe. 

 

Now let me say right now that I think there are some things that need changing in the Federal Small 

Farms Program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And I have said it right along. I think they should raise the limit higher than the 

$30,000 – that is the 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

53 

limit in Alberta. I say that they should make it very clear that they can sell to any farmer or to anyone 

else if they qualify whether they are in farming or not. Make it easier, but it still doesn’t have to be one 

on one. But in spite of that let’s have this program because you, by your obstruction, have denied many, 

many farmers in this province an opportunity to sell that land and to get extra money, because you 

refused to sign. 

 

I hope this Federal Government will put that in without your co-operation. But again I predict that in the 

final analysis you will knuckle under and you will give in because you don’t want that program 

operating in competition to your Land Bank. You don’t want it and if you can stop it you will stop it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at another of their Ministers, a new Minister, the Minister of Social 

Service. I gave an interview and Mr. Rolfes heard me and so he ran in and changed his speech a little 

because he knows that I was going to say something about the mess that Welfare is in. I am going to say 

more about the mess that Welfare is in and I am going to say something about advertising. 

 

To begin with the Government set up a Committee, an inter-sessional committee to go about this 

province and hold hearings concerning Welfare and there is nothing wrong with it, at least we don’t 

know whether there is anything wrong with it yet until we see the report. In the middle of it the new 

Minister decided that he would take a little gang and they went out and started to hold meetings. There is 

nothing wrong with that on the surface except they are holding political meetings. The Minister, the 

Rev. Taylor under the guise of talking about Social Welfare and Social Aid, has at Government expense, 

I charge, has been holding political meetings all over this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Further to that he has launched a program. Bad enough that social welfare costs have 

gone crazy, almost out of control, with this Government – and it will come out in this House – the 

abuses of Social Welfare, abuses that make the abuses of the Unemployment Insurance under the 

Federal Government pale by comparison, abuses that only happened after this Government came to 

power. He is on the air spending thousands of dollars of the taxpayers’ money, actually pleading with 

the people to come under social aid. I say that it is a disgrace and we are going to go into this further 

later on in the Session. 

 

I am sorry that Mr. Kramer is not here. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I am going to take notes. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, you take notes, Roy. Get somebody to translate them. Get a good lawyer and they 

will tell you what they mean and then come back into the House. 

 

I am sorry that the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) is not here. He is on the Hot Line. Did you see 

the picture of the new Minister of Highways with his big straw hat on, the Hot Line to Highways. I don’t 

know why they have to spend the money to 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

54 

put his picture in there, they just needed the phone number on the Hot Line. But anyway big happy 

Kramer is right there, large as life, doubling the cost of advertising, publicizing himself. 

 

I am going to tell you something, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to tell this to the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Smishek). We have had serious complaints about the situation at the mental hospital at North Battleford. 

We even sent Mr. Grant up to some of these people to find out if these complaints were justified. I have 

been the Minister of Health and so has Mr. Grant and we recognize that it is very easy to get complaints 

about the mental health program and about what goes on in North Battleford or what goes on in 

Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Grant found that there was a great deal wrong in North Battleford. And things that need correcting. I 

notice that the Minister of Health hasn’t said anything in particular. If he has I haven’t noticed it and I 

am not blaming him for that, I presume he is looking into it. A press statement had come out that Mr. 

Grant was going up to look into some of these deaths and some of these things that had gone on. 

Kramer, of course, just reacted, flew off, went to the press, and accused us of all kinds of political 

shenanigans. I am going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we want to see some kind of investigation because 

if a decent honest investigation is held, I am positive that it will find that the political actions of the 

Member from North Battleford (Mr. Kramer), the Minister of Highways, are at the bottom of some of 

the problems that are in existence now at the hospital in North Battleford and his presence up there and 

his continuous phoning and harassing the people who work up there, are making the very difficult job 

they already have in the hospital a great deal more difficult. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I hope you can prove those statements. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I hope the Minister of Health will do it because he comes in for his share of criticism 

when it comes to arrogance. 

 

You know I have got a headline here, a story in the press about the Minister of Health saying, “if our 

doctors want to leave this province, they are going to have to pay us back for their education”. 

 

Mr. Guy: — They do that in Russia. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, I knew I had heard that song somewhere before, and that is where it come from, 

Russia. I don’t know, we haven’t heard much about it lately, maybe we are gong to hear about it in this 

Session. I hope it is something that he has forgotten. I hope as soon as he said it, that saner heads on that 

side of the House, said, “Look, this is nonsense, we are not going to build a wall around Saskatchewan, 

maybe we get, as far as university graduates are concerned over the years, as good as we 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

55 

have given. Maybe we are a net exporter of brains, of people with an education and with degrees and of 

people with qualifications. We don’t have to be. We need some kind of a program that develops this 

province, we don’t have to be that big an exporter but we will be for a long time. But the day any 

province in Canada says to Canadians, “Before you can move from this province to that province you 

have got to pay back what you owe us.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — You should have read the story. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I did read the story. You should have read it a little more carefully before you put it out 

yourself. Don’t yell, you can’t get out of everything that happens. You people just say the press doesn’t 

like you or you were misquoted. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You just don’t know how to read. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I can read pretty well and I can read English too. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say a word or two about the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan, our friend, Mr. Bowerman. Hear, hear, he says. I want to thank him. I mentioned earlier 

in my speech this afternoon that we hadn't seen such a number of civil servants at any time in the history 

of this country. We have seen a number of civil servants cold bloodedly, blatantly, out working 

politically. A fellow called Mike, Roy Mike, a fellow called Thompson, a fellow called Allan. He was 

your executive assistant. Now I understand he is working directly for the NDP. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He is on welfare. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He is on welfare, he should be on welfare. Out working and we have evidence to prove 

this, out working in the by-election I know that Roy Mike was not off duty he hadn’t up until that point 

done anything to earn his wages that anybody could find out from the day he was hired. He certainly 

wasn’t on leave of absence. And he worked day in and day out politically. As a matter of fact I am glad 

they did because it was one of the factors that helped win the by-election for us and sent Allan Guy back 

here into this House. 

 

Ray Jones, I want to talk about Ray Jones tomorrow because of all the incidents that happened in that 

by-election, the ugliest and the one that told the truest story about the attitude of the NDP to our native 

people, was what happened to Ray Jones. The handling of Ray Jones by the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You can make fun, I hope you make fun, because you did make fun of them and of him 

and you lied about him and you told stories about him from one end of Athabasca to the other. Ray 

Jones was an Indian, he had the guts to try and get an NDP nomination and he got it. He had it. But what 

was he doing? He was beating out four lily white men, four of the power 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

56 

structure up there, the people that Mr. Bowerman wants around him to dictate and to keep the people up 

there under his thumb. So what do they do? They couldn’t have an Indian, they couldn’t have one of the 

native people, so they had a kangaroo court and they kicked him out. They booted him out of the NDP. 

They thought he would go quietly away like the Wafflers and lie down and write funny little articles in 

funny little papers and be satisfied with that. But Ray Jones had more in him than that. He went out and 

he ran as an independent. Well then what did they do? They started a program, the NDP, of character 

assassination about the man that was unbelievable, but it backfired on them. Many people say that it was 

because of Ray Jones that they lost the election. I don’t know whether that is true or not. But I will say 

this, that Ray Jones came out of the by-election a far bigger man than the people who were trying to tear 

him down and spreading the stories about him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, before I sit until tomorrow I just want to mention the Premier for a 

moment or two. Because it is very easy to get on to the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow), the Minister 

of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), they get out in the open. I think the Premier makes the bullets and they 

shoot them. He has had a pretty good record of arrogance. He has had a pretty good record of playing 

politics. I would just like to deal with some of it. 

 

I don’t know who the Premier is going to blame for this business in Bruno. I was down East. Almost a 

full page, in fact I think it was a full page, almost a full page in the Globe and Mail about the closing of 

the Bruno pharmacy. Very, very bad publicity for the Province of Saskatchewan. I don’t mind the bad 

publicity for the NDP, I enjoy it and they deserve it. Very bad publicity for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. You know the story. How did this man find out what was his sin? What had he done? His 

sin was that he was a Liberal. I thought when this started and they talked about taking his liquor license 

away from him, they had backed away. But then I am sure the Member from Watrous (Mr. Cody) and 

his little NDP mafia up there, in fact, I know it because one of them said, one of the NDP officials in the 

area said, “We are going to get you Liberals in Bruno”. What was their sin? Bruno votes Liberal. Bruno 

votes Liberal in the good years and the bad years. They are Liberals. They have a funny idea that you are 

allowed to do this in a democracy and you won’t be punished. But they don’t know the NDP. They have 

been punished. They have lost their drug store, they lost their doctor and they have a phoney character 

selling some kind of filters who was never in business before. They have got him running the liquor 

store. Anybody who tries to put a decent face on this rotten smelly situation can’t do it. And where do 

we lay it, at the door step of the premier. No one else. The Premier is responsible for the liquor licenses, 

the Premier gives the final okay. Stayed in the background pretty well but he is the one that is 

responsible. 

 

Now, let’s talk about the political hirings. You know when they were in opposition over here, they loved 

to talk about us hiring Wilf Gardiner and some other people who were former Liberal candidates. And 

we did hire some. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . fired them. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

57 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, we fired him. You got a few, I’ll give you a list. You should fire too, your country 

cousins, you’ve got lapping it up at the hog trough of the public purse, Mr. Whelan (Regina North West) 

and you should fire them too. But I hope that you don’t because the public will fire the lot of you in 

1975, the first chance they get. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — If we get the truth, I say the list of defeated NDP provincial candidates, the list of 

defeated federal NDP candidates, the list of presidents, of secretaries, of happy workers, of hacks, of 

hangers-on that have been placed on the payroll and are feeding at the public trough at the expense of 

the people of Saskatchewan will be a list that will shock the people of this province and will be a record 

for any province, Newfoundland anywhere else. Quebec! There is nothing that will equal it. Anyway 

that will come up later. 

 

Let’s talk about the politics of the Premier. He doesn’t play politics. He was very upset if Premier 

Thatcher flew his airplane somewhere. It could be a political meeting, maybe sometimes he did. Well, 

the Premier hired a bus, I don’t know whether he hired it or not, they got it from the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company, they spent a lot of money, they fixed it all up, I am told. I wasn’t invited into 

it, but I saw it. The Premier started around on a political tour. Don’t let him kid anybody, a political tour. 

I hope they give us the cost of that bus. I am told in one place that the thing was coming into Rosetown 

and stopped, the plane dropped in and landed and the Premier got out of the plane and jumped on the 

bus and rode into Rosetown. I don’t know if that is true or not, I wouldn’t think such a thing is possible. 

If it is I am sure the Premier will clear that up. That was a rumor some NDP phoned me up and I said I 

don’t really believe that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I said please don’t phone me rumors like this because I won’t repeat them, too often. 

Then the Premier went overseas. The reason he went overseas mostly is because he got lonesome. 

Because everybody else was overseas. The Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) was there. I don’t know all 

of them. They could have had a cabinet meeting, they could have had a far bigger cabinet meeting in 

Europe last summer than in Regina. 

 

We got some great headlines, ‘Blakeney Hints at New Industry’. This is when he hit Britain. What kind 

of an industry are we going to get from Britain. Well, I don’t know, just a minute. There was a little 

thing that says, “The British are Coming”. That was right after we had seen a headline in the paper that 

said, “The Roumanians are Coming”. The Roumanians have been coming for a year or is it a year and a 

half or two years and what are they going to do when they get here. Well they are going to build a 

tractor factory. Se we have got non-existent Roumanians who have never shown up to build a tractor 

factory that we have never seen. So naturally they are going to need parts for that tractor factory and 

that’s what the British, who haven’t shown up either, are going to build a factory to supply three or four 

or five hundred jobs, they are going to build tractor 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

58 

parts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well one of these days we will look up and the Roumanians will be here and the 

English will be here and I shall still be here but I will be on that side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And you will be back trying to make an honest living which I think you will have a 

great deal of trouble to do. Then I think the best headline of all. Here is a headline in the Leader-Post it 

says, “Premier Happy in Paris”. Well, my God, why shouldn’t he be. I’d be happy in Paris too, if I was 

over there on taxpayers’ money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Premier happy in Paris. Well, I am glad to hear that. I don’t know how long he stayed 

or what he did. Well he went to see the Rothchilds. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In London. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You didn’t see the Rothchilds? In London. Oh, you didn’t see them in Paris, France, 

that’s why you were happy. You saw them in London but you missed them in France, well I am glad to 

hear that. Anyway the next story that we have is about this British industry. The Premier doesn’t want to 

wiggle himself out of this so he gets the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) and he says, “Why aren’t 

the British coming?” I’ll tell you why the British aren’t coming because DREE won’t give them a grant. 

Of course they didn’t name the British firm they didn’t say really what they were going to manufacture. 

They didn’t give any plans. But that terrible DREE, that terrible Federal Government, they don’t like us 

here in Saskatchewan, they don’t give us a DREE grant. Then he even blamed it on the weather, how far 

we are from the markets and the dirty Liberal government they defeated back in 1971. 

 

So much for the Premier and his being happy in France, I hope he goes back there next summer, I hope 

he is happy in Italy and every thing else. But the next time please keep some of the Members home to 

watch the store next summer. 

 

The next thing I would just like to mention in passing and I am sure Allan Guy might mention this. 

What happened in the by-election when suddenly Athabasca became the most important place in the 

whole world as far as the NDP Government was concerned? They rented planes and they flew up there 

and they haven’t been back since nor were they ever there before. But the flew up there and they had 

cabinet meetings, in fact, they renamed that the little red barons “flying circus”. And they flew in and 

flew out and before they arrived they had 70 per cent of the vote and when they left we had 70 per cent 

of the vote. I want to thank you publicly now, Mr. Premier. The key note was in Black Lake. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

59 

I went up to Black Lake about a week after the Premier was there. They told me they walked out on the 

Premier. I said, “You didn’t”. They said they had a meeting and the Indian chief told me, “We walked 

out on the Premier. One of the fellows got up and he said in Cree, he might fool the rabbits and the white 

man but he can’t fool us Indians anymore”. We got 107 votes the NDP got two votes. There were two 

school teachers who voted, I think, by mistake and even they realized the mistake. They never got one 

vote there from the Indian people. Why? Because they saw through you. They saw through Mr. 

Bowerman, they saw through the Premier. They saw through that hypocritical nonsense of coming at the 

last minute paying a great deal of attention and they saw something else. It was brought up by the 

Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross). They talk about they are going to put some power development 

up there. I say right now that this talk about power development, hydro-development in Northern 

Saskatchewan is just nonsense, it is window dressing. If you need more power in Saskatchewan you still 

have added capacity at Estevan and you still have the next hydro plant that should be built at Nipawin. 

And to talk about going up into the North and ruining that area around Black Lake, what for? To give 

some power to the Gulf Minerals? They don’t even want it, they don’t need it. I don’t think you have the 

intention of building any hydro development. And if you have the need for a little balance, I tell you just 

move that one up there and you won’t really need to haul any rocks in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You’re not going to build any power plants up there, quit kidding the public. You know 

what you are going to do, you have created a straw man. You are going to say that you were talking 

about some hydro development on the Churchill River, hydro development up at Stony Rapids, at Black 

Lake. Then you are going to send some of these people you have hired and they are going to come back 

and say, “Oh we think it is a terrible thing”. We should take into consideration the native people, and I 

agree with you, should take into consideration the wonderful hunting and the fishing and the ecology. 

And so you will be the most enlightened government in Canada and will forgo the great hydro 

development. Well there is no great hydro development up there and you know it. You have power 

enough, power potential enough at Estevan and Nipawin to look after the needs especially the needs as 

long as you are the government, I say for another 10 or 15 years at least after that. 

 

Whenever we talk about the Premier there is one little incident we just can’t leave alone. We must just 

touch on it. That was that incident where one of the local breweries had a little fun at a football game. 

They put a little target down and they had some sky jumpers land on it and they had people there with 

straw hats and they invited them all over to the Regina Inn to have a big party. They had a good party I 

guess. Beer flowed like beer should. Food was wonderful and it was all free. There were two or three 

thousand people there. Free loading and drinking the beer and eating the sandwiches. They thought they 

were doing a wonderful thing. Some of you were there. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Had a good time. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The Minister of Labour 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

60 

(Mr. Snyder) was there, front and centre. Knocking back the free beer, I understand. So was Mr. 

MacDonald . . . Who else? Not Henry! Was Henry there . . . ah no! 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Any others that would like to confess now? Kind of clean this up. Were you there? 

 

Mr. Robbins: — No. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They probably didn’t invite you. Even the brewery would draw the line somewhere. 

Anyway the one difference between Mr. MacDonald and the Minister of Labour is, Mr. MacDonald 

didn’t drink the free beer and then run back to the Premier like some people did, and tell him they broke 

the rules. They broke the law. Maybe they did break the law. And if they broke the law they should have 

been punished. Funny thing, Mr. Speaker, I always thought we had courts for people who broke the law. 

You are charged, you are found guilty, you get a chance to defend yourself. You pay the consequences if 

you are guilty. No, the Premier stands up and says, “I am the judge the jury and the hangman, I’ll close 

them up for two months”. Throw a couple of hundred people out of work. Make them flush all the beer 

and cost them five, six, seven hundred thousand dollars. 

 

Mr. Messer: — . . . didn’t say that. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, who said it? The order came from his office to close them up. You mean that 

civil servants could have closed them up. Don’t you kid the troops. He ran tippy toe up, whispered to 

Mr. Premier, that’s the one who came back and told the Premier what happened. Free beer, free beer, 

they broke the law. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Premier, said, “I’ll show him, I will show him who is boss, we will close them 

down”. He said he was going to close them down. Well then, what happens? The public took a look and 

they said, “This is ridiculous”. What did they do? They looked after a few people who like a free beer 

now and then, they had a little fun at the football game. Funny, I was at that football game. I didn’t go to 

the dinner, I was invited but I didn’t go. I saw you down in front of me, I figured you would be there, 

but I thought, well, you’ll look after it. I knew you would look after my share. 

 

I was at the football game the week before and there was a group there and they were throwing little 

footballs around advertising a distillery. Now I didn’t see anything worse than that, than this fellow 

going up and down and this sign saying, “eat a barley sandwich”, which I didn’t know what it meant. 

Someone told me on Monday. I didn’t see anything worse. But the Premier jumped up and pounded his 

little fist and said, “I’ll close up the distillery for a month, two months, I’ll make them take their product 

off the market”. 



 

January 29, 1973 

 

 

61 

No, I’ll tell you why. That distillery is in there in SEDCO right up to here. I know, we put him in there. 

That’s why he didn’t close them up. The Premier didn’t want them to go broke, we’ve got enough 

industries leaving here now, so we’ll leave them alone. But what happened? There was a little public 

outcry and Mr. Blakeney backed away. He gave them the sentence one day and he backed off the next 

day, which is a bit of a record for the Premier, but standard procedure. He takes a stand one day and 

somebody gets tough and stands up to him and he back down the next day. They may stand up and say 

you people used to close beer parlors up and do one thing and another, and we did. Okay if we did I say 

we were wrong. Charge them before the law. If you’ve got a law, charge them before the law. Why 

should the Premier of this province be the law? What are you shaking your head for? If they broke a 

law, we charged them. I’m well aware than under certain circumstances you could take their license 

away from them, but in a case like this don’t try and kid anybody that you weren’t the judge and the jury 

and don’t try to kid anybody that something happened to change your mind and I know what it was. 

From about Monday to Tuesday afternoon, or whenever it happened, you back down and you backed 

down publicly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I brought a few things up this afternoon, some of the errors and some of the bungling 

of the Government and tomorrow when I speak in the Throne Speech I’m going to talk about the rest of 

their record which is as sad, or even worse than the things that I’ve mentioned today, and I’m going to 

make some concrete, positive suggestions . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I knew that you would welcome them and I hope that you have the intelligence to vote 

for them, but I doubt it. I hope that you have got the political acumen, but I don’t think you have, to 

accept our suggestions because really we are kind of foolish making them, because if you do accept our 

suggestions, if you do follow our alternatives to bail you out of the terrible failure you have made of 

industrial development, if you do listen to the sweet voice of reason that I shall bring forth tomorrow, 

then the people of this province will be a lot better off and you will probably be, maybe even safe, in the 

next election. I’m confident that you won’t, in your usual narrow-minded way, but we are going to put 

you on the spot – we’re going to test you. We are bringing forward proposals and resolutions. 

 

The Member from Nutana (Mr. Rolfes) said, “This will be an opportunity if you want to rise above petty 

politics, we’ll give you that chance”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal to say tomorrow and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:07 o’clock p.m. 

 


