



















































Hansard: April 28, 1973


3054 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

67th Day 

 

Saturday, April 28, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 9:30 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

Question 
 

Hog in Legislature 
 

Mr. J. Wiebe: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question 

to the Minister of Government Services (Mr. Brockelbank). The democratic hog which was let loose in 

the Legislative Building last week I noticed was a Yorkshire hog. I raise Duroc and Hampshire. It 

looked like a very good hog and I was looking into the possibilities of purchasing this hog to improve 

my herd. I was just wondering if the Minister could tell this side of the House what fate has befallen this 

democratic hog after it left the Chambers. 

 

Hon. J.E. Brockelbank: (Minister of Government Services) — I lost control of it once it left the 

building and I have no knowledge of where it is. You might check with the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I can tell the Members what happened to it. The Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson) 

offered to take it so as Speaker, I told him to take it and look after it. I gave it to the Member for 

Yorkton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Adjourned Debates 
 

Second Readings 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 

(Attorney General) that Bill No. 120 — An Act respecting the operation of Snowmobiles, be now 

read second time. 

 

Mr. E.C. Whelan: (Regina North West) — Mr. Speaker, at the weekend of March 12, 1973, according 

to the Leader-Post, as a result of seven people being killed during that week and three on another 

weekend, a total of 85 people had died in snowmobile accidents in Canada thus far this year. At the 

same time we were considering snowmobile legislation, statistics were provided for us which showed 

that the number of deaths in Saskatchewan in snowmobile accidents during the winter of 1972-73 

included: 

 

1. A 12 year old hit a wire fence and died of head injuries. 

2. A 12 year old died as a result of an accident in which a scarf caught in the engine while it was being 

repaired. 

3. An 8 year old was killed when driving a snowmobile which hit an oil storage tank stand. 



 

April 28, 1973 

 

 

 

3055 

4. A 19 year old was killed when a snowmobile struck a power pole. 

 

According to the Attorney General’s remarks just the other day this figure has increased in the last 

weeks. According to the Saskatchewan Motor Club editorial in the January-February 1973 issue of the 

Saskatchewan Motorist, total deaths during the 1971-72 season as a result of snowmobile accidents 

stood 116, a decrease of two perhaps, from the previous year’s total of 118. Over half of the fatalities 

involved collisions with other motor vehicles; 15 per cent were the result of breaking through the ice on 

lakes or rivers or running into open stretches of water; 65.7 per cent occurred on public roads. Of the 

total of 116 fatal snowmobile accidents, 69 took place at night, 96 of the total were drivers, 17 were 

passengers and three were pedestrians. Fatalities were highest among the 25-44 age group and that 

number totalled 52, followed by the 16 to 24 age group with 38 deaths and there were 11 deaths in the 

15 and under age group. Eighty people in snowmobiles died in collisions with other vehicles. Operation 

of snowmobiles on public roads is still the major hazard. Sixty-six people were killed in accidents on the 

roads as follows: 40 on secondary roads, 19 on municipal roads and 7 on highways. This tells us clearly 

that we should look very carefully at the operation of snowmobiles on public roads. 

 

In this province the latest figures available for hospital costs, covering those injured in snowmobile 

accidents, shows that in 1971 there were 111 people hospitalized for treatment of injuries, during the 

first four months of that year. Injuries occurred at the rate of one per day during this period. Analysis of 

the Saskatchewan statistics for this four-month period of 1971 shows that each person spent an average 

of seven days in the hospital. Adults who worked lost an average of 42.5 days before work was resumed. 

Fractures were the most common type of injury representing 44 per cent of all injuries. Thirty per cent 

of the accidents occurred after sunset. The driver of the snowmobile was the victim in 53 per cent of the 

accidents; the passenger was a victim in 31 per cent of the accidents; a bystander in 4 per cent of the 

accidents and other persons in 12 per cent. 

 

The need for legislation has been recognized in other areas. I have in my files regulations that have been 

introduced in the Province of Quebec recently. These regulations appeared in the Gazette of that 

province in October 1972 and indicate the snowmobiles there must be licensed and must have an 

identifying number. While rigid, these regulations, according to newspaper reports have been effective. 

Deaths in snowmobile accidents this winter in Quebec, according to a Leader-Post news story, dropped 

to 22 from 40 for the corresponding period last year. In conjunction with the legislation I understand a 

safety program is carried on. During the snowmobile season last winter 1971-72 there were 73 fatalities 

in snowmobile accidents in the Province of Quebec. Indications are that as a result of the safety program 

and the legislation this figure will be cut in two this year. In some jurisdictions, for instance in France 

and this again, is from the Leader-Post story of February 13, 1973: 

 

Operation of snowmobiles for personal use has been completely banned because of their noise and 

because they are considered unsafe in mountainous terrain. 



 

April 28, 1973 

 

 

3056 

Snowmobiles have become very popular, as the Attorney General pointed out, here in Saskatchewan. 

And the result has been that thousands of them have been purchased and it is estimated that there are 

35,000 machines in Saskatchewan and within four years this figure could climb to 70,000. In the 

Province of Ontario, for instance, there are now 250,000 snowmobiles and in British Columbia 86,000. 

If we are going to sell snowmobiles in large numbers, if they are to be purchased and used by the 

population at large, then I suggest that we have to regulate the manner in which they are handled and 

operated and insure them as well. I approve of this legislation. 

 

Recently a survey carried out by the Saskatchewan Safety Council showed that 87 per cent of the people 

surveyed — and I understand the survey was carried out to cover the entire province in a very judicious 

fashion — 87 per cent of those replying felt that there should be a minimum age limit for snowmobile 

operators: 46.8 per cent thought the age limit should be 16; 30.1 per cent thought the age limit should be 

14 to 15. It should be pointed out that of those answering the survey, 37.1 per cent either owned or were 

going to buy a snowmobile and yet only 13.7 thought the maximum age should be lower than 14 years. I 

commend the Safety Council for the survey. It contains other valuable information. For instance, it 

shows that most people have snowmobiles for recreation and that 81.5 per cent said that the vehicles 

should be licensed and insured, while 75.5 per cent felt that specific areas should be set aside for the use 

of snowmobiles. 

 

To sum up, the legislation is timely and necessary. It needs to be constantly reviewed. For instance, it is 

questionable as to whether or not we should allow this type of vehicle to run near our roads and our 

highways. There is some need to examine the possibility of carrying on safety programs and licensing 

snowmobiles through club organizations as has been done in Manitoba. Too, there is justification for 

opening up provincial parks and designate snowmobile trails for the use of the vehicle during the winter 

months. Finally, there is a need for a snowmobile safety handbook. Some are available from the 

manufacturers but probably the most reliable and the most useful handbook available at the moment has 

been published by the Province of Manitoba, Highways and Safety Division. It outlines the use of a 

snowmobile at night, for instance. It is complete with illustrations and does an excellent job of 

explaining the laws and regulations and setting out in reasonable terms the limitations in the use of the 

vehicle itself. 

 

The final point, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make is that there are excellent areas for developing 

snowmobile trails in Saskatchewan and around Regina in particular, such as the valley of the Wascana 

and King’s Park. If more snowmobiles are going to be purchased, and I’m sure they are, I suggest we 

proceed to develop snowmobile trails to keep vehicles off the highways and the roads where the record 

shows deaths have occurred. In addition, when the Highway Safety Committee of the Province is 

studying the safe operations of motor vehicles, I suggest they include the snowmobile and even the 

advertising of snowmobiles, if you like. They should look at the possibility of recognizing clubs for 

insurance and also their efforts to promote safety regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:55 o’clock p.m. 

 


