



















































Hansard: April 02, 1973


2098 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Seventeenth Legislature 

48th Day 

Monday, April 2, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. E. Kaeding: — (Saltcoats) Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to introduce to you and through you to 

the Members of the Legislature, 45 students from the High School at Saltcoats in my constituency. They 

have come here today under the direction of Mr. Farquharson, the principal. Mr. Farquharson not only is 

the principal of the school, he is also a Minister in the United Church and he carries on a dual role in the 

town of Saltcoats and does a very good job of both. I sincerely hope that the students this afternoon will 

enjoy their observations of what we do here. I hope they will be impressed and certainly wish them a 

good tour of the buildings and wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Under the Dome 

 

He said: The “Under the Dome” report in the Leader Post of March 31, 1973 reports an interview with 

the writer and myself as Speaker. 

 

I feel a number of the comments in this article are taken out of context and does not report the tone of 

my interview. 

 

I regret very much the portion dealing with the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod). 

 

I wish to make it perfectly clear that I had no intention to embarrass any Member of this House. 

 

It is the right of any Member to question the ruling of the Speaker. The House makes its decision on the 

Rules by majority vote when necessary. 

 

I regret very much that this has happened and I realize that in the future I must refuse to be interviewed 

by the Press. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Mr. Oliver: — (Shaunavon) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day it is with regret that I bring to 

the attention of the House the passing of Billy Bock, MP for Maple Creek from 1927 to 1930, who died 

last Wednesday, March 28, in Eastend. 

 

Billy was a noted historian in the southwest. He contributed a great deal to the recording of the rich 

history of the southwest, especially the Cypress Hills district, the North West Mounted Police post at 

Fort Walsh, all about the Cypress Hills massacre, the Chimney Coulee incident, Life on the Turkey 

Track 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2099 

and 77 Ranches. These were, of course, brought into focus in the books that he wrote. He was also a 

major factor in the setting up of the museum in the Eastend school. 

 

Now this museum contains some of the world’s best specimens of dinosaur skeletons in the world. It 

also has many Indian and pioneer artifacts known nowhere else. 

 

Billy was instrumental in the establishing of the PFRA pastures and also of the irrigation project on the 

White Mud River. 

 

In his later years he turned to writing his memoirs and ballads about the early days and songs that he 

composed and sang himself. 

 

I wish to extend my deepest sympathy to the family. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Member from 

Shaunavon on behalf of the Premier and the Government to extend our condolences and sympathy to the 

family of Mr. William Bock. Mr. Bock was born in 1884 in Bruce County in Ontario. At the age of 18, 

1902, the late Billy Bock went West to what is now Saskatchewan and proved up a homestead in the 

Stony Beach district. 

 

He apparently moved on from there to a number of endeavors one of which was to take a job as 

lumberjack in the Canadian Rockies. He even prospected for gold in the Yukon. In 1908 he came back 

to Saskatchewan, to Regina, to work as a farm machinery salesman. I guess the lure of the land was too 

much and subsequent to that he acquired a section of land in the Palliser Triangle near Eastend, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Billy Bock has had a very considerable life that has been certainly rich and varied and very experienced, 

Mr. Speaker. I have in front of me a book called “The Best of Billy Bock”, edited by John Archer and 

Robert Peterson in 1967. The preface of the book, I think, sums up the man very accurately from what I 

have been able to determine about this very interesting person. It says: 

 

Bill Bock is no run of the mill mortal, miner, Member of Parliament, PFRA fieldman, author, 

songster and potter. What other man can boast of such a variety of skills? 

 

Billy Bock, with a good sense of humor, had all of these and as the Member for Shaunavon pointed out, 

Mr. Speaker, he was in fact a Liberal Member of Parliament being elected in the election in 1927. 

 

I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by reading one small passage from the foreword of the book, written by the 

later Mr. Billy Bock, which I think all politicians would find a great deal of interest in. It is simply 

entitled “Skeletons”. This man obviously had a very good sense of humor. He talked about what 

skeletons were, something to hang in closets and then he said in the introduction, in his own words, Mr. 

Speaker, as follows: 

 

If in the following pages I happen to release a few members of the skeletal fraternity, the reader will 

find that in most cases they have been inhabiting my 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2100 

own personal closet and that I released them only in order to make room for more. If any of my 

progeny find that my revelations have cost them grave concern, I trust that it may be a warning and 

discourage them from following too closely in their grandad’s footsteps. 

 

I am sure that Saskatchewan will sorely regret the passing of this very memorable person, Mr. Bill Bock. 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Members 

opposite and on behalf of this side of the House join with them in paying a tribute to the late Billy Bock. 

 

He was, as was pointed out, not only one of the great pioneers in Western Canada and in Saskatchewan 

in particular, he not only helped to make history in this province, he also wrote about that history. He 

wrote in an interesting and humorous way. 

 

I never met him, but I have heard about him and I recall listening one time when he was interviewed by 

the CBC, and I think it was about an hour program, they had on his life and times and his writings and I 

remember that he sang and recited some of the ballads that he wrote about the early days in that part of 

Saskatchewan where he lived, where he homesteaded and that part of Saskatchewan that he represented 

in the House of Commons. 

 

Certainly he was an outstanding figure in the history of our province. I should like to join with the 

Members on both sides of the House in paying a tribute to his memory and passing on our condolences 

to his family. 

 

Mr. E. F. Flasch: — (Maple Creek) Mr. Speaker, I did not know the late Mr. Bock personally. 

Apparently he lived all of his life in Eastend. However, the present Maple Creek provincial constituency 

is a part of the old federal riding of Maple Creek which he represented. I was not familiar with his works 

but I did have occasion to visit the school at Eastend and to see the museum which he apparently helped 

to set up. It is certainly a credit to him to have worked in that connection. 

 

I should like sincerely to offer my sympathies to the family. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Dr. Hodgins New Chairman of Cancer Commission 

 

Hon. W. E. Smishek: — (Minister of Health) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

make an announcement which I believe will be of interest to the Members of the Legislature and the 

public at large. 

 

You will recall the House, last week, gave third reading to Bill No. 67 to Amend the Cancer Control 

Act. This Bill proposed changes in the structure of the Cancer Commission and will broaden its scope 

and functions to make it more concerned with the program development and improvement of cancer 

services in 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2101 

the province. 

 

As the first step in this reorganization, Mr. Speaker, I have asked Dr. Ken Hodgins to assume the duties 

as the new chairman of the Cancer Commission. This will be in addition to his duties as Executive 

Director of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. 

 

Dr. Hodgins is a native of Saskatchewan and holds degrees in pharmacy and medicine as well as a 

diploma in hospital administration. He joined the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan in 1965 and was 

named the Executive Director in 1968. 

 

Dr. Hodgins will be succeeding Dr. Wigmore of Moose Jaw who has been chairman of the Commission 

for the past 8 years and prior to that served as a member of the Commission for some 10 years. 

 

I should like to take this opportunity on behalf of the Government and the people of Saskatchewan to 

thank Dr. Wigmore for this extended period of dedicated service. During the period that he was 

chairman, the Cancer program continued to function at a high level and the Commission contained a 

highly respected position as one of the health administration bodies in the province. 

 

I am sure that Dr. Wigmore’s term of office as both member and chairman will be remembered by the 

citizens of the province as a true example of faithful and devoted public service. Although all of the 

details have not yet been worked out, I anticipate that a new Commission to help Dr. Hodgins 

implement some of the recommendations of the Johnson Commission Report, will be appointed around 

the middle of this month. 

 

Again, may I pay tribute on behalf of our Government and the people of the province to members of the 

outgoing Commission, many of whom have served with dedicated and distinct service over the years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Tom Barkley has requested that he be allowed to relinquish the position of Director of 

Cancer Services for the province which he has held since 1966. Dr. Barkley will continue in his position 

as Acting Director of the Saskatchewan Cancer Clinic on an interim basis at the conclusion of which he 

will take up other duties on the Cancer Commission. 

 

Again, on behalf of the Government and the citizens of the province I should like to pay tribute to Dr. 

Barkley for his dedication and personal commitment to the Cancer Program that he has so freely given. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the main recommendations of the Johnson Commission was the strengthening of the 

administrative organization of the Commission. To implement some of the changes that were suggested, 

I am pleased to report the establishment of the position of Executive Director, Saskatchewan Cancer 

Commission. This position will be advertised in the near future and it is our expectation that we shall be 

able to recruit an individual with considerable administrative experience in a health related setting and 

with academic training related to the administrative requirements who can provide 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2102 

adequate administrative support for the Cancer Program. 

 

Dr. Hodgins will be fulfilling this position on a temporary basis until a full time person can be recruited. 

However, it is our intent to recruit a non-medical person into this position as we feel that medically 

qualified people should be free for the medical work for which their training was intended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my speech in support of the amendments to The Cancer Control Act, these 

organizational changes are only the first steps in implementing some of the recommendations of the 

Johnson Report to improve our cancer control program in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. G. B. Grant: — (Regina Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, commenting on the Hon. Minister’s 

remarks I want to commend him for his quick action on making a start in implementing the Johnson 

Commission Report. 

 

This report did take some time to complete but it is a voluminous and complicated report and it is nice to 

see that the recommendations are receiving attention. 

 

I would appreciate the Minister clarifying the position of Dr. Hodgins. It seems to me that this man is 

going to be busier than the Minister himself with all the other duties he has taken on. He is involved 

with the Grey Nuns’ Hospital and the management of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, and 

now he has assumed other duties. Will he be relieved of some of his present responsibilities? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Hodgins has no special responsibilities in the Grey Nuns’ Hospital. 

He did act as a director on a pro tem basis until we made a decision to have the Grey Nuns’ Hospital 

under the jurisdiction of the South Saskatchewan Hospital Board. 

 

He will continue as Executive Director of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. As the Hon. 

Member may recall that until Dr. Wigmore was appointed, the chairman of the Cancer Control 

Commission had always been a senior civil servant within the Department of Public Health. For a long 

time it was the Deputy Minister of Health who was chairman. 

 

Yes, we will be giving some additional support and assistance to Dr. Hodgins, so that he can fulfil this 

role. We believe that he can carry on as Executive Director of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

and with some additional help which he may need, he can also very well carry on and do the work as 

chairman of the Cancer Control Commission. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Intercontinental Packers 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. 

Thorson). 

 

In the purchase of 45 per cent of Intercontinental Pork Packers, did the Government buy, was it included 

in the deal, 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2103 

any portion of the F. Mendel ranch, or any portion of the F. Mendel Holdings Limited? 

 

Hon K. Thorson: — (Minister of Industry) Mr. Speaker, the Government purchased 45 per cent of the 

shares of Intercontinental Packers Limited. 

 

I don’t know what he means by the reference to pork packers. We did not purchase any shares or 

interests in any ranching operation. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Or the Mendel Holdings Limited? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Or Mendel Holdings Limited, that is correct. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Or Western Livestock 1958 Limited? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — No interest purchased there either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It is better than I thought. 

 

Program for Dental Auxiliaries 

 

Mr. Grant: — About six weeks ago in reply to a question I directed to Mr. Smishek, he indicated that 

by the end of March he would probably have available the program for the dental auxiliaries, who are 

being trained in the new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Science, in Regina. 

 

The program that will involve the utilization of these people when they graduate from that school. I 

don’t believe it had been established at that time but he felt that it would be established by the end of 

March. I wonder if he has that at this time? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I have not yet received a report of the advisory committee on Dental 

Care. It was the expectation of the Committee to have the report tabled with me by March 31st. My 

information is that the committee has completed its duties and hearings. They are in the final stages of 

preparing their report and it is expected that their report will be in our hands within the next couple of 

weeks. 

 

Report of SEDCO 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow). 

 

I should like to ask him if he is aware that his colleague, the Minister-in-Charge of SEDCO is 

contravening the Crown Corporations Act by not having the SEDCO report tabled in this Legislature. It 

may be a minor point but I think we all recognize that we don’t certainly wish our Legislature to be in 

disrespect of the law. There is enough of that today without 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2104 

the Government being placed in that position. Could we have that report tabled as early as possible. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, I am advised by the Minister that the report 

will be tabled by tomorrow. The reason for the delay has simply been a matter of printing, I am advised. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Provincial Intermediate B Championship — Shellbrook Elks 

 

Hon. G. R. Bowerman: — (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t let the 

opportunity go by without commenting on the 1973 win of the Shellbrook Elks Hockey Club. 

 

This will be the fifth consecutive time that I had the privilege of congratulating the Shellbrook Elks 

Hockey Club in winning the Provincial Intermediate B Championship. 

 

The win was last night, in the PA Communiplex, when the Elks met the Leader Flyers in the series 

which is a two game total goal series. It was won very narrowly by the Shellbrook Elks. I suggest to you 

that I have been informed this is the fifth straight annual win and is a winning record within the 

Intermediate B Series. 

 

May I say that during the season the Elks Club was not able to become one of the continuous hockey 

clubs playing in the league, but in the absence of playing within the Intermediate B League, they played 

against the Intermediate Double A Clubs meeting with such teams as the Lloydminster Border Kings, 

the Kindersley Clippers and the Rosetown Club. May I suggest to you, Sir, that even in this league they 

met with considerable success. I’m sure that all Members of the House would want to extend 

congratulations to them. I would so ask you to do so. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION FOR FURTHER ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. E. L. Cowley: — (Minister of Finance) Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 84: 

 

An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 

Year ending the Thirty-first of March, 1974, 

 

be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Additional House Sittings 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by Hon. W. E. 

Smishek (Minister of Health): 

 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2105 

commencing Wednesday, April 4, 1973, meet at 10:00 o’clock a.m. each sitting day and there 

shall be a recess from 12:30 o’clock p.m. until 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the Members of the Assembly would agree to passing this motion. This 

would enable us to go ahead to passing this motion. This would enable us to go ahead with morning 

sittings starting on Wednesday at 10:00 o’clock. If, however, we have not completed the matter of 

Crown Corporations which is the SEDCO one, or if we have yet to do some work with respect to the 

Public Accounts Committee, we cannot go ahead necessarily with the morning sittings unless we make 

sure that the committee work is well n hand. We simply think that it’s important to proceed at this stage 

in the game by getting this motion before the House and having the Members approve of it. So, with 

those brief introductory remarks, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move the motion that I have referred to. 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, we haven’t really caucused on this one 

so we’ll caucus right out in public, but I presume we intend to support this motion. As usual the 

Opposition is always ready to do anything to speed up the proceedings in the House and help the 

Government along on its chosen task of grinding the people of Saskatchewan under their authoritarian 

heel as quickly as possible. 

 

I find it very interesting though, Mr. Speaker, that this was introduced after we have started to do 

everything we can, and I make no apologies because we intend to continue to do everything we can to 

hold up Bill 50, an Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act because we think it’s a bad Bill 

and we want the farmers to be able to rally so they know what is happening to their freedom and their 

independence by this Government. So it was very interesting when we held this up, and when you look 

at the time table, we only held it up about the same length of time that the Government had in getting 

around to introducing it and giving it second reading, but we evidently interfered with one of their time 

tables which was to have the Bill in operation maybe April 1. It was then in sort of a fit of temper that 

the Government decided to show us and use their majority and say, okay, we’ll show you, you’ll start 

sitting mornings, and that great, wonderful, sort of new look the Government introduced to say we’ll 

give the Opposition all kinds of time, we won’t sit at night, we won’t force them to sit in the mornings, 

went out the window. They didn’t stand up to the acid test. As soon as the Opposition got a little 

obstreperous and took their democratic right to hold up a Bill to give our farmers or any other group in 

our society a chance to rally around, to look at the Bill, to make their wishes known one way or the 

other, then suddenly this very, very democratic attitude of the Government opposite disappeared. 

 

And now when we have such Bills as the Teacher-Trustees to consider, The University Act, which 

incidentally I understand was talked about in The Star-Phoenix today. An Act, that if it goes through the 

way it’s painted in today’s issue of The Star-Phoenix, I’m told, that any autonomy and independence the 

University had won’t last very long. A very important Bill, the Teacher-Trustee relationship, a very 

important Bill. I understand there’s a Bill to come in yet to talk about the controlling of election 

expenses, another very important Bill. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2106 

So, we’ve got a very thick Order Paper. We’ve got, I don’t know how many more Bills. The Attorney 

General hasn’t told us what other legislation is coming in. 

 

I have a feeling, Mr. Speaker, that we’re on the down slope now and now they’re going to dump the 

really important legislation in and now they say we’ll work the little, fighting, fearless band of 15 over 

here morning, noon and night if they dare to show their courage and their strength to try to hold back 

anything, hold up anything that we want, we’ll use our steam roller. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The Sask. Oil Bill. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I’m not crying. I’m just pointing out what happened to you fellows and your wonderful, 

great democratic move, it suddenly went out the window. However, we’re not going to oppose this. It 

wouldn’t matter anyway if we did because the Government would use their steam roller to pass it. But I 

want to go on to say very clearly, to point out to the public of Saskatchewan how long the Premier’s 

word, the Premier gave his word to the public and said, “We do not intend to steam roller this 

Legislature. We recognize the Opposition have a limited number of Members and we’re going to give 

everyone lots of time to look at Bills, discuss Bills so there can be full participation by the public, by 

themselves and through the Opposition.” But the minute their little plans didn’t go quite the way they 

planned, as long as we were sitting here passing Bills, doing like their back benchers, not quite as bad, 

rubber stamping them, moving them right along, we were fine fellows and they were prepared to give us 

lots of time. But as soon as we showed some courage, as soon as we fought the bill then what happened. 

Morning sittings, night sittings. Fine, okay! All I want the public to know is what they should know 

already in 19 or 20 months, exactly how Members on this side are finding out daily and have found out 

every day since they sat here, how much value and how much worth you can put on the word of the 

Premier and the Government opposite. 

 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, if I may just say a word in connection with this. I 

should certainly like to go on record as indicating that we haven’t been holding up the work of the 

House. We’ve talked about one particular Bill. I’d like to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that The 

Natural Products Marketing Act which we have been debating for about the same time as The 

Agriculture Machinery Act has been sitting on the books waiting to get second reading. It was brought 

in on March 5, introduced by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). We thought it was a very 

important Bill. We thought it would take considerable time in second reading, debating in second 

reading, and we have been waiting from March 5, and now it’s April 2, for the Minister of Agriculture to 

give this Bill second reading. It’s been on the Order Paper every single day since that time. So when the 

people opposite indicate that The Natural Products 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2107 

Marketing Act which we have been actually debating for about the same length of time that they are 

holding this up, I think they are a bit ridiculous in this attitude. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to know precisely how to respond to remarks 

such as those made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and the Member from Moosomin (Mr. 

Gardner) with respect to the business of the House. First of all, I want to make it absolutely clear that 

this motion does not have the effect of steam rollering the Opposition, none whatsoever. The simple fact 

of the matter is that when we move out of committees I think the people of Saskatchewan expect us as 

MLAs to make full use of our time. They are paying all of us, including the Liberal Members opposite, a 

very handsome salary indeed as MLAs and when we’re finished Crown Corporations and finished 

Public Accounts to fail to move into morning sittings would, in my judgement, be irresponsible and 

would be a denial of the responsibility that the people of Saskatchewan expect of all of us as MLAs of 

this Assembly. That’s what this motion is simply doing. And for the Leader of the Opposition to get up 

and to say that somehow this is steam rollering, I say with all due respect to the Leader of the 

Opposition he’s merely politicking with that statement. 

 

With respect to Bill 50, Mr. Speaker, which has been referred to by the Leader of the Opposition, I want 

to draw to the attention of the House that Bill No. 50 was read for the first time and capable of being 

read a second time in and around February 2, I’m not sure of the exact date but it was around that time. 

It sat on the Order Paper for about a month till March 1. Why? So that the Leader of the Opposition and 

the Member from Moosomin and all the Liberals opposite could have a good opportunity to study the 

Bill. Well, the Leader of the Opposition laughs, laughs at that. We left it around so they could study it, 

left it around so they could consult with any farm organization that they wanted to. We left it around so 

that they could start to petition and put out 18,000 letters throughout all the Province of Saskatchewan in 

trying to foment trouble on Bill 50. They had every opportunity during the evenings when we didn’t sit, 

every opportunity during the mornings for those who weren’t on committees to study Bill 50 and to 

restudy Bill 50. And I say in all seriousness that certainly is an adequate amount of time. 

 

Now on March 2 the Minister of Agriculture goes ahead and moves it for second reading. Today is April 

2, Mr. Speaker. From March 2 to April 2 there have been 10 adjournments of Bill 50. Of the 

adjournments, nine, Mr. Speaker, are by the Members opposite, one on March 8 was by the Member 

from Watrous (Mr. Cody) and there wasn’t a Member on this side who moved to adjourn that Bill since 

that time. No one denies anybody the right to adjourn but can it be said from the period of February 2 to 

March 1 that they were rushed in their understanding of the legal and political and other implications of 

Bill 50? Can it be said from March 2 when the second reading was made to today, April 2, that they had 

insufficient time to study Bill 50 from a legal or political implication. Mr. Speaker, none whatsoever. 

What the Opposition wants to do is, of course, to bring the entire proceedings of Bill 50 and the 

proceedings of this House to a halt. Everybody has the right to criticize and to oppose, but I say, Mr. 

Speaker, do so responsibly and not irresponsibly as the Opposition has been handling itself with respect 

to this Bill 50. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2108 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — At one time, Mr. Speaker, you could go around the country and there would be 

people asking questions about Bill 50. Now the questions when I travel around the country are: “Why is 

the Opposition acting so irresponsibly with respect to Bill 50?” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That’s the question that’s coming out over and over again! And I say, Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to Bill 50, if they use that as an example of the Leader of the Opposition is when he is 

getting up with his 1,200 clipout coupons, 1,200 from people who are now dead and people who are 

unknown on the returns, and he says that is an attempt to spank, then I say the Leader of the Opposition 

is purely and simply politicking. 

 

Now one final comment with respect to this resolution. There are some important Bills to come forward 

yet before this House. We will, like we have up to now, give the Opposition and the people of 

Saskatchewan every opportunity to study the Bills, oppose the Bills, make suggestions for amendments 

and ask us to reconsider the Bill. We will grant adjournments, we’ll give the Opposition every 

opportunity they can to act responsibly and respond to any of the legislation that is put before the House. 

 

But I say, Mr. Speaker, that the public is saying now to the Leader of the Opposition and to the Liberal 

group that it is time to stop acting irresponsibly and get on with the people’s business which we were 

elected to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 72 – An Act respecting 

Dental Nurses. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce second reading of The Dental 

Nurses Bill. This Bill is a major step forward in our Government’s program to provide and ensure dental 

care service for all Saskatchewan children under the age of 12. The Saskatchewan dental nurses will 

play an important part in this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago the Hall Commission on Health Services recommended that the Department 

of National Health and Welfare in conjunction with the provinces set up a program to provide dental 

services to children. The Hall Commission recommended that the program employ the skill of dental 

nurses and auxiliaries to assist with this service. Since these recommendations were made, Provincial 

and Federal Liberal Governments have done nothing to implement such a program. The latest health 

survey shows that the need for such a program is still just as great as it was 10 years ago. In 1961 a 

Canadian Dental Association survey reported that at age 14 the existing 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2109 

backlog of untreated dental decay was, on the average, 3.4 teeth per child. In 1971 a survey of six school 

units in Saskatchewan revealed that on the average each child had four defective permanent teeth at age 

11. 

 

Our Government recognizes that dental disease is one of the most prevalent forms of ill health among 

our children and our adult population. We made a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to 

establish and ensure dental care service initially for those under the age of 12. We are now taking steps 

to fulfil another commitment made in our New Deal for People. 

 

There are many reasons why so many of our children have poor dental health. First, there are simply not 

enough dentists available in Saskatchewan. There are approximately 208 practising dentists resulting in 

a dentist population ratio of roughly one dentist to 4,500 people. This ratio is the second worst in 

Canada. Saskatchewan dentists are rather poorly distributed geographically. About one-half of the 

dentists are practising in Regina and Saskatoon. They are serving only about 30 per cent of the total 

provincial population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that in the case of the dental profession we have the second worst 

situation as to the number of dentists to population. In contrast we have the highest number of 

pharmacists, in fact twice as many as the national average. Somewhere this indicates a disparity and the 

weakness of our training programs over the years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the average a Saskatchewan child receives only a fraction of the time needed for dental 

services. Data from the Oxbow project reveals that each child accepted into the program requires an 

initial three hours treatment. By contrast 70 per cent of persons 18 years of age and under in 

Saskatchewan are receiving approximately one-half hour of dental care annually according to the 

Canadian Dental Association Report, 1968. There is a vast spread between the amount of dental service 

time required and that which can be obtained. 

 

It is estimated that we would require at lest a 50 per cent increase in the number of practising dentists to 

provide the treatment service required annually for children ages 3 to 12 in Saskatchewan, not to 

mention the rest of the population which would continue to be partially unserved. At present only 40 per 

cent of our children receive dental care on a regular basis. Our Government believes that the best 

method of dealing with the dental health problems of our children is to set up a comprehensive program 

financed from public funds using auxiliary dental personnel to augment the services of the dentist. The 

results of the Oxbow project confirmed that belief. 

 

I want to tell you a bit about the Oxbow project, Mr. Speaker. It was started by our dental health division 

with financial assistance from the Federal Government. The project is in its third year of operation. 

Some encouraging results have been received. The dental team consists of a dentist, two dental nurses, 

three certified dental assistants and a secretary-receptionist. The team operates out of a 62 foot trailer 

which has four dental chairs. The trailer can be parked right beside a school whose children are being 

seen. Services are offered to all children in a test area from ages 3 to 12. Once enrolled in the program 

the children are eligible for continuing 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2110 

care for the duration of the project. Between 91 per cent and 96 per cent of all those eligible have 

registered in the program. The typical child after enrolling in a program would receive X-ray screening, 

a complete oral and dental examination by the dentist, followed by diagnosis and delegation of treatment 

responsibility as appropriate. Also chair side and classroom dental health education such as how to brush 

teeth and what foods to eat, scaling and polishing of teeth, individual treatment as required. 

 

The functions of the dental auxiliaries in this program are similar to those envisaged for our dental 

nurses, that is providing dental education to children and parents, both individually and in the classroom, 

simple drilling and filling of teeth where necessary and limited extractions. The more complicated cases 

are handled by the dentist. 

 

The prevention services and X-rays are done by the certified dental assistants. Preparation work for the 

project in the case of Oxbow began in the fall of 1969 and by March 31, 1970 some $34,000 had been 

spent for equipment and supplies including the specially designed trailer which was built here in 

Saskatchewan. The project itself commenced in September of 1970 and by March, 1971 a further 

$51,250 had been spent in operating costs. For the period April 1, 1971 to March 31, 1972, the project 

cost $80,250. Costs for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1973 are estimated at $75,000. As of April, 

1973, the Provincial Government will assume responsibility for the project. In fact I might say that we 

have been assuming the responsibility for the project since September 1st, 1972 because it was at that 

time that the Federal grant research money ran out. 

 

The project has demonstrated that the use of auxiliary dental personnel can cut costs and extend 

services. There are marked improvements in the dental health under a regular preventive and treatment 

program directed to children. There are some 3,500 children who have been in the program over three 

years that it has been in operation. The average cost per child has been $35. To give some estimates of 

comparative costs the project data reveals that the initial period of care in Oxbow averaged $37 per 

child. Under the 1972 Saskatchewan College of Dental Surgeons’ fee schedule the services would have 

cost $69.98, almost exactly double to what the Oxbow project cost per child. Not only that but the 

average cost per child after the initial period was over, that is the $37 figure that I reported, the figure for 

the service cost thereafter dropped to just under $29 and therefore giving us the average cost of $35 that 

I have mentioned. Our latest figures aren’t in yet but I am told that they are expected to drop even 

further so as the service continues we are able to keep up with providing service to the children and the 

cost over a period of time reduces itself. 

 

There has been no sacrifice in the quality of work done by the dental nurses to achieve these lower costs. 

In fact a continuing assessment of the actual work done is carried out by the College of Dental Surgeons, 

two independent appraisers, Dr. Carl Bolen of Regina and Dr. Wayne Brattley of Assiniboia, who 

regularly assessed the quality of the restorative work done by the dental nurses. Their reports indicate 

that the work being done is excellent. The Oxbow project shows rather conclusively that the concept we 

are examining is viable. We have laid out broad guidelines for this program. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2111 

Like the Oxbow project, the program will provide preventive and basic restorative dental care for 

children up to the age of 12. It will encourage parents to take a greater interest in their children’s dental 

health. 

 

We are also taking steps to train more dentists in the province by extending the College of Dentistry in 

Saskatoon. I might report that of the ten members of our first graduating class I am pleased to see that 

nine have remained in the Province of Saskatchewan. The tenth was on an Armed Forces bursary and 

was transferred to Calgary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we intend to spend an additional $2 million on expanding the teaching facility of the 

College of Dentistry. We have begun to train Saskatchewan dental nurses at the Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Arts and Science in Regina. We have developed a departmental proposal of how a dental 

care program for children could be implemented and publicly funded. The department’s proposal is 

being examined by the six-member Advisory Committee made up of the Dean of the School of 

Dentistry, past president of the Saskatchewan College of Dentists, a public servant who is a dentist, a 

school trustee, a school teacher and a housewife with three school-age children. The Advisory 

Committee had its initial meeting with me on December 6th, 1972. The Committee decided to distribute 

the department proposal widely and sent out some 600 to 800 copies of the departmental proposal. Then 

the Committee advertised in every weekly and daily newspaper in the province and sent an invitation to 

all interested individuals, groups, organizations and providers of dental services to submit briefs. If a 

person appeared before the Committee and wanted to have a hearing, this opportunity was provided for 

him. 

 

Some 37 briefs or letters of comments were received by the Advisory Committee. Both the 

Saskatchewan College of Dental Surgeons and the Canadian Dental Association presented briefs to the 

Committee and appeared in person. Three members of the College of Dentistry, Saskatoon, presented 

oral submissions. Five persons were interviewed at the request of the Committee. As well the 

Committee Secretariat had undertaken a number of studies on behalf of the Committee. We had hoped 

that the Committee’s report would have been in our hands by March 31st. The Hon. Member for 

Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) raised a question on the Orders of the Day. I indicated to him that at my 

meeting with the Secretary of the Committee this morning I was advised that the Committee’s report is 

well advanced and is in the final drafting stages and we should be receiving it within the next couple of 

weeks. 

 

I might report that by the end of March the Committee held a total of nine meetings. The Committee’s 

report will be in our hands shortly. You can see that we have provided a good opportunity for the public 

and all interested persons to make their views known on this important matter of provision of dental 

services for our children. There has been direct consultation with the dental profession on The Dental 

Nurses Act on which I am going to give second reading. 

 

I met with the officials of the College of Dental Surgeons on February 7th. I had previously sent a copy 

of the draft Bill in confidence so that they could comment on our proposal. The representatives of the 

Council were in agreement with the principles of the proposed Bill. They suggested some minor 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2112 

draft changes which we took under advisement, such as their suggestion that the draft Bill should 

authorize a dental nurse to provide services to patients while receiving clinical training. Clause (h) was 

added to Section 16 of the draft as a result of that suggestion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it fair to say that as a result of this consultation, the Bill before you has the 

endorsement of the dental profession. We think that is an important consideration. The Saskatchewan 

Government is going to implement a first class dental program foryour children. At the last session of 

the Legislature, this House passed a new Act to provide for the education of ancillary dental personnel. 

This Act allows us to set up an education program to train Saskatchewan dental nurses for the dental 

care program. At the 1972 fall session, 36 students were enrolled at the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Arts and Science, Regina, in a two-year dental nursing program. There will be some 60 students 

enrolled next year. 

 

The curriculum involves academic study, pre-clinical and clinical experience. A Curriculum Planning 

Committee has been set up to set out the details of the course that these students should follow in the 

two-year training program. The Committee has on it representatives from the University of 

Saskatchewan College of Dentistry, the College of Dental Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the Department of 

Public Health and the Department of Education. The graduates of this course will be well trained in such 

dental procedures as drilling filling, extractions, X-rays, cleaning and preventive dental work. The 

intention is to produce well-trained Saskatchewan dental nurses, not semi-trained dentists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be of interest to note that South Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand and England 

have had similar training programs in effect for some time. In the case of New Zealand I understand that 

their program has been in effect for almost 50 years. The Oxbow project has demonstrated quite clearly 

to us to be a satisfactory program providing good services. Our local dentists are being used as well as 

the dental auxiliaries and the kind of training that they have had makes it possible to provide good 

services to people. 

 

The dental program is expected to begin, that is the full program based on our new graduates, in the fall 

of 1974. That date will be another land-mark in Saskatchewan’s history of pioneering in the health field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a part of a Government that has such a pioneering spirit in the health 

field. In general The Dental Nurses Act will provide for the licensing of graduates for our new dental 

program. It will set out the machinery to regulate the conduct of the Saskatchewan dental nurses in the 

children’s dental care program. The Act proposes the formation of the Saskatchewan Dental Nurses 

Board. This Board will be in charge of registration of Saskatchewan dental nurses and will prescribe a 

code of conduct for these nurses. It will also serve in an advisory capacity for the making of regulations. 

The Board will be made up of both health professionals and lay members. A teaching member of the 

College of Dentistry at the University of Saskatchewan and one dentist engaged in private practice will 

be selected by nominations to the joint board. An official of the Department of Public Health, along with 

the person employed in the ancillary dental education program will 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2113 

also be board members. There will be three Saskatchewan dental nurses on the Board. We must not lose 

sight of the fact that this is a regulatory board and our Saskatchewan dental nurses, like any other 

occupational group, have the right to a significant voice in matters relating to their own professional 

conduct. The remaining two to five members will be laymen representing the public interest. These lay 

members will play an important role in ensuring that the program is responsive to the needs of the 

public. Allowances have been made in Section 3 for a regular turnover of board members. The members 

will be appointed for three-year terms. A third of the membership will be subject to re-appointment 

every year. 

 

In summary, the Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Board provides for the appointment of seven 

professionals and up to five members of the general public, maintaining an effective balance between 

the providers of the service and representatives of the public. It is intended that each Saskatchewan 

dental nurse shall be registered and shall be in receipt of an annual licence. The Secretary of the Board 

will be responsible for maintaining the register of dental nurses. The Board also has the authority to 

remove the name of a Saskatchewan dental nurse from the register for contravention of the Dental 

Nurses Act. 

 

The House will remember that at the last session of the House we introduced an amendment to Section 

50 of the Medical Profession Act, to improve the appeal procedure for persons whose names have been 

removed from the register. Historically, it has been found that recourse to the courts has not been the 

most effective method of handling complaints against decisions of Regulatory Boards. I am confident 

that the three-man tribunal made up of a Judge of the Queen’s Bench, an appointee of the Dean of the 

College of Dentistry, and an appointee of the Minister of Public Health, will provide the necessary 

safeguard for the interests of both the Board and the complainant. An annual report of the activities of 

the Dental Nurses Board will be tabled in the Legislature. As I have said before, the Board represents the 

public interest and an annual report will be one means by which to monitor the activities of the Board. 

 

Finally, I should like to draw your attention to Sections 20 and 21 of the Act. The existing legislation 

relates to the dental profession, in effect, grants the College of Dental Surgeons the right to regulate their 

own affairs and to oversee the professional conduct of dental auxiliaries. This regulatory authority 

should not be confused with that of The Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Board. The Saskatchewan Dental 

Nurses will be regulated by the new Act and not by The Dental Professions Act. 

 

I might add that the College of Dental Surgeons has concurred in these sections of the Act. Passage of 

this Bill will allow us to give the dental care program for children past the formative stage and into the 

implementation stage. 

 

Saskatchewan dental nurses are being trained at the present time and we should like them to gain some 

field experience later this year. The dental care program for children is being heralded across Canada as 

a pioneering effort. Under the headline, “Denticare Another Saskatchewan First.” 

 

Mr. Nick Hills of Southam News Service wrote and I quote: 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2114 

Saskatchewan NDP Government is returning to its pioneering role in the field of state medicine with a 

province-wide ‘Denticare’ program that by the end of the decade will provide treatment for more than 

140,000 children. 

 

We are pioneers, Mr. Speaker, because this will be the first province-wide dental scheme in North 

America. It will place an equal emphasis on both preventive and treatment dental care among our 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might suggest and point out to the Members that the proposal that we have made and the 

training program that we have started, has received wide interest. We have now had people from 

Newfoundland visit us, including the Minister, who has been giving special attention, special study as to 

how our program is developing. Just last Friday I received a telegram from the Minister of Public Health 

in the Province of Nova Scotia who wants to come to Saskatchewan on April 18th to take a look at our 

proposal and at our training program. It seems to me that it is only a matter of time before other 

provinces will be trying to duplicate and copy the proposal that we are making here for a dental care 

program. As I said earlier, the Saskatchewan proposal for the program is still being examined by our 

advisory committee. The final program plan will not be available until later this year. However, as the 

department proposal stands at the present, we should like to see each child registered in the program 

receiving dental check-ups twice a year. The proposed program covers a wide range of dental services 

emphasizing prevention such as cleaning and scaling of teeth and basic restorative procedure such as 

simple fillings. It is proposed that the basic services will be provided by Saskatchewan dental nurses and 

certified dental assistants, under the supervision of the dentist. More complex services would be 

provided by dentists through a referral system. 

 

I want to stress that a dental care program for children will be innovative. We will be tackling one of the 

most neglected areas of health among the children of Saskatchewan. We will be setting up dental teams 

to make the most efficient use of very expensive, but skilled dental professionals. Our program will 

emphasize prevention, as well as restorative care. I am confident that with the introduction of this 

program, we will see marked improvement in the dental health of our children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the Member to support this Bill so that Saskatchewan may take another giant step 

forward in the health field as we have done in the past and as we propose to continue in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose to move second reading of the Bill, and after second reading our intention is to 

have this Bill referred to the Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 

 

I now move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. F. MacDonald: — (Moose Jaw North) Mr. Speaker, I am going, after a few remarks, to ask 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2115 

leave to adjourn this debate. I’m sorry but I had difficulty hearing the Minister. I have a bit of a cold and 

I just didn’t hear all of his remarks. 

 

I’m not adjourning it because of any desire to oppose the Bill. To the Bill, as set out, on dental nurses I 

cannot object too much. Really what we are talking about is the entire dental program for children. The 

Bill sets out some stipulations for dental nurses, but we are really talking about dental care for children, 

and I think it will be the last opportunity that this House has to discuss this dental plan. And I do have 

some concerns about the dental plan for children that will be implemented at some time in the future. 

 

The Minister indicated that he has consulted with the profession and that he has the endorsement of the 

dental profession. Well, I don’t really understand it. I don’t understand what the Minister means by 

consultation because certainly he has talked to the profession but he has not written to them. He hasn’t 

asked them really to have any input into the proposed dental plan. I don’t know whether he means the 

dental profession is in favor of this Bill. I don’t think that the dental profession has indicated any 

endorsement of the program, or the program as I visualize it, or the program and the profession 

visualizes it. I’d say they are very apprehensive about what they think the Minister has in mind and what 

the Minister has so far indicated. I don’t think that we can rely on this endorsation by the dental 

profession. I don’t think they have given it. 

 

I think we also have to consider some of the remarks of the Minister. He talked about preventive and 

restorative measures. I don’t know whether when he is talking prevention whether he includes the 

fluoridation of water that the dental profession thinks is necessary. I expect that when he talks about 

prevention he does include fluoridation. This is something I should like to find out before passing this 

Bill. 

 

I think the other thing is that the dental plan (as I visualize it and as the profession visualizes it) will 

have a detrimental effect on the dentists in rural areas. I think the rural areas need the dentists they have 

and if the plan is not going to utilize both the dentists and the facilities in rural areas then certainly rural 

areas are going to suffer because of losses of these dentists. 

 

I think that every Member in this House and all members of the public support the concept of a 

children’s dental plan. I don’t think that’s in question at all. I think that, certainly speaking for myself, 

that I endorse it but I only endorse it if the plan is of the highest standard and one thing that I would 

demand and would only accept if the plan for dental nurses has the direct supervision of dentists and I 

think this is a must. This takes place at Oxbow and as I understand it this is not part of the plans of the 

Minister of Health for his proposed plan. I cannot accept the plan if it does not have direct supervision of 

dentists. I don’t think that the public will, nor the dental profession will accept anything else. 

 

I should at this time like to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2116 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 63 – An Act to amend The 

Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act, 1968. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act — 

Bill No. 63. 

 

At the last session of the Assembly The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act, 1968 was 

amended in several important respects. 

 

For the purposes of the Bill now before the Assembly, it is necessary to refer only to three major parts of 

that 1972 Bill. Before dealing with the Bill itself, I should perhaps report to the Members of the House 

that late last fall the Board of Arbitration, The Surface Rights Arbitration Board, was increased by two 

members so that it is now composed of six members. The appointment of all members to the Board 

expired on January 11, 1973 and I am pleased to report to the Members of the House that all members of 

the Board have been reappointed for a further period of one year from that date. 

 

Now about the Bill and the amendments. As I have said, they basically affect three parts: 

 

1. One of the definitions of ‘owner’ in Section 2, (3) of the Act was found to be too narrow and to 
possibly exclude owners who might be entitled to compensation with respect to surface rights 

or to have such compensation reviewed. Section 2 of this Bill has been revised so that the 

definition of ‘owner’ will include those who might have been excluded from the benefits of the 

Act by virtue of the 1972 amendments. I don’t think there is anything too controversial or too 

major in that amendment. 

 

2. Next it was found that the procedural provisions of the Act with respect to applications to The 
Surface Rights Arbitration Board were not entirely satisfactory. They required amplification 

and they required simplification. Section 3 of this Bill which is before the Members of the 

House will add a new section providing for service of notice by an owner or occupant of his 

application to the Board of Arbitration for a hearing with regard to compensation to be paid by 

the operator for surface rights acquired under the Act by filing the said notice with the Board. 

The Board will then send a copy of it to the operator. In this way, any possibility of a dispute 

as to the mailing or receipt of the notice will be avoided and I do believe that it will improve 

the matter procedurally. 

 

3. The third aspect of the Bill – one of the problems of complaints that has arisen with respect to 
the Act itself, arises in this way. If the owner and operator fail to agree upon the surface rights 

to be granted to an operator, and the matter was dealt with by the Board of Arbitration under 

the Act, and the Board granted the surface rights and fixed compensation to be paid to the 

owner, the Act in Section 32 provided that the operator could apply to the Board every five 

years for a review of that compensation. But, in many instances, the owner and the operator 

had agreed upon the surface rights to be acquired by the operator, by an agreement in writing 

and in that agreement the compensation was very frequently fixed. Some of these agreements 

also provide for a periodic review of compensation, either by agreement, or if necessary by the 

Board. Many 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2117 

of the agreements contain no such provisions. 

 

Section 26, therefore, of this new Act will be amended to provide for a review of the compensation, not 

only where the Board of Arbitration has determined the amount, but also where the amount of 

compensation has been agreed to in writing, between the parties themselves. Such reviews may be made 

at five-year intervals and the Board is given jurisdiction to deal with them in accordance with the 

provisions of the Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are other parts of this Bill as well which require just a brief mention. 

 

4. Section 5 of this new Bill simply corrects an error made in Section 51(f) of the 1972 amending 
Act. I think no further comment needs to be made there. 

 

5. With respect to Sections 59 A and 59 B as enacted in last year’s 1972 Act. Perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, I should try to explain the situation with respect to this part as it existed before last 

year’s 1972 amending Act was passed, which Act included these two sections, namely 59 A 

and 59 B. 

 

Now ever since the discovery of oil and gas in this province took place, commencing about 1953-54 or 

thereabouts, a large number of what are called surface leases for well sites and access roadways have 

been entered into between owners of the surface and the operators. Most of such surface leases, so far as 

can be ascertained, contained a provision fixing the compensation to be paid by the operator to the 

owner, and contained also, provision for periodic reviews of the compensation at seven year intervals. 

Some of such surface leases did not contain such review provisions. Then in 1965 a Royal Commission 

was appointed – The Friesen Royal Commission to study the whole field of surface rights. That 

Commission made its report to the Liberal Government of the day in November of 1966. The Surface 

Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act, 1968 was passed at the 1968 session of this Assembly and 

received Royal Assent on April 13, 1968 to come into force on a date fixed by proclamation, and in fact 

it was proclaimed on May 23, 1968. Now between the dates the Commission was appointed in July, 

1965 and the time that the Act was brought into force in May of 1968, a period of a little over three 

years, operators had acquired surface rights from owners either by agreement, or under authority of the 

Minister of Mineral Resources under the then Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulations in force. Since it 

was not known what recommendations the Commission might make in its report, or what action might 

be taken by the Government on the report of the Commission (when it was finally dealt with) the matter 

of compensation was left open (or at least not determined). After the Act was passed in 1968 it was 

found that no provisions were made in it to deal with matters of compensation for surface rights 

acquired before the Act came into force in 1968. Further in many instances, a Board of Arbitration, 

established under the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulations, from time to time in force, had made 

orders awarding compensation but those regulations appeared to make no provision for a review of 

compensation unless the operator voluntarily agreed to do so. 

 

In order to bring all these matters within the jurisdiction of the new Board of Arbitration established 

under this Surface Rights Act, the 1972 amendments contained Sections 59 A and 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2118 

59 B. As a result of a hearing before the Board of Arbitration of applications based on these two sections 

59 A and 59 B, it’s been argued that they are not as clear as they should be to define the rights of the 

owners, the occupants and the operators. It is, therefore, proposed that the 1972 sections 59 A and 59 B 

will be repealed and a new section 59 A to 59 D, as set out in the printed Bill, will replace them. 

 

One of the main purposes of enacting the new sections mentioned is to remove any uncertainty that may 

appear in the old sections 59 A and 59 B. Further, to separate matters of compensation and review of 

compensation that arose before May, 1968, when the Act came into force, from all those matters with 

respect to compensation and review of compensation that arose after the Act came into force in May 

1968, this confusion has been eliminated. Then it was felt that there should be uniformity at least in 

principle, particularly with respect to review of compensation to be paid by operators to owners and also 

to occupants of land where the latter was entitled to it. As already mentioned, some surface leases 

contained seven-year reviews for compensation provisions, others contained no such provisions. The 

regulations mentioned did not contain proper provisions for review of compensation where that has been 

determined by the Board of Arbitration under them. 

 

I think special mention should be made with respect to surface leases granted prior to May, 1968, which 

contained a seven-year review of compensation provisions. 

 

Many of our farm owners felt that this term was far too long and apparently many of the operators have 

also agreed. Many of the operators have voluntarily agreed to review compensation at five-year intervals 

and have substituted voluntarily the five-year intervals in new agreements in place of the seven-year 

review provision which had been written into the leases. But there are always, of course, as Members 

know, a few operators who refuse to change the terms of the surface leases in this regard. We believe 

that there should be uniformity in the laws as much as possible between the owners or occupants on the 

one hand, and the operators on the other hand particularly as to the period when reviews of 

compensation should be required. New sections 59A and 59B in this Bill before you will therefore adopt 

the policies of those operators, I believe that is the majority of them now, who have voluntarily agreed to 

a five-year review period in place of the seven-year provision contained in the earlier surface leases. At 

the same time for those operators who have refused to adopt the policy of providing for the five-year 

review provisions it will nullify the seven-year provisions in their surface leases. 

 

The new sections, Mr. Speaker, also provide for the procedure to be followed to bring such matters of 

review before the board of arbitration. A new Section 7 is included in the Bill. 

 

I am advised that the number of applications made under the old Sections 59A and 59B are presently 

still pending before the Board of Arbitration. It is felt that these applications should be dealt with by the 

Board under the present law. Whatever problems arise from the interpretation of those sections by the 

Board or by the court on an appeal will be binding upon the parties. But if the court or the Board on 

appeal should hold the sections to not apply to the applications pending then 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2119 

the owner or operator or occupant will be entitled to make application under the new section for the 

relief for which he considers he is entitled. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the 1972 amending Act contained a new Section 9. This section deals specifically 

with pipe lines, flow lines, gathering lines and other facilities in connection with those lines. The Pipe 

Line Act of this province deals with pipe lines generally but specifically excludes flow lines, gathering 

lines and other facilities usually installed in connection with them, as well as the land required for 

purposes of laying such pipe lines. Under Section 26(2) of The Pipe Line Act the Minister of Mineral 

Resources could make an order that the Act shall apply to those pipe lines mentioned. If the parties 

cannot agree upon the compensation to be paid the district court is then given jurisdiction to determine 

the compensation. Section 9 of the 1972 Act made provision to the effect that where such compensation 

had not been determined by agreement or by the court the owner or occupant could apply to the Board 

of Arbitration within six months after the 1972 Act came into force to have that compensation 

determined. It may be remembered by Members that there was a long delay between the time the Bills 

passed at the 1972 session of this Assembly and the time that they received Royal Assent and the time 

that finally the Bills were printed, published and distributed among the people. As a result, the six month 

period provided by Section 9 had expired before many owners became aware of their new rights under 

Section 9 of the 1972 Act. We feel this has to be remedied, accordingly the new Sections 8 and 9 of the 

Bill will repeal the old Section 9 of 1972, it will re-enact it in substantially the same terms but will 

extend the time to make application to the Board of Arbitration for a period of one year from the date 

that the Bill becomes law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of this is very technical I realize, perhaps highly legalistic, perhaps more detailed 

questions can be answered in Committee of the Whole. With those few words of explanation I move 

second reading of Bill No. 63. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) Will the Member allow a question before he takes his seat. Could you 

tell me how many claims were heard and awards made under the 1972 amendments and whether a 

mediation officer has been appointed as allowed in that legislation? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I will have to provide that information with respect to the numbers of cases under 

the 1972 amendments later, I don’t have it handy, perhaps I could do that in Committee of the Whole if 

the Member would agree. If not, I will try and get some information beforehand. With respect to the 

mediation officer, no mediation officer has been appointed to date to the best of my knowledge. I am 

advised by the chairman of The Surface Rights Arbitration Board that an offer has either been made 

within the last several days, or is about to be made to a person who resides in Regina, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. It will be, I am advised, on a sort of per diem basis whenever he is required to go out and 

mediate. We shall see how that operates because it may not be a full time position. I don’t think I am at 

liberty to reveal the person’s name because he may refuse the terms and conditions, or whatever, but I’ll 

be pleased to 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2120 

advise the House the moment a mediator is appointed. 

 

Mr. H. E. Coupland: — (Meadow Lake) Mr. Speaker, as the Attorney General has already mentioned 

there were some amendments made to this Act last year in the 1972 session of the Legislature. The 

Government introduced Bill 27 to amend this Act. In that Bill the Government introduced a number of 

innovations such as the tortious acts claims section and the provision for appointment of a mediation 

officer. At the same time an attempt was made to introduce the principle that every agreement or award 

for surface rights should have a provision that it can be reviewed every five years for a re-adjustment of 

compensation. However, the Bill was so badly worded that it was subject to so many interpretations that 

it caused a great deal of confusion. 

 

Bill No. 63, this one before us, seems to be an attempt to clear up this confusion. However, as it seems 

in most cases when one attempts to amend original principles of an Act and then again amend the 

amendment, the resulting patchwork becomes so complicated that it becomes a nightmare of 

interpretation. If one accepts the principle that no matter how a right of entry for a petroleum well, flow 

line, service line or power line was acquired that is, by agreement, by board award or by ministerial 

order under the various acts and regulations throughout the years covering this subject these are now not 

valid in two respects. These are the amount of compensation paid originally and the right of periodic 

review for compensation. Then one cannot quarrel with the principle of Bill No. 63. The main thrust of 

the Bill is to ensure that every situation is covered to provide that the original amount of compensation 

must be reviewed in each period of five years. 

 

Accepting this principle it still leaves some mammoth problems. For example, Section 6 of the Bill 

provides a new Section 59B. This, in effect, provides for the right of review for compensation of an 

agreement made prior to April 15, 1968 for a period of five years after the agreement was made. 

Suppose then an agreement was made in 1954 and there are many, the owner and operator are now 

supposed to consider what adjustment or compensation should be made as of five years later, 1959, 

failing that, an application can be made to the Board. Given the criteria of Section 24 of the Act it seems 

it will be a most difficult task for the Board in 1973 to adjudicate what would have been a reasonable 

compensation 14 years ago, that is in 1959. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I doubt if anyone could attack the principle of the Bill. However, any lawyer, farmer or 

petroleum employee would agree now that its amendments are a mishmash and most are difficult to 

interpret. The best thing that could happen would be for the Attorney General to scrap the whole thing, 

repeal this Act and bring in a properly written one so that farmers and industry alike would be able to 

know precisely where they stand. 

 

In view of the comments made by the Attorney General I should like to go over some of them and I beg 

leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2121 

Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 74 — An Act to amend The 

Medical Scholarship and Bursaries Act. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few brief remarks regarding the amendment to The 

Medical Scholarships and Bursaries Act. 

 

At present, the Act authorizes the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission to provide up to 

$150,000 per year to support two programs, bursary awards for Saskatchewan undergraduate medical 

students and research money for projects directly related to the provision of insured medical services in 

Saskatchewan. Since this legislation was enacted in 1963, 231 medical students have received medical 

bursaries; total disbursements from this fund have reached over $1 million. There is a service 

requirement of six months with each bursary unit. A bursary unit is valued at $700, a student may apply 

for one or two units but must establish his financial needs in order to qualify for a second $700 unit in 

any one academic year. To qualify for a bursary a student must agree: 1. To continue his studies as a 

medical student. 2. Immediately take all steps necessary to become qualified to practice medicine in 

Saskatchewan. 3. Immediately practice medicine in Saskatchewan for a period of six months for each 

bursary unit received. 4. Repay to the Commission the full value of the bursary unit plus interest at 7 per 

cent per annum accruing from the date the bursary was awarded if the obligations are not met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1972, 149 bursary units were awarded; 130 were for $700 each, while 19 units were for 

$1,400 each. The total amount awarded was $117,600. This compared with $98,700 awarded in 1971. 

Over $31,000 was expended in 1972 on research under the Act, an increase in excess of 50 per cent over 

1971. In the past the research funds have been used, for example, for the purchase of an electron 

microscope by the Department of Pathology and Anatomy in the College of Medicine and for the 

conduct of the pilot study on automatic interpretation of electrocardiograms as well as other projects. 

Total expenditures under the Act in 1972 were just under $149,000. Since the ceiling is close to being 

reached under the existing program, we have begun to question the value of maintaining this statutory 

ceiling on the bursary and research fund. The $150,000 ceiling was placed on the fund in 1963 but since 

that time as we are all aware inflation has reduced the value of our dollar. Even at a five per cent average 

inflation to have the equivalent purchasing power would require about $257,000 in today’s dollars. 

Money is needed to give medical students some financial support and research money serves a useful 

function in upgrading the quality of our health care programs. 

 

I have therefore asked for the removal of the budgetary restrictions and for a review of the existing 

bursary awards and research schemes. As we are all aware a long period of training is required to 

become a medical doctor, a minimum of seven years is required; one year pre-med, five years in 

medicine, the sixth year is a full 12-month study, one year of internship before a licence to practise is 

granted. In addition those students wishing to become specialist require a further period of training of up 

to four years. Other provisions have been made for financial assistance to students in their sixth 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2122 

year because they are working a full 12-month period and while they are in training they are also 

providing a service to patients. The bursary program is designed to help the students during their first 

four years of college at the College of Medicine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might point out that regardless of whether or not there is a ceiling in this Act, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Insurance Commission is effectively controlled in the payments it may make 

under this Act by the amounts of money appropriated annually by this Legislature. This is an 

opportunity to review the operation of the bursary payments. 

 

I have on earlier occasions indicated my concern about the retention of Saskatchewan trained 

physicians. We in this province spent $7.2 million on medical education in the fiscal year 1972-73. This 

means approximately $120,000 in public funds for each graduate of the College of Medicine. I am sure 

everyone in this House can agree that these are substantial sums of public funds that are being spent on 

medical education. What is of primary concern is that from this expenditure we are receiving services 

from only about one third of the students we train. The other two thirds leave Saskatchewan for the 

United States or other parts of Canada. The total number of graduates from the Saskatchewan College of 

Medicine is 556, this is for the period since our first graduating class of 1957. Of these graduates some 

200 are now taking additional training to become specialists or to fulfil their internship requirements. 

This means that there are approximately 350 Saskatchewan trained doctors practising, however, we have 

only 105 of these doctors in active practice billing through the Medical Care Insurance Commission, 

1972. A few others are providing service in Saskatchewan as administrators or with agencies that do not 

bill the Medical Care Insurance Commission. That is, only one-third of the doctors who are trained in 

Saskatchewan have, in effect, elected to practise in this province. 

 

If we are to pro-rate this on the basis of the cost of their education it means that along with the 

two-thirds of the medical graduates who leave Saskatchewan there is a corresponding loss each year of 

something in the order of $4.8 million of costly medical education. This is a matter of grave concern, 

concern I have expressed before. At that time I was accused of advocating totalitarian tactics to retain 

medical graduates. Mr. Speaker, I note in the January 1973 issue of the Medical Care Review, an 

American publication, a similar concern is expressed by a medical doctor. Let me quote: 

 

He urged consideration of a plan to ease the maldistribution of health care providers by requiring 

certain physicians to practise in needy locations. The plan would train a government subsidized 

medical education for three or four years of practice in a medically deprived community. The practice 

requirement would be written in an unbreakable contract and would be enforced through a temporary 

licence, specifying the indebted physician’s place of practice. 

 

This is a quotation, Mr. Speaker, from a medical doctor. In fact, from the president of the American 

Medical Association. They are not noted to be a radical left-wing group. The man in question is Doctor 

C. A. Hoffman. Let me quote him again: 

 

In urging new approaches to the physician maldistribution 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2123 

problem the AMA president noted the lackluster record of so-called forgiveness loan programs. These 

programs while commendable have met with limited success, he said, primarily because the young 

physician often elects to practise in a location of his choice and then repay the loan instead of fulfilling 

his original agreement to practise in a deprived area. Dr. Hoffman said his required practice proposal, 

a modified version of some European approaches should not be viewed as regimented or coercive, 

since the original commitment by the student would be completely voluntary. Once that commitment 

is made, however, the student would not have the option of cash repayment as with the forgiveness 

loan, Dr. Hoffman said. 

 

He went on and said: 

 

To control this sort of program, he said, medical societies and licensing boards would work together 

granting new physicians temporary licences permitting them to practise only in designated 

communities. This proposal admittedly is a drastic change from our previous concepts, said Dr. 

Hoffman, but I ask you, before you condemn it, consider it and consider it carefully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Hoffman’s concern is one that I share in many ways. This loss of our medical 

graduates concerns me because in order to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, we have to recruit 

physicians from other countries, particularly for service in smaller communities. Recent studies show 

that 53 per cent of all general practitioners in Saskatchewan are graduates of non-Canadian medical 

schools. In rural communities under 3,000 population the percentage of non-Canadian trained general 

practitioners was 63 per cent compared to 13.5 per cent Saskatchewan trained physicians in these 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only did I express this concern. I want to advise this House that the national 

conference of Health Ministers was held in this province in early October. And while I placed this 

item on the agenda for discussion by the Ministers, it was interesting to note that this kind of concern 

is being expressed by every province. That we are losing too many of our Canadian trained physicians 

and particularly the young ones that we are training who, on graduating, leave the provinces and do 

not return anything in service and particularly when this is perhaps the most costly education we 

provide. 

 

Not only are we as Provincial Ministers expressing concern, there are also other people. I can tell you 

that this concern is expressed by our new Dean of Medicine. I can tell you that this concern is being 

expressed by our own medical students. I have here a letter dated March 25, 1973 from Dr. T. J. 

McHattie who is the President of the House Staff Association. He is in his fourth year of residency. He 

is going to get his full qualifications as a specialist and will be practisng in Regina within another few 

weeks. He writes me this letter. This is following a meeting that I had with him. He came to Regina 

specifically to express concern and to discuss with me the development of a bursary and scholarship 

program which will help us retain the Saskatchewan trained physicians in the province. He says. 

 

Further to our conversation of March 19, we would like 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2124 

to clarify and expand some of the points we discussed. 

 

This is a quote from his letter: 

 

We would like to emphasize the primary stimulus of our Association is a concern over the lack of 

local graduates who remain in Saskatchewan. It has been shown that physicians tend to practise near 

the place in which they complete their training. It should follow then that we should devote our 

efforts to have as many local graduates complete their training in Saskatchewan as possible. If one 

wishes to increase the number of general practitioners, then we should encourage local graduates to 

do their rotating internship here. As I mentioned to you, there are a number of things which when 

taken singly appear to be trivial but when taken together serve to discourage our graduates from 

remaining. 

 

He then goes on and outlines some of the things that we might be doing by way of developing a program 

which will help to keep our Saskatchewan graduates in the province. But I particularly want to stress his 

concern and the concern of the Association that he represents – the money that we are spending on 

medical education and the few physicians that we are able to retain in the province after they graduate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say also this, that I appreciate and our Government appreciates the contribution that 

non-Canadian trained doctors have made in this province and continue to make. This is no criticism of 

the non-Saskatchewan trained or non-Canadian trained physicians. In fact, if it were not for them we 

would not be able to provide the high quality of care that we are providing in this province and 

throughout this country. However, I believe we should as much as possible meet our own needs with our 

own local people. Particularly at a time when employment opportunities for young people are at a 

premium and in the light of the very substantial amount of money we are spending on medical 

education, I think that we are training an adequate number of physicians to meet our needs, if we can 

encourage them to remain in Saskatchewan after they have graduated. 

 

One of the programs that is designed to make it possible for young people with limited financial 

resources to become doctors and to encourage the graduates of our medical schools to remain in the 

province is our medical bursary program. In recent months we have been studying the medical bursary 

program to see if it can be improved. The College of Medicine has submitted a short brief regarding the 

medical bursaries which contains the opinions of both professors and students of the school. After 

reading the brief I know that we share many common concerns. I hope that a program can be developed 

with the participation of all of these involved which will more equally share the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. The proposal from the College of Medicine has may innovative ideas. For example, they had 

provisions to encourage graduates to practise in particular areas of the province such as northern 

Saskatchewan. Also to encourage those students who are gong into specialty training to specialize in 

those areas in which the manpower need is greatest such as psychiatry and other areas where we have 

shortages. 

 

Students and the professors were concerned with the amount of bursary support which is available in 

any one year. The 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2125 

present maximum of $1,400 per year per student is possibly not realistic in terms of the high cost for 

students undertaking medical education. It should be kept in mind that the school year for a medical 

student covers a longer period than for other university students. This means that they have less 

opportunity to augment their income with summer jobs. Not only that, but most of the good summer 

jobs are gone by the time the medical student is available for employment. Furthermore, their tuition 

fees are higher and their personal expenses for purchasing necessary equipment and supplies are also 

higher than for the other classes of university students. We will certainly be taking this into 

consideration in our review of the medical bursary program. Mr. Speaker, I am hopeful that a better 

bursary program can be introduced for the medical students this year. For this reason I am asking that 

the statutory financial ceiling in the Act be removed. This amendment will give us the flexibility to meet 

the future needs of medical scholarships and bursaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. G. B. Grant: — (Regina Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, on the Bill itself I don‘t think anyone can 

take exception to the removal of the limit of $150,000. It serves no practical purpose really because as 

the Minister points out the real control is the Treasury Board and the Cabinet where his budget has to be 

approved. 

 

The Minister has taken advantage of this opportunity to delve into a larger field, a problem area that has 

existed for some time. I’m sure there is no one in this House who has served a stint as Minister of Health 

who can’t sympathize with him. I concur in most of what he says. It’s a problem, as he has pointed out, 

that is not restricted to Saskatchewan. It’s widespread throughout North America. I would hope, and I 

gather this from his remarks, that any restriction on the export of doctors would be done by co-operation 

rather than by direct control because Saskatchewan by itself cannot do this except on a voluntary basis 

and with the co-operation of the College and the Saskatchewan Medical Association. I doubt whether 

even improving the bursaries is going to overcome that problem. It’s certainly going to make medicine 

maybe a little more attractive and thereby maybe attract more people and hopefully because you have 

more people graduating you’re going to keep more bodies, but percentagewise I don’t know that it’s 

going to make that much difference, but every bit helps. There are so many other factors that enter into 

the decision-making of a doctor as to whether he continues to practise here in Saskatchewan or go 

elsewhere that the bursary program is only a small part of it. 

 

I would hope that the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the Medical Associations would really be 

the spark plugs in this type of thing because it does require a lot of co-ordination and co-operation across 

the country. Because one province or one state I don’t think can do it in isolation to any advantage. I 

suppose if there is a surplus of students and they can’t get into the other colleges then a province could 

resort to this and get away with it. But if restrictions are put on here in Saskatchewan and there is 

capacity in the other medical schools to take our students, I think that you would find that they would 

move to these other schools so it’s pretty important to do it on a co-operative basis. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2126 

Mr. Speaker, since the Bill itself has no direct relation and only an indirect relation to the problem we 

have no desire to hold it up and we will support the Bill. I urge the Minister to try to overcome the other 

problems by co-operation and I certainly wish him success because I know it’s a real toughie 

particularly with the psychiatrists. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, may I express my appreciation to the Hon. Member from Whitmore Park 

for expressing his support for the Bill. It is true that in my remarks during second reading I dealt more 

than with the bursary program but I felt it was important to bring to the attention of the Members of the 

Legislature as to how much money is being spent on medical education and the difficulties that there are 

in the retention rate. 

 

May I say this in closing. I’m not suggesting that in this province there is a shortage of medical 

manpower. There is not. We have plenty of doctors to provide good care for the people. We do in some 

particular areas like psychiatry have a shortage and that has been something that we have had a problem 

with for many years. It seems to me that in this area our medical program, our education program has 

failed and has not provided the doctors that we need. And I think in this area I want to see us work out a 

program with the College of Medicine to start providing those doctors that we are short of. 

 

I know also that in the case of the cancer control program in recent months we have seen some 

difficulties of getting radiotherapists and chemotherapists and other highly specialized groups. Again, I 

think that we can be training these people in this province but for some reason or other we have failed to 

do this. In Saskatchewan there is no overall shortage of medical manpower. I think we are fairly 

fortunate. But there are areas where there are particular shortages. 

 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that since I’ve raised this question publicly last October, it is interesting to note 

that whenever I visited rural communities who over the years have had difficulties recruiting physicians, 

they said, good show, it’s time somebody raised this question and that we have some public debate on 

this question because, if we, the public are spending this much money on medical education, we are 

entitled to get some reasonable return. I think this is an area where there is a good deal of public concern 

as well as there is a need to develop a program which will meet the needs of Saskatchewan and 

particularly start training those doctors in areas where we do have a shortage. 

 

I’m glad to hear that we are going to get the support of the Opposition on this Bill. I can agree with the 

Hon. Member from Whitmore Park that if the program is to be effective in keeping our Saskatchewan 

graduates here it does require co-operation from the SMA and from the College and particularly of the 

University. May I say this, that in Saskatchewan the number of applicants that we get every year is in 

the order of 250 or 260 and we are only able to accommodate 60 each year. That’s the intake to the 

school. I’m sure that if we develop an effective bursary and scholarship program and perhaps encourage 

them to stay here following graduation, I think it can be successful. I don’t think that we have really 

tried up until now to develop that kind of program. 

 

Motion agreed and Bill read a second time. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2127 

Hon. A Taylor (Minister of Social Services) moved second reading of Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend 

The Public Service Act 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 68 contains only one amendment. It may be that some will attempt to 

see in this some sort of ulterior or hidden motive but I should like to assure you, Sir, there is no such 

motive or design. Indeed, as I see it, this particular amendment is more of a housekeeping nature. 

 

You will remember that in an earlier session of the Legislature the requirement in The Public Service 

Act of being a British subject in order to obtain a job in the Public Service of Saskatchewan through the 

regular job channels was removed. I’d like to review with you, Sir, the reasons for this because they are 

directly related to the present amendment. 

 

One of the main causes in the past for Order-in-Council appointments, particularly among professional 

groups, has been because the individuals involved were not British subjects. Not being such subjects it 

was impossible for them under the old Act to obtain employment in the normal manner. Now people 

today have far greater mobility than they ever had before. It is not unusual for men and women to move 

with fair frequency from one country to another, not only in search of employment but also for a change 

in living and working experience. It has been said often that the world as we know it has shrunk, and this 

is true. There are a growing number of people who want to have an opportunity of living in various parts 

of that world. I am convinced that in the years ahead there will be an increasing number in this category. 

Many people are no longer satisfied to stay in one place or in one country for life. Although at times this 

can create problems, it is my belief that in the long run this type of movement of population will be 

beneficial to us all. There will surely result from this a greater understanding among people of the world. 

At the same time professionals and others who have come to us from other parts of the world will bring 

to us new ideas and concepts. They offer us new insights into other ways of doing things. 

 

Another problem we face, and I am sure that those who have been in Government before and sat on the 

Treasury Benches will also recognize this problem, is that from time to time we cannot find the qualified 

personnel we need within our own country. We then have to reach out and bring them in from other 

places. Occasionally this happens in reasonably short term appointments where for a period of just a few 

years the Government may need a highly skilled individual in a particular branch of technology or 

professions. The same thing, of course, happens in the case of employees that we hope will be 

permanent. For these reasons the requirements of a person being a British subject was removed from the 

Act some time ago. It seems to me only logical then that the Oath of Allegiance should also be removed. 

 

The Oath itself is often as much of a block as the previous requirement was. Members will recognize, I 

expect, that in a number of countries the taking of an Oath of Allegiance in our country would cause the 

individual to lose his previous citizenship. If he has not then already become a citizen of Canada he 

becomes a man without a country. It may also be, as is sometimes the case, that a person has come to 

work for a specified period of time, at least in his own mind, and he intends to return to his native land. I 

suggest that this type of thing will be happening more frequently in the years ahead. When this 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2128 

is the case he certainly does not want to take any action which might deny him his previous citizenship. 

Now I might say, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t believe there is any danger from this or from any other 

subsequent government using the repeal of this requirement to deliberately fill the Public Service with 

non-citizens. I’m certain this is not our intention and I cannot believe it would be the intention of any 

future government. Indeed, I suspect that the reverse would be true, that wherever there is a reasonable 

choice a Canadian citizen, and preferably a citizen of Saskatchewan, would receive first preference. Our 

aim in this amendment is to reduce the necessity in such cases for Order-in-Council appointments. 

Rather than an amendment which might undermine anything; I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this 

amendment will strengthen the normal recruiting process in the Public Service. 

 

I would therefore, at this time, move second reading of a Bill to amend The Public Service Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Deputy Speaker, I only have a few remarks to this 

Bill but I should like to express to the House my own unhappiness with the decision to eliminate the 

Oath of Allegiance and I do oppose the Bill although I recognize the reasoning given by the Minister 

and the sincerity with which he has approached this matter. Nonetheless we have had numerous civil 

servants or public servants in the past who have not been Canadian citizens, and it has not been too 

much to ask of them that while they are employed here they should give an Oath of Allegiance to Her 

Majesty. In my judgement there is today too little respect for the traditions of our form of government. 

And I believe as long as we have our form — the democratic or constitutional monarchy with the 

trappings and the form, the Lieutenant-Governor coming to us and all the rest — with the traditions that 

we have, it is not inappropriate that each person who comes to take our money and serve us, for which 

we thank them, should, in fact, take the Oath of Allegiance. I do not believe than any person is belittled 

in any way taking that Oath of Allegiance nor is that Oath of Allegiance an opposition to any other 

country. An American citizen or a French citizen or a German citizen may well come to Canada to seek 

employment in Canada and come to work for our Government without in any way speaking in 

opposition to or swearing an oath which will in any way betray his own loyalty to his own country. I 

understand the remarks of the Hon. Minister but I do not believe that it is necessary to make 

Order-in-Council appointments of every non-Canadian citizen who comes to work for the Government 

of Saskatchewan through the Public Service Commission. I do not wish to make this a major issue, but I 

speak for myself. I rather hope that other colleagues of mine in opposition feel about this the same as I 

do. I regret that the Government has seen fit to bring this kind of a Bill to the floor and I regret that I 

must oppose it. 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) I should just like to say a word or two. I appreciate, like my colleague, 

the comments that the Minister made while he was introducing the Bill but I feel that at this particular 

time that this is not a good piece of legislation. After all we are still a part of the Dominion of Canada as 

a province, we are a 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2129 

member of the British Commonwealth of Nations as a country, the Queen is still the sovereign head of 

our country. And to introduce legislation at this time which would eliminate the need of taking the Oath 

of Allegiance I don’t think is a good step for the province and it wouldn’t be a good step for the country 

as a whole. When we are trying to bring unity in the world and in the British Commonwealth of Nations 

it is not wise for a province in the middle of this great country to pass legislation that would eliminate 

the requirement for people who come to work for the province, to take the Oath of Allegiance. We do 

have the British system of government, we do have the judicial system so why should we be hesitant to 

have members who are under this system take the Oath of Allegiance to Her Majesty? I don’t wish to 

suggest the Government has any ulterior motives but we saw in a previous Bill where the basics of our 

judicial system have been turned around and the innocent are now guilty until they prove themselves 

innocent as under The Natural Products Act. I think this is another step perhaps to wear away some of 

our British judicial system that we are proud of in this province and therefore on that basis I do oppose 

this Bill. 

 

Mr. P. Mostoway: — (Hanley) Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a few brief comments in regard to this 

Bill which I wholeheartedly support. I think, and I don’t want to get into an argument here, that the 

correct terminology is “The Commonwealth of Nations.” I believe this is the terminology used by the 

Prime Ministers when they meet. Another thing that I wanted to point out is that the Oath of Allegiance 

can have some serious implications for those who might be forced to take this Oath of Allegiance, 

serious implications for those people when they return, if they do, to their own countries. So, just for the 

record, I wholeheartedly, support this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. J. G. Lane: — (Lumsden) There is a great deal of indication that the Government opposite has 

many steps involved in and this particular amendment is just one indication. We had a federal election 

campaign where three Premiers of Western Canada took a very pro west stand in an election where the 

Premier went around the country demeaning Saskatchewan Cabinet Ministers in the Federal 

Government by saying there were no Cabinet Ministers of any note from Western Canada. We are very 

concerned about the amendment. We get different speeches from the Government opposite in Halifax 

than what we hear in Saskatchewan. And we are not all too sure just where the Government opposite 

stands in this particular scheme of Confederation. We are going to ask for leave to adjourn this debate 

for further comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Second Readings 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Wood that Bill 

No. 70 – An Act respecting Urban and Rural Planning and Development be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, when this was 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2130 

last before the House I asked for leave to adjourn the debate on this particular Bill in view of the size 

itself of the Bill, 70 odd pages, 208 different subsections. I think, upon reading the Bill and studying 

some of the subsections and the many related powers, I am going to go briefly through them, Mr. 

Speaker, to try and make the point in opposing this Bill as it’s presently written, opposing it for the 

reason that it gives, as I read the Bill, almost complete power over the municipal planning process to the 

Provincial Government. And I would agree with the Minister, when he introduced the Bill, that the 

Province does have a responsibility in planning. Surely, it doesn’t need to have complete power and 

complete responsibility as it would appear to me that this Bill will give the Provincial Government. 

 

Section 30 of the present Act reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The Minister may after consultation with the Council of a municipality direct the Council to prepare or 

amend a municipal development plan for all of or any part of the municipality. 

 

In short, the Government can order any rural municipality, any village, any town, any city to prepare a 

development plan. Section 30 goes on to say that, in effect, municipalities have up to two years to get 

such a plan developed and implemented. If the Government should at that time decide to do it for them, 

of course, another section states that municipality shall pay the Government for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to the Minister and other Members opposite that for hundreds of Saskatchewan 

towns and villages it’s a little too late to get excited about formal development plans. Plans now are not 

really going to change the future. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that as far as the larger urban centres are 

concerned and I speak here of the cities and, of course, the majority of the major towns in the province, 

they have development plans which have been approved by the Department of Municipal Affairs. And 

may I suggest that the Government opposite might better be spending time on planning in a broader 

sense, studying what can be done to bolster and enhance rural and rural-urban life, I speak of urban in 

the sense of the urban communities centred in rural Saskatchewan, to try and maintain and expand the 

viable urban communities we have remaining in rural Saskatchewan. And certainly if changes in 

development plans for individual communities, if they are desirable, there’s no one I think in a better 

position to recognize those needs, to develop the changes and implement them, than the local people 

themselves. 

 

This again, as I say, is one of the reasons why I don’t like the powers that are being, in essence, taken 

away from municipal governments. 

 

Section 60 is another section in the Act that sets up a zoning appeals board. Such decisions may then be 

appealed to a provincial board. Section 87 is another section, the Minister may direct the commission to 

prepare or amend an approved district development plan. As I understand it, any particular plan may be 

amended by ministerial or by departmental order. Another section, and I should perhaps take more time 

to expand on these, but another section, Section 97: 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2131 

No sub-divisions of land may be made unless in accordance with this Act and the regulation and with 

plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the Minister. 

 

I doubt if that section is really required, Mr. Speaker. As I read it, it’s a new power and I suggest an 

unnecessary power in all cases. It’s another illustration, I think, of the growth of bureaucracy and I 

would ask the Minister to look at some of these things himself. 

 

Section 122 . . . 

 

Mr. Wood: — Excuse me, I don’t know if it is in order that we go into sections at this stage of the 

debate. I didn’t catch the number of the section, Section 66 or 87, I didn’t catch what the other one was. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Section 97. I list a few of these sections, Mr. Speaker, to demonstrate that I believe the 

principle of the Bill is not in the best interests of the municipalities of the province, greater and greater 

government control and government involvement in community planning affairs. 

 

Section 122: 

 

Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of an approving authority may appeal therefrom to the 

provincial planning appeals board in accordance with various procedures that are set out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in short terms what that means is, if the municipality or any resident of it and landowner 

gets by all of the roadblocks the Government can throw in its path, it is still subject to having its moves 

appealed by anyone who feels aggrieved and that could be anyone as I read the Act. 

 

Section 124 then increases the membership of that appeals board and I think probably rightly so because 

it will certainly be more of a full time tribunal if all of these changes are proceeded with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that some of the Press reports and some personal contact I’ve made with municipal 

officials clearly indicate that municipal officials generally, both here and in Saskatoon, and other points, 

have opposed this legislation. The Minister told us in the introduction of the Bill that the draft of it had 

been worked on by staff in the department when the former Liberal Government was in power and that 

is true. I know that to be a fact. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this bill needs more working over yet. It 

never was presented to even the Minister in the former Liberal Government let alone the Cabinet. The 

Bill along with the powers that pertain to controlling municipal planning in general, I suggest, is an 

indication of the Government’s lack of concern or lack of consideration for municipal councils in this 

province and as such I will be opposing the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood: — (Minister of Municipal Affairs) I should like to have an 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2132 

opportunity to say a few words concerning what has been said by the Hon. Member who has just sat 

down. 

 

May I submit it is slightly irregular that we should be going into the clauses of the Bill at this stage. I do 

submit, Sir, that my opportunity to bring forward arguments in regard to those that have been mentioned 

by the Hon. Member opposite are a little restrained by the ordinary procedures in this debate. I will 

however, endeavor to mention some of the ones that have been set out. 

 

In regard to Section 30, the Hon. Member has pointed out that the Minister under this Section is able to 

require that a municipality may come forward with a municipal development plan after due consultation 

with the council of the municipality. He indicates that he feels that this is something that should not be. I 

believe when I introduced this Bill I indicated that we did feel that there was a responsibility upon the 

Provincial Government to accept the responsibility for planning in the province. And I think the Hon. 

Member opposite who has been a former Minister of Municipal Affairs will recognize that there is this 

responsibility upon the Provincial Government, the Department of Municipal Affairs will recognize that 

there is this responsibility upon the Provincial Government, the Department of Municipal Affairs, to see 

that proper procedures are carried out in all municipal councils in the province. He is well aware that the 

Department of Municipal Affairs, the Minister of Municipal Affairs has the authority to move in and 

regulate what is done in any municipality in the province in case — in his opinion — that the municipal 

council duly elected is not fulfilling its obligations. I think he is well aware that this is just not done very 

many times. Although it has been done and from time to time it has been found necessary. There is a 

similar section in regard to planning, that the province has a responsibility for the planning of the 

province. And if we find places where municipalities are just ignoring or not living up to their 

responsibilities it does say that the Minister can — he has this power. 

 

We are not saying that there has to be a development plan in all municipalities. The Hon. Member 

indicated that he thought that we were behind, that we’re much too late in suggesting that there has to be 

a development plan in hundreds of towns and villages in the province. 

 

We are not saying this, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly not the intention of the Government that we should 

be insisting upon development plans in hundreds of towns and villages. These things are left entirely up 

to the village or the town. But if, Mr. Speaker, there are cases — very infrequent I am sure — but if 

there are situations where the municipalities are negligent of their responsibilities in this regard even 

after consultation with them, the powers are put into this Act that we can move in that direction. I think 

it is justified and it is not expected that this will be a power that will be abused by any Government. But 

it is simply an opportunity to do what we feel should be. 

 

The Hon. Member has said that the local people themselves are best suited to know what is desirable 

and what is good in that community. And with this I certainly wholeheartedly agree. I think that this is 

only right and it is to be expected that the local people are the ones who should move and will be 

expected to move in regard to these matters. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2133 

This Act does place very squarely upon the local people the responsibility for planning in their areas. 

And it is only in cases where this is not lived up to by the local people that there would be the necessity 

of anything being done under these sections of the Act. 

 

On some of these other matters I am afraid I have not had the opportunity to go into it in detail. But we 

will have ample opportunity to discuss the sections in detail when we get into committee. 

 

I should like to point out one thing that has been said in regard to Section 97, that this is a new section. I 

think that the Hon. Member will find that this is where we are dealing with subdivisions and what was in 

the old Section 72 of the Act, whereas this is reworded, the authority was there before. Old Section 72 

reads: 

 

No subdivision of land for the purpose of sale or transfer or for building purposes shall be made unless 

in accordance with plans and specifications committed to and approved by the council under 

regulations approved by the Minister under Section 79 or submitted to and approved by the Minister 

under regulations made by him in the case the council has not adopted regulations. 

 

Well that gave the power directly to the Minister under the old section of the Act and I don’t think there 

is any departure in principle from that in the present Act. 

 

The Hon. Member mentioned the ability to appeal to the provincial appeals board. I think that this is a 

good feature of the Act. In fact in this Act even the actions of the Minister may be appealed to the 

provincial appeals board. 

 

This Act does not make the Minister supreme in planning in the province. It will be the provincial 

appeals board which is the supreme body in that regard. I think this is a good thing. I think that it allows 

anyone to appeal the Provincial Government or the actions of the local authorities to the provincial 

appeals board. I think this is a good feature of the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that any Act dealing with the planning has to be a certain degree autocratic. I think 

that in this Act we have bent over backward to endeavor to bring in as much as possible the application 

of the principle of consultation with local people. The principle is there that everything has to be 

advertised and well known by the people in the area before action can be taken upon certain things by 

the municipal council or by the Minister. 

 

I feel that the principle of this Bill throughout has been to democratize the action of community planning 

and bringing it more to the attention of people and involving more people in it than what there has been 

in the past. I think there are sections in the Act as there have been in any community planning Act that 

have to be enforced by the province. There have been certain places where those in authority have to do 

the planning. Planning is something that is a little hard to do by strictly democratic measures. But having 

said that, I think this Act brings in as much democracy as it is possible to have in such 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2134 

an Act. I think in the overall viewpoint that it is a good Act based on sound principles which I submit 

have been under consideration by community planning people in the province for many months. 

 

I would thus, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 50 – An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972 be now read a second time and 

the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. MacDonald (Milestone). 

 

Mr. J. G. Lane: — (Lumsden) I wish the Members opposite would have enthusiasm for the resolution 

as they do for the remarks that I am going to make today. 

 

I think that the matter under discussion, Mr. Speaker, about whether or not the particular Bill would go 

to the committee is one that I touched on, I made it quite clear the other night why we are proposing the 

amendment. We feel that the Bill is just as important as any that has come before the Legislature in 

taking away the rights of the farmer to operate in his own way and make his own decisions as to what 

type of operation he wants to make without a vote. Never in the history of this country has there been 

more iniquitous legislation as the proposals of the Government opposite. 

 

We can quite easily compare this legislation to the infamous padlock laws and any other type of 

iniquitous legislation that has been proposed in this House. 

 

We make it quite clear that it is our intention in the Opposition to try and get the Government to change 

its mind and give to the people and the farmers and the hog producers a vote. A very, very simple 

procedure. 

 

Now the Member opposite has repeated that they don’t want one. He has said that the hog producers 

don’t want one. 

 

It took the CCF 20 years to get out of touch with the people. The Government opposite accused the 

Liberals of seven years of being out of touch with the people. Even when the hog producers put a full 

page ad in the Western Producer it is shown that the Government opposite has taken 20 months to get 

out of touch with the people. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — How much did you pay for the ad? 

 

Mr. Lane: — We didn’t pay for that ad because we didn’t have to pay for that ad. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But it was quite clear that a principle was involved in the 

amendment that was made. The credibility of the Attorney General, the credibility of the 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2135 

Government, the credibility of their arguments for the committee system are all at stake on the voting of 

this particular amendment. What we have done as I have stated, Mr. Speaker, is merely proposed that 

the Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act go to a committee. 

 

Now the Attorney General has stated and has given some very cogent reason for the committee system. I 

repeated some of them the other night, unfortunately Members opposite saw fit to ignore the arguments 

of the Attorney General. We find it very hard to believe that the Deputy Premier would be so cut off 

from his own back benchers that they would completely ignore the arguments that he gave to this House 

a year ago. 

 

We find it very, very surprising that the Attorney General would have his credibility ride on this 

particular issue. We note the accusations of the Attorney General earlier today that the Opposition is 

playing politics. We are not playing politics with the farmers. We are demanding that the Government 

opposite give to the producers of Saskatchewan a vote. We don’t know why the Government opposite 

fears a vote. Is it because the Minister of Agriculture wasn’t telling us the truth when he said that the 

hog producers wanted a Hog Marketing Commission without a vote? 

 

That is what this vote is going to determine, the vote on this amendment. Whether or not Members 

opposite feel the Minister of Agriculture was telling the truth. But above all on this particular debate 

which is the principle about whether or not the amendment should go to committee, I can only urge that 

the Members opposite reconsider what the Attorney General has said in the past. As I stated we had a 

very — in the words of the members opposite — vital issue come before this House last year. A Bill was 

prepared so there is ample precedent for a Bill being taken after it has been prepared and given to a 

committee. I think that there are many reasons for putting this in a committee and I should like to remind 

them because the Members opposite were urging me to take it as read. If I could be assured that it could 

be taken as listened to, I wouldn’t have to repeat what the Attorney General said last year when he was 

urging a Bill that had been prepared to go to committee. 

 

I think it was very interesting to note what the Attorney General said last year. And he is referring to the 

Foreign Ownership Bill. He is referring to why that particular Bill went to a committee: 

 

I don’t know what the Government could do more than it has done. 

 

We ask you to apply this same criterion at this particular time. We ask you to take every one of the 

reasons that the Attorney General and just show that you believe what the Attorney General said last 

year. Let’s see if you really believe and really meant what you said about putting the Foreign Ownership 

Bill to committee or whether you were playing cheap partisan politics, with an issue last year that you 

knew had gone too far and was contrary to the wishes of the people. 

 

I urge the Members opposite to tell the Attorney General his credibility still is high within his own 

caucus. We know that speech number five that he gave today probably won’t get 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2136 

too much Press because the Press has heard it before. All the Government has to do with the Natural 

Products Marketing Act is place it in committee and give the hog producers a vote. Obviously that may 

be too much to ask of the arrogant 45 Members of the Government opposite. But I think that the reasons 

given by the Attorney General – unfortunately he is not in his seat, he doesn’t want to hear his own 

words thrown back at him. He has now left the House, obviously some of the Members opposite don’t 

want to hear what the Attorney General said in urging, a very pressing and a very vital issue, that it go to 

the committee. 

 

Now one of the main reasons for the committee and the reasons for placing a Bill – and I might add for 

the edification of the Members opposite that the Bill had been printed last year, it was all prepared for 

the House, we were all prepared to discuss it. But no, you took it out and you put it into committee. The 

Attorney General states that the reason it went in Bill form, and he states. 

 

Here is a Bill as a proposal. Here is a committee that is going to study it as the Minister of Agriculture 

has said. 

 

Now these ringing words of course will apply to the conscience of every Member opposite. 

 

Let’s get to the task and solve the problem for the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

These are the words of the Attorney General in urging a Bill to go to committee. 

 

“But now the Member for Wilkie gets up today and says that he doesn’t blame the Minister of 

Agriculture for introducing the Bill and for saying that it is going to be the subject matter of review. He 

says that he doesn’t blame the Minister of Agriculture, he blames our Leader. I can say to him that I 

don’t necessarily blame him for the tenor of his remarks today, because I think that the tenor as set by 

his leader, who was never convinced that this matter is a serious political discussion and debate in the 

Province of Saskatchewan.” 

 

A failure of the Government opposite to place this particular Bill into committee, is an indication that 

the Government opposite is not convinced that the matter of compulsory marketing commissions 

without a vote, is a serious matter of political discussion and debate in the Province of Saskatchewan, 

and a vote against the proposed amendment is an indication that you are not taking this problem 

seriously. You don’t take the issue of a vote seriously, and you don’t think that the people of 

Saskatchewan should discuss your actions in this regard. 

 

He goes on: 

 

If the Leader of the Opposition was genuinely concerned about this problem, (I refrain from referring 

to foreign ownership) as the Member from Cannington suggests at any rate, I won’t even say that he 

indicates it’s a problem because maybe he doesn’t believe it is a problem, but he clearly left that 

impression on me and I think Saskatchewan. 

 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2137 

Surely the Members opposite don’t want to leave the impression the people of Saskatchewan and on the 

Members opposite, that they don’t think that a failure of the vote is not a pressing problem. And yet that 

is the impression that you are leaving with the people of Saskatchewan and it is the impression that you 

are leaving with the Opposition and the people of Saskatchewan when you say that there will be no vote, 

no committee, to discuss this particular Bill. 

 

And again some very famous ringing words said from the depth of his heart: 

 

If the Leader of the Opposition was sincere in saying that this was a problem he wouldn’t have gotten 

on national television the day the Bill was introduced and tried to make big political mileage of it as he 

did. 

 

Surely, if the Premier is sincere, really sincere about giving the farmers a voice in their own affairs, that 

this Bill would go to a committee. 

 

And then he goes on: 

 

Because as we said there is no power until the Bill becomes law and we said the Bill wouldn’t become 

law. And we said the Bill wouldn’t become law until there was a committee studying it. So why does 

the Leader of the Opposition and why does the Member from Wilkie chastise the Government about 

taking powers unto itself when there are no powers until the Bill becomes law. 

 

We ask you: Why do you want to take the powers upon yourself? Why not give the powers to the 

Committee to review this question of voting? Why do you want to take upon yourselves and upon your 

conscience the fact that you have failed and refused to give the farmers, the hog producers, a vote to 

decide what they want to do? 

 

There are many reasons for the Bill going to Committee. As I say I am using this as a precedent: 

 

The Member from Wilkie asks why did the Government bring in this Bill. If I haven’t made myself 

clear now then I will never make myself clear to the Liberal Party opposite. Sometimes I am 

convinced that I never will. 

 

The credibility and the ability to clarify is certainly going down the drain and out the window if the 

Government opposite votes against the amendment. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture and I repeat again the thrust of his remarks. The purpose of this Bill is to 

put forward a subject that can be the subject of debate and study and consequent recommendations by 

a Standing Committee or Special Committee of this House, (He didn’t know which, but he was getting 

it to a committee) the basis of which could be possible legislation at the earliest opportunity available 

by the Government of Saskatchewan. This is in effect the purpose. 

 

Why do the Members opposite not hold these words dear to their hearts this year, when we ask that a 

Bill of much greater importance than foreign ownership, and that is the right of the farmers to decide 

their own future goes to a committee? Why 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2138 

does the Attorney General’s words have no effect on the Members opposite? Why don’t they listen to 

the Attorney General’s words this year? Because perhaps he was playing cheap partisan politics when it 

cam to the Foreign Ownership Bill? No, surely our Attorney General would not do that. Surely our 

Attorney General would not stand up in this House and urge a study and a listening post for the people 

of Saskatchewan when he is talking about foreign ownership, a man who is responsible for the 

administration of justice, fail to do what he demanded earlier, when it comes to the right to vote and the 

right of the farmers to make their own decisions. 

 

Now we are surprised because every one of the Members opposite, is going to decide by the vote on this 

amendment, whether or not the Attorney General was telling the truth when it came to the Foreign 

Ownership Bill. And this is precisely what this is about. 

 

They say no, no he wasn’t telling the truth, that means that they are going to vote against the 

amendment. Is that what the Members opposite are saying? Because I think that it is worth repeating, for 

the Members opposite, the purpose of this Bill is to put forward a subject that can be the subject of 

debate. Surely the right to vote can be the subject of debate. If you are going to take it away it shouldn’t 

be the subject matter of a debate as it should never arise. But you insist on putting it before this forum 

and surely it should be a matter for a subject of debate for every citizen in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Surely the right to vote and the farmers to decide whether they want a compulsory marketing scheme is 

a subject for study. And surely the right to vote and the desire, or the lack of desire, for a compulsory 

marketing scheme is subject for subsequent recommendations by a committee or a Standing Committee 

in this House. 

 

To paraphrase what the Hon. Member said last year – the basis of that committee and why we urge the 

Members opposite to vote for this amendment, is that we could have the best possible legislation at the 

earliest possible time to take to the people of Saskatchewan. And that is what we are urging with this 

amendment. And that is why we urge the Members opposite to vote for this amendment. To paraphrase 

again the Attorney General – so that we can get the most acceptable legislation and the best possible 

legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. And that is the purpose of the amendment. 

 

But we were accused of not accepting that by the front benchers opposite. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — What are you on, Gary? 

 

Mr. Lane: — Page 2057 and moving right along. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What year? 

 

Mr. Lane: — It is an amazing thing that the Government opposite, when they make a drastic mistake 

with a Foreign Ownership Bill that didn’t have the support of the people that they can even forget what 

year they brought it in, and they have only been in 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2139 

for less than two years, and they are already asking, what year did we bring in the Foreign Ownership 

Bill? Ask the people of Saskatchewan when you brought it in and they will give you the date and they 

will give you the time. 

 

The purpose is to have a subject matter of debate. It doesn’t matter, I can pick up this debate at any time. 

The Hon. Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) may be well advised to read it for his own interest and 

edification. For the simple fact that I can pick this particular debate up at any page and I am struck by 

the very ringing words of the Attorney General, a different page, a different page picked at random. 

 

I ask all the people of Saskatchewan when I get up in my position and the Minister of Agriculture, we 

may be politicians, but surely there has got to be some onus of responsibility on it that even you 

people would grudgingly admit. 

 

Well, surely there must be some onus of responsibility on the matter of giving the farmers a vote, which 

surely even you people, must grudgingly admit. 

 

The purpose of our amendment is to give the farmers the chance and the opportunity to debate a 

marketing scheme with all the information available to them. Why is it refused? And that is the question 

that the farmers are asking. What have you got to fear from a vote? 

 

Now we were accused at that particular point because the Attorney General, as I said, has stated it was a 

matter of study. He said: “You boys don’t want to study this matter seriously.” And I think that is worth 

repeating, we were accused that, “You boys don’t want to take this matter seriously.” Surely this is the 

issue here that you people aren’t taking the matter seriously. You are not taking the matter seriously of 

1,200 farmers writing in, demanding a vote, demanding a plebiscite. Why aren’t you taking it seriously? 

 

Is it a fact that the 45 Members sitting opposite are already out of touch with the people of 

Saskatchewan and are saying to the farmers, “We know what is best. We will make the decisions. We 

will make the rules and the regulations for the farmers of Saskatchewan.” 

 

I can advise the Members opposite that the more notes I get from the Members opposite, the more 

reading material I have. It may not have much value to it, but certainly it would be worth repeating to 

the House. 

 

He says that they were elected on the Land Bank. We asked that the Land Bank go to Committee. But 

the Government opposite, in its very limited wisdom said that they were elected on the mandate. So we 

don’t have to put that particular matter to a vote. 

 

Well, if I remember the New Deal for People it states that there would be a producer control on 

marketing commissions. And I think those are the exact words, I may have suffered slightly on an 

adjective, but I think it was producer control. The Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla) has seemingly 

forgotten the New Deal for People, which states that the Government opposite is proposing a producer 

controlled hog marketing commission. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2140 

Now if you were prepared to give a producer controlled hog marketing commission, I suppose that you 

would have some acceptability, if you stood up and said, “But we ran on that issue. We were elected on 

that issue.” But that is not your intention. You intend to give a Government controlled hog marketing 

commission and that is not what you were elected on, and that is not why the people voted for you, and 

that is another reason for getting consensus from the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let’s hear what they say about your plans for a Government controlled hog marketing commission, or is 

that what you fear? Is that why you are afraid to take this matter to public debate? 

 

Mr. Cody: — We will worry about it. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Now they say that they will worry about it. I am sure that you should have started 

worrying about it. I think that it is only the Members opposite who could fall asleep on an issue this 

vital. And it is a very surprising thing that they are that arrogant and don’t care that they would want to 

sleep in such a particular issue. 

 

I would refer the Member from Canora to The New Deal for People, the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan’s program for progress. Number 12 under Agriculture. Agriculture has a picture of a 

tractor, for all of you have not read this, it has a tractor on the first page and then above the word 

‘provincial’, we discern that it is going over the word ‘provincial’ and I don’t know whether that is an 

indication of what you are doing to the rights of the farmers of Saskatchewan or not, but we can refer to 

number 12 under the New Deal for People. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Will you repeat the . . . 

 

Mr. Lane: — I am now going to do that, Mr. Speaker! The first heading was Agriculture, and then as I 

say there is a tractor and I suppose it is a farmer – and the word ‘provincial’ under the word tractor: 

 

The continuing degradation of Saskatchewan agriculture and the related decline of our rural 

communities are the most critical issues before the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now they go on and they are going to chastise – we agree with that: 

 

Liberal policy makers in the name of economic efficiency are doing everything in their power to 

promote ever-larger corporately managed farms and hasten the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan. 

 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2141 

We witness their recommendations of their Task Force on Agriculture. Surely we have heard about that 

before. Several speakers of the Government opposite discussed the Task Force on Agriculture. We asked 

them when they discuss family farms and corporate farms to tell us how many family farms there were 

in the province. Lo and behold, they don’t have a number! Lo and behold, then they talk about corporate 

farmers and now find out that many small families have corporate farms for tax purposes or accounting 

purposes, or management purposes. 

 

However, that is the type of issue that came up in the New Deal for People. Well, they decided to restrict 

corporate ownership to family farms and groups of families farming co-operatively, which was 

completely at variance with the earlier paragraph, obviously written in the hopes that the people 

wouldn’t really read it. When we get to number 12 – the establishment of a provincial producer 

controlled (maybe I missed a word for the Member from Canora, because he accused me of misreading 

this). But number 12: 

 

The establishment of a provincial producer controlled hog marketing board. 

 

I think that was the one that was submitted to most of the people of Saskatchewan. The Premier had got 

up and proudly discussed how many thousands of copies of the New Deal for People were sent out. I 

think that the farmers and the hog producers are entitled to ask the Government opposite, ‘why don’t 

you do exactly what you have written.’ 

 

You weren’t elected on a Government controlled hog marketing commission and that is all the more 

reason that we go back to the Attorney General’s remarks, all the more reason for sending this to a 

Committee. 

 

I say to the Members opposite that surely we can bury our political differences in the resolution of that 

problem. I am sure that if you are really concerned about the democratic process and the right of hog 

producers to make their own determination, that we can bury our political differences. We can bury our 

political differences by putting this particular matter before a committee and that is what we urge. 

 

Then just to prove that committees can work, we have an admission from the Attorney General: 

 

I am sure that those Members of the committee on our side will be prepared to do just that. 

 

And that is to make it work. 

 

We had strong differences over The Family Farm Protection Act but that committee worked well. 

Everybody acknowledges that. This committee can also do the same job very well. 

 

We are inviting the New Democratic Party to join with us in that stated task. That is all we ask, take this 

matter to the people because you weren’t elected on a Government controlled marketing commission. 

 

Now just to make sure that the Attorney General wasn’t alone in this because his credibility is an issue 

and his desire 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2142 

to tell the Members of this House the truth, we will have to turn to another Member of the Treasury 

Bench about the advantages of committees and starting at page 1903 of the Votes and Proceedings of 

1972, April 24, obviously the Members opposite are not following this too closely so I will read it for 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of the agricultural land in the Province of Saskatchewan is now operated by family 

farms. The social life and the community life of rural Saskatchewan depends upon a vital contribution 

from the families who live on and operate those farms in our province today. The pattern of family 

ownership of farms is well established and I think has been successful to this point in time. 

 

Completely at variance we might add with the New Deal for People. 

 

In the Province of Saskatchewan where agriculture is by far and away the most important industry the 

ownership of our agricultural resources is crucial to the economic and social development and well 

being of the province. 

 

Our towns and cities are, in fact, dependent upon the trade that they enjoy with the rural community 

for their income and for their stability and/or growth. The churches and social clubs of our rural areas 

will thrive only if the population they serve does not decrease further. Public investment in 

recreational and leisure time facilities can be justified only if the use of them by the members of the 

community is rather extensive. 

 

The pattern of family ownership and operation of farms has become exposed to two important kinds of 

dangers. One is the danger of the purchase and ownership of our agricultural lands by non-residents. 

Certainly, we welcome persons who come to Saskatchewan from other parts of Canada and indeed 

from anywhere in the world, who intend to put their roots down deep into the soil of our province, to 

reach out to other members of the community and to live as part of an economic and social viable 

structure. However, the purchase and ownership in some substantial cases of blocks of land by persons 

or corporations whose intention does not involve Canadian or for that matter Saskatchewan citizenship 

adds little to the economic stability and indeed in many cases poses a very grave threat to the survival 

of small business in our towns and villages. 

 

Some Hon. Members agreed because there is a quotation here: 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer continues: 

 

The effect of such ownership is cumulative. These purchases generally involve the sale of several farm 

units and the loss of population of several farm families from the local community. 

 

Mr. Gross: — Four more minutes, Gary. 

 

Mr. Lane: — I’m building up to the reasons given by the 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2143 

Minister of Agriculture, as he did, for sending this particularly vital issue to committee. And I am sure 

that the Members opposite would feel just as justified to send a problem of a vote for farmers to a 

committee. Because each one of you will have to stand up and be counted in your constituency as to the 

powers to take away the right to vote for farmers. 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Shut up and let us vote! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Well, I would certainly be quiet if the Hon. Members would stand up and give to the 

farmers the right to vote. And if he is prepared to stand up in his seat at the present time and promise the 

farmers of Saskatchewan that they can have a vote on whether or not they want a marketing 

commission, I’ll be prepared to sit down and so will every other Member of the Opposition and give that 

right to vote to the farmers. If they are prepared to stand up and make that commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan — no, he’s not! Typical arrogance of the Treasury Benches opposite! They talk about 

vote. They want to keep their 45 ramming things down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Obviously my remarks have not yet convinced and the very timely words of the Attorney General (Mr. 

Romanow) have not served to convince the Members opposite. Does that mean that the Members 

opposite do not believe the Attorney General? Because that is going to be the vote. Because if they 

believe him there will be no question but they will vote to send this particular Bill to committee. If they 

don’t believe him and we note that he has gone out and has left the room to make sure that the Members 

opposite have a free vote and that he is not influencing them and they don’t feel prejudiced. The 

Attorney General has left the room so that each one of you can vote with your conscience as to giving 

the farmers a vote and to send this particular matter to a committee. 

 

But let’s go on to the words of the Minister of Agriculture when he was urging a committee because he 

was establishing, as we have attempted to do, the vital importance of the particular matter going to 

committee. And he goes on to the reasons for the committee: 

 

The effect of such ownership is cumulative. These purchases generally involve the sale of several farm 

units and the loss of population of several farm families from the local community. The farm in the 

usual case is operated with very large equipment and a reduced work force. 

 

Large equipment like that shown on the New Deal for People. 

 

When the exodus of people from the farmland itself is added to the inevitable loss of employment in 

the shops and stores, a decrease of the dealerships in the local communities, the impact of foreign 

ownership in the community can be very considerable indeed. The impact obviously is not limited or 

restricted to economic considerations but extends even more significantly to the entire social fabric of 

the local community in the province itself. 

 

These words would certainly ring true when we attempt to get to 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2144 

a committee the right of farmers to determine their own type of operation and whether or not they want a 

compulsory marketing board. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, there have been some good reasons and I have already referred to one of the 

better ones of the desirabilities of going to committee. One of the better ones was certainly by the Hon. 

the Attorney General and the Members opposite seemingly have forgotten it this year. We’ve got 

another one that’s a good one which may be of interest to the Members opposite and that’s from another 

Member of the Treasury Benches. And I’ll get to some of the back benches who were very proud of 

their speeches on, again, the desirability of going to committee. I think that, as again a precedent is 

ample, the Minister of Agriculture gave a speech last year on the need for an intersessional committee to 

study the Foreign Ownership Bill. And there was a very dynamic speech made by the Minister of 

Agriculture last year, again, all with a view to convincing this House of the need for a committee, the 

desirability of a committee. And I’m going now to refer to page 1904 of the Debates and Proceedings of 

April 24, 1972. 

 

Mr. Cowley: — That’s about where your ideas are. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Our ideas are very simple, give the farmers a vote and listen to them and don’t be afraid 

to give the farmers a vote and don’t be afraid to listen to the people of Saskatchewan and the hog 

producers of Saskatchewan. Our stand is very simple. Nothing more simple than the idea or a need for a 

vote. 

 

Mr. Faris: — Simple. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Yes, it’s simple, very basic, very simple. Even the Member from Arm River (Mr. Faris) 

can understand the desirability for a vote. He understood it in 1971 and he will perhaps understand better 

in 1974 and ’75. But the Minister of Agriculture argued, as I said, very dynamically for a committee and 

it was agreed and I think for the interest of the Members opposite, seeing as they agreed with it last year, 

perhaps they will agree with it again this year as we read it into the record because the committee system 

was upheld and propounded by the Minister of Agriculture in the following words: 

 

The land that is purchased by non-residents is land that is owned by persons or organizations who in 

many cases are outside the normal constraints of the democratic process. 

 

Democratic process, by the way, is precisely what we’re talking about here and his concern last year is 

certainly the concern of the Members of the Opposition this year that the democratic processes do apply. 

 

The land that is purchased by the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission is land that will be held by 

the Crown or by the Land Bank . . . 

 

He didn’t know, himself, at that point. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2145 

. . . and therefore it is land that is subject to the will of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now Members opposite may be very interested in this phrase of the Minister of Agriculture when he 

refers to the Saskatchewan Land Bank and the land that it holds. He says: 

 

The land that is purchased by the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission is land that will be held by 

the Crown or by the Land Bank and therefore it is land that is subject to the will of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Except when you want to get prices on it, I guess. 

 

The option to purchase will be built into the Land Bank Commission. There is no corresponding 

option to purchase built when Saskatchewan land is sold to non-resident owners or to large 

corporations. The policies needed for use of land in the public interest require the examination of two 

somewhat related kinds of ownerships. 

 

Now he says: 

 

I’ve discussed the problem in the first instance in respect to non-resident ownership but many of the 

forces operating in respect to non-resident ownership also apply in the case of corporate ownership. 

Indeed, it is conceivable that corporate ownership may be a more fundamental important question than 

non-resident ownership. 

 

And I think, without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture is setting out very succinctly 

the importance of the issue before he takes it into the committee argument. 

 

It is essential to realize, however, that the word ‘corporation’ has a variety of shades and meanings. It 

is not the intention of the Government to prevent the formation of corporations by families. Such 

corporation is an option which the family farm . . . 

 

Again, we have asked for the number of family farms and there is a noticeable failure on the part of the 

Government opposite to tell us how many they have saved. But: 

 

Such corporation is an option which the family farm should enjoy because it may fit the particular 

needs of the family farm in providing a disposal or dispersal of ownership, a prospect of a smooth 

transfer of the assets and certain other advantages which the family regards or may regard as 

important. The corporation which a family owns is a corporation in a legal sense while in the practical 

sense the family farm and the family that operate it are as legitimate a part of the rural scene as the 

family farm which has the legal existence of a partnership or co-op or as a single proprietorship. 

 

Then he goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is our intention to appoint a select committee to consider the questions of foreign ownership and 

corporate ownership of agricultural lands. The committee will be concerned with agricultural lands 

and not lands that are within the boundaries of incorporated towns and villages 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2146 

or cities. The committee will travel about the province with a preplanned series of meetings. 

 

Now we argue that in this particular case, the Marketing Bill, that the committee travel around and be 

concerned with the question of farmers’ production and controlling their own means of production. We 

certainly would hope that the committee will have a series of preplanned meetings and we certainly hope 

that, as the Minister of Agriculture urges, to paraphrase him again, that the meetings and the committee 

will hear briefs from interested citizens on the matter of, in this case, a marketing commission. Now we 

also urge, as does the Minister of Agriculture, that in the committee that legal counsel be attached to the 

committee because the Minister of Agriculture certainly urges that and we can see an awful lot of 

benefits. I have no doubt that Members opposite, if a committee is established, and again we urge them 

to establish it, and send this Bill to the committee, that legal counsel be attached to the committee 

because I am sure there are some NDP lawyers who need all the help that they can get, all the work that 

they can get and this would be an excellent opportunity for the Members opposite to give some work to 

NDP counsel who are, without a doubt, having very trying times in light of the corporate climate in 

Saskatchewan, and for that reason and other reasons give some work to some of your legal friends who 

without a doubt need the help at the present time. But again, he suggests that legal counsel be attached to 

the committee. 

 

If it believes that such a venture will be a wise use of its time and its resources, the committee may 

choose to visit some of the adjoining states along the US-Canada border. 

 

We would certainly have no objection to such a committee being established to hear the farmers’ views 

on marketing boards, marketing commissions to go to the United States if there are any states that have 

done this, that have done it without a vote. We would certainly urge that the committee travel to the 

Province of Alberta where a vote was given and to Manitoba where a vote wasn’t given and to Ontario 

where a vote was given. There may be some reason or some suggestion that perhaps it’s only in NDP 

provinces that a vote is not given. I leave that to the discretion of the Members of the House to make 

their own decisions taking into account the bare facts that face them. 

 

In the course of meetings that the committee will be holding in Saskatchewan, . . . 

 

And this is vital and I certainly urge the Members opposite to take this into consideration. 

 

. . . the opinions of the people of Saskatchewan will be brought to light. 

 

I think that is worth repeating: 

 

In the course of the meetings the committee will be holding in Saskatchewan, the opinions of the 

people of Saskatchewan will be brought to light. 

 

I ask the Government opposite how they, when they talk about being the more open party and the more 

open Government, can refute the argument of the Minister of Agriculture, their own 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2147 

Minister of Agriculture, when he wants to hear the views of the people of Saskatchewan, when he wants 

to get the opinions of the people of Saskatchewan. Certainly, if that is a legitimate and an accurate 

concept, then surely if it was applicable in 1972, it’s applicable today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — And we agree with the Minister of Agriculture that the committee system in case of the 

Foreign Ownership Bill was an excellent opportunity to hear the views of the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Because now I’m going to come to some of the back benchers opposite. This may take a 

little time because most Cabinet Ministers had something to say urging a committee for the people of 

Saskatchewan. The Members opposite, I think some of them went so far as to say, now that there was an 

issue, now was an ideal time to have a committee and surely when the Members opposite and the 

Members of the Opposition are getting coupons by the hundreds and phone calls by the hundreds and 

the producers themselves are crying for a voice that now is an ideal time to have a committee while the 

issue is right. 

 

These are your arguments, gentlemen. I urge you to follow them, but to repeat, because it is vital, to 

repeat what the Minister of Agriculture said, “In the course of the meetings the committee will be 

holding in Saskatchewan, the opinions of the people of Saskatchewan will be brought to light,” and 

above all (these are my words — ‘above all’) because I think it deserves emphasis to quote again: 

 

The final form that the legislation respecting The Foreign and Corporate Ownership will take will 

reflect the view and the concerns of our residents of this province. 

 

How can the Members opposite go against their own Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) when he has 

made such glowing words about the need and the desirability of a committee and surely it applies in this 

case, or was it that the Minister of Agriculture was playing cheap partisan politics this year and his word 

is no longer credible? 

 

Surely the Members opposite are not going to say to the Minister of Agriculture, “We don’t believe you, 

you were playing politics last year — we back you, we’re going to play politics with the farmers of 

Saskatchewan this year and we’re not going to give them a vote,” because that is what the Members 

opposite are saying if they vote against the amendment proposing that this Bill go to a committee. But 

the Minister of Agriculture goes on adding to the argument, adding weight to the argument that there be 

a committee because (and I’m assuming that this is accurate), quoting the Minister of Agriculture: 

 

Briefs will be presented, not only by individuals . . . and surely when individuals by the thousands . . . 

 

As the Hon. Member says: 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2148 

by the thousands want to have their voice heard. 

 

The Government opposite with its so-called New Deal for People, with its anti-corporation bias, with its 

anti-large bias (whatever large means), surely the fact that a committee is going to hear from individuals 

is another argument in favor of committees. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Telephone call for you, Gary. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Would you get it for me, please. But also by farm organizations so surely the Minister of 

Agriculture was not going to rule out the voice of the people and he has referred to them: 

 

but by farm organizations and I feel certain by local Chambers of Commerce. 

 

Now surely the Chamber of Commerce have not presented a brief or have they had the opportunity to 

present a brief on the question of compulsory government controlled marketing commissions. Here is an 

ideal time to back up the Minister of Agriculture when he talks about wanting to hear from the 

Chambers of Commerce. It’s an ideal time to put it to committee and I think that the committee would 

be proper and it would be in order for the committee to invite the Chambers of Commerce to give their 

points of view. And I am sure too, that when the Minister of Agriculture expresses a desire that we hear 

from individuals, that the committee would be an ideal mode of determining what the individuals want 

to hear or want to say and to get the feed-back to get the best possible legislation for the people and the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am sure now that the Minister of Agriculture (who has now just arrived in the House) has reread and 

reread and reread the speech he gave last year, because he was so convinced last year that there be a 

committee to look into the question of foreign ownership of land and he’s got it. I’m sure that the 

Minister of Agriculture is going to sit down tonight and read along with me as we go into those glowing 

words that the Minister of Agriculture gave on April 24, 1972, and for the interest of the Minister of 

Agriculture we are presently at page 1904, and also the Minister of Agriculture he goes on for several 

pages. He wanted to hear last year, he made a great hue and cry about hearing from individuals and 

hearing from Chambers of Commerce and hearing from farm organizations. Now the question is, was he 

telling the truth last year, or is he telling the truth this year when he says, ‘I don’t want to hear from farm 

organizations, or individuals, or Chambers of Commerce, or the hog producers themselves.’ Surely his 

credibility is at issue – his credibility is just as much at issue as that of the Attorney General (Mr. 

Romanow) and we are going to find by the vote that the Members opposite just whether or not they are 

playing cheap partisan politics with the farmers of Saskatchewan, with their vote on the amendment as 

proposed by the Opposition. 

 

But the Minister of Agriculture goes on and urges that other civic organizations will recognize clearly 

the importance of stabilizing the population of rural Saskatchewan. Now surely, other civic 

organizations would utilize the committee system to get their voice across, to get their voice heard, to 

make their arguments and proposals to the Government of 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2149 

Saskatchewan as the Minister of Agriculture says: 

 

To ensure that we have the best possible legislation for the people in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He goes on and he wants the church communities to be heard and their views and surely the church 

communities could be welcomed to the committee and be heard by the committee. It’s just as valid now 

as it was last year. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture has just held up his 2,000 coupons for the House to see. 

 

We also note that the Minister of Agriculture suggests that social and leisure organizations and 

associations have a voice in the committee and have something to say and I am sure that they do and if 

the Minister of Agriculture wanted to hear them last year, surely he will want to hear them this year. 

He’ll want to hear all of the individuals whom he spoke about last year. He will want to hear all of the 

farm organizations that he wanted to hear last year. He’ll hear all of the local Chambers of Commerce 

that he wanted to hear from last year and the other civic organizations that he wanted to hear from last 

year. He will also want to hear the towns and the church communities that he wanted to hear from last 

year and every one of the social and leisure associations and organizations that he was so worried about 

making sure that they had a voice last year. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — And the temperance league. 

 

Mr. Lane: — And the temperance league, there’s another great reason. The Member from Hanley 

suggested the temperance league perhaps would like to be heard or make a presentation to the proposed 

committee. 

 

Now if, Mr. Speaker, if the temperance organization as suggested by the Member from Hanley, that they 

want a voice, I hope and urge that he will stand up and vote for this amendment and give them a voice 

that he is now ordering from the back benches. 

 

But, we are now going to the words, and I think that the Attorney General may have had something to 

do with this, because it is on the same grand eloquent type and manner that the Attorney General used 

when he was arguing for the committee and this is the same Minister of Agriculture who this year would 

not give a vote. He says: 

 

No dice on a vote for the hog producers. 

 

Here’s what he said last year: 

 

But in terms of democratic process itself, our commitment is to an involvement of the grassroots of the 

province. 

 

I find that I’m going to have to reread this, Mr. Speaker, because the difference between April 24, 1972 

and April 2, 1973 – there’s an amazing difference. Last year when he was arguing for a committee the 

Minister of Agriculture says: 

 

But in terms of democratic process itself, our commitment 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2150 

is to an involvement of the grassroots of the province. 

 

There is a singular lack of enthusiasm for that commitment this year, Mr. Speaker, and it is unfortunate 

that the people of Saskatchewan are now getting rammed down their throats a government controlled 

marketing commission. I urge the Minister of Agriculture to be counted when it comes to a committee 

system. Reassert and re-emphasize his commitment to the democratic process and that’s what the 

Minster of Agriculture should be doing in this debate. He should have stood up and said, ‘I agree with 

the idea of a vote, I agree with the democratic process’, but what has he said, he has said, ‘No dice for 

the farmers and no dice on a vote.’ Obviously there is a big difference. Obviously a Government with 45 

Members has let its arrogance take root where the grassroots were supposed to once be, we have the 

roots of arrogance in the Government opposite. 

 

He argues for a committee by saying that the committee then will go to the grassroots and that’s 

precisely what we are arguing, is sending this committee out, let it go to the grassroots. Recommit 

yourself to the democratic process and go out and go to the grassroots to find and report what the people 

on the farms and in the towns of Saskatchewan believe and what the people on the farms and the towns 

of Saskatchewan really do want and that’s precisely what we urge you to say today, is reassert your 

commitment. Listen to what the Minister of Agriculture says. Don’t let him tell you that he has changed 

his mind about democratic process and that he no longer believes it. Listen to what he says. He wants a 

committee, a committee, a Select Standing Committee of the Legislature, which is exactly what our 

amendment says, to go out to the grassroots. These are his words: 

 

. . . to hear what the people of Saskatchewan, in the towns and in the villages, want to say about 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t know why — maybe it was the first touch of arrogance and the first example that he was out of 

touch and that he ignored the hamlets last year, but I’m just sticking to what the Minister of Agriculture 

said and he wants to just go to the people on the farms and in the towns of Saskatchewan and see what 

they believe. These are his words: 

 

To see what the people believe and really do want in this vital area in the case of land use and 

community well-being. 

 

But he gives another argument. He follows this up with argument upon argument, upon argument in 

favor of the committee system and then he goes and he refers: 

 

It may well be, Mr. Speaker, in fact I think it will be the case, they will lay down (referring to that very 

committee that we were arguing for) they will lay down and give us the recommendations that will be 

needed in regard to the Orders-in-Council and the regulations that will have to be passed pertaining to 

this legislation. 

 

Surely, this very committee that we are proposing can do exactly the same thing. It can give us the 

regulations, the recommendations that will be needed in order to pass the Orders-in-Council 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2151 

and the regulations necessary to give effect to the legislation. But here is the expectation of a committee 

and our expectation is just as great as that of the Hon. Minister of Agriculture. It’s fully expected that 

through the series of meetings and briefs that they will be receiving during their discussions, they (and 

referring to the committee) under the proposed legislation, will suggest amendments to be forthcoming 

and I can assure the Members opposite that if they have a committee and if they go around this province 

holding hearings, that there will be amendments forthcoming, because the hog producers and the farmers 

don’t want compulsory licensing and they don’t want a government controlled marketing commission 

and they will tell you that and they will tell you that loudly and clearly. Surely if you are listening to the 

people and if you believe in the democratic process, you’ll bring in amendments to this legislation 

because that’s precisely what they will tell you to do. 

 

Now, there’s a very interesting comment in that the Minister of Agriculture went so far as to give me the 

opportunity last year when he said: 

 

You’ll have your opportunity to get up and talk on the Bill, Mr. Member from Lumsden, and I want 

you to listen carefully to what I have to say so that you’re not confused when you get around to 

making some remarks if you have any intentions of doing it. 

 

Well I am going to urge the Minister of Agriculture to listen carefully to what I have to say; to reassert 

your commitment to the democratic process that you urged upon the House last year and to go around 

and give a committee that will hear from the grassroots, that will hear from the towns and villages and in 

your own words: 

 

The church organizations and the Chambers of Commerce and the towns and social and leisure 

organizations and other organizations and the farm organizations above all. 

 

“Listen carefully to what I have to say,” because those are your words Mr. Minister of Agriculture and if 

you weren’t telling the truth and you firmly believed and you really believed what you were saying last 

year, surely the same thing applies this year. 

 

Now, the Minister of Agriculture didn’t quit with these very glowing words. He insisted on giving us 

many more arguments and he goes on to discuss, “the seriousness”. In the words of the Minister of 

Agriculture and surely the question of whether or not a farmer can make his own decisions, or if he 

seriously wants to give up his rights and privileges, and his decision-making abilities to the Government, 

surely that’s got to be a serious problem. He has now given notice that the legislation which will be 

enacted and he went on at that point to go into the question of retroactivity and he used a very important 

date because the Minister of Agriculture has gone back and forth across this province saying, ‘come hell 

or high water there’s going to be a hog marketing commission, government controlled, on April 1, 

1973.’ What did he do at that point? He promised that it would be retroactive, the legislation that he was 

proposing last year would be retroactive to April 1st. Surprise: Mr. Speaker, last year he picked April 1st 

for his Foreign Ownership legislation. Surely, it is not 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2152 

surprising that he picked April 1 for his iniquitous, government controlled hog marketing commission. 

But he makes it quite clear that with that type of statement that it will be retroactive; that nobody will be 

confused and surely the same principle can apply here if the Minister insists on a starting date for his 

hog marketing commission. Surely he can go around and he can make it effective April 1, he can tell the 

people that it will be effective – it will be retroactive and then go and hold his hearings. This is what he 

did last year. Why can he not and why does he refuse to do it this year? 

 

He again makes it quite clear, as of April 1, 1972, he then believed in the democratic process and he 

believed on April 1, 1972 and I make it clear for the record that this was in 1972, that he believed this: 

 

The responsibility for social and economic policy rests on any democratic system with the 

Legislature. (That was last Year) It is the responsibility of Legislatures to enact a legal framework in 

which the social and economic policies continue to be made in the best interests of our province and 

without restriction or limitation that would be a consequence of (in this case the committee on the 

hog marketing studies). 

 

But he goes on and he reasserted his faith in the committee, in the ability of the committee by saying: 

 

The legislation that will be enacted on the basis of the report that will be submitted by the committee 

will be legislation that will assure an active and rewarding social and economic life for all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What better reasons for a committee! What better reasons for a committee than the very words of the 

Minister of Agriculture when he said last year that the legislation that will be enacted, and surely he can 

stand up now and make a commitment that there will be legislation resulting from the committee that we 

are proposing. Then he can say that the legislation that will be enacted on the basis of the report that will 

be submitted by the committee will be legislation, “that will assure an active and rewarding social and 

economic life for all of Saskatchewan.” 

 

I suggest to the Members opposite that if you really believed those words last year, if you were sincere 

in those words last year, if you backed up the Minister of Agriculture in his sincerity, surely we can 

make the same statement when the Minister of Agriculture proposes that there be a committee this year, 

that the results of the committee and the legislation that comes from the committee that will have heard 

from the farms and the people and the individuals of Saskatchewan will ensure an active and rewarding 

social and economic life for all of Saskatchewan. 

 

The interesting thing is that the Minister of Agriculture last year was so committed to the committee 

system that when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) was speaking the Minister of Agriculture 

proposed to interrupt him on several hundred occasions just making it clear that at that point he really 

believed in the committee system. During the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition we have 

statements by the Minister of Agriculture when we criticized the Minister of Agriculture he 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2153 

interrupts and it is in Hansard, page 1908 of April 24th, 1972, again when he still believed in the 

democratic process at that point, he said, “It’s before a committee”, when there was criticism of his 

position. He immediately used this committee last year to get out of any further arguments and 

discussions in the House. Surely, if the Government Members opposite wish to avoid further discussion 

and debate on this particular issue, they could do that by putting this to a committee and then the 

Minister of Agriculture could interrupt any speaker from this Opposition and say, “It’s in the 

committee.” 

 

He denied last year when the committee matter was presented to him by the Leader of the Opposition 

when he said that we are going to set up a committee, a Select Standing Committee, he was accused of 

making a mistake on the committee. But what did he say last year and again, assuming Hansard to be 

correct which I think we safely can, “We haven’t made any mistake at all”, is what the Minister of 

Agriculture says. Now he didn’t want to simply maintain silence when the Leader of the Opposition was 

speaking on the debate and he then proceeded to make, and he obviously got his procedural training 

from the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) because he stood up and made a Point of Order which 

wasn’t a Point of Order, which the Attorney General is known to do on occasion, and he says when 

being criticized at that point as follows: 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may on a Point of Order, for the clarification of the Members opposite. I may be at 

fault in this. I endeavored to give an indication that we were, in fact, going to refer it to a special 

intersessional committee but I apparently did not make it clear that it will be my recommendation on 

closing of second reading that it goes to a committee before it goes to Committee of the Whole or 

before it gets to third reading in this House. 

 

Now surely that is a great stamp of approval to the committee system when the Minister of Agriculture 

places so much importance on this matter going to a committee that he wanted to make it clear when 

another Member of this House was speaking. He wanted to make it absolutely and abundantly clear that 

he was going to have a committee, no matter what happened before third reading and before it goes to 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

We have heard a lot of talk about the Liberal rumors that are running rampant around the province as the 

Minister of Agriculture and the Members opposite have stated. This is an excellent argument again for a 

committee because the Minister of Agriculture states: 

 

So in fact a lot of things that the Leader of the Opposition has said, will not be legislated but they will 

first of all be scrutinized by the committee to have third reading at some later date and some later 

session. 

 

Now maybe you understand, very interesting, you can use the committee system in the very words of the 

Minister of Agriculture to put an end to rumors, to put an end to stories. Why don’t we have a committee 

in this case if the Government opposite is so concerned about rumors and stories and speculation. Here 

we have an ideal method, suggested by the Members opposite, to put an end to the rumors that you are 

so critical 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2154 

of. The Minister of Agriculture has an excellent argument in favor of the committees and I am glad that 

the Hon. Minister of Northern Saskatchewan agrees with me. I am sure that if he took those arguments 

last year at full face value, which I am sure he would want to do from the Minister of Agriculture, then 

he will take them again this year because these are the very words of the Minister of Agriculture when 

he argued for a committee. I can assure the Members opposite that they, too, are going back and getting 

the words of the Members opposite what they said in this House in favor of committees last year, to 

remind you and in order to restore your credibility on your words of the committee system. 

 

Do you know what the Minister of Agriculture did last year? He went so far as to accuse the Liberals of 

making a political issue out of this particular matter. Now it is a surprising thing, it is a very surprising 

thing that when we have in the debate the Attorney General arguing that, ‘let’s get it out of the political 

arena, let’s take it to the people and get the best possible legislation for the people and for the Province 

of Saskatchewan,’ the Minister of Agriculture got up and accused, blatantly accused, the Opposition of 

making a political issue out of this. Now surely, surely no words today ring more hollow in the minds of 

the people of Saskatchewan, when they look around and see the hue and cry that went up last year on 

this matter going to committee, that it was such an important issue that it go to a committee, that it was 

so important that everybody be heard, that all the towns and villages and the farmers and the individuals 

and the farm organizations and the social and charitable organizations and the church organizations, all 

have an input into this because it was such an important and pressing issue. Surely when one party 

stands up in this House proposing to take away the right to self determination of an issue, and to take 

away the right to vote on the type of marketing agency that a farmer wants, it is even more important, 

more pressing and more vital than any question of foreign ownership of land, last year. 

 

As I say, the Minister of Agriculture made the statement that the Opposition was making a political issue 

out of it. The Hon. Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) said that the Attorney General made a weak 

defence last year compared to what we are presenting in this Bill. Now unfortunately the Member from 

Wilkie and I disagree because I thought that the Attorney General made a very strong defence of putting 

this matter before a committee last year. Such a strong defence that I urge the Members opposite to 

reread and if it doesn’t sink in the first time, read it again. If we could get a commitment from every 

Member opposite to read, read very carefully the words, and then would vote according to exactly what 

they argued last year, I think we could safely ride on the fact that they would read it if we gave them the 

book, but I think what would happen is, because they are playing cheap, partisan politics with this issue, 

I think they would hide it. If the opportunity ever happened in five years, if they are still around in five 

years from now, they may pull the book out and look for something in there that they may have said that 

may or may not have been wrong. 

 

Now we were accused, and I can assure the Members opposite that the accusation will not be made if 

you put this particular Bill to a committee, the opinion that Members of this House, we 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2155 

were accused of leaving this impression and I checked the Press releases at that time and I can assure 

that no members of the Press gave the impression – as a matter of fact if we went by the indications in 

the Press last year and the indications this year – there is a big difference. Last year the Government 

proposed and organized a committee, a special committee to study foreign ownership plans. Now what 

happens when the Opposition filibusters the issue and demands a committee the headline is, “Marketing 

Bill delayed again”. It will be delayed again and I hope again and again and again and again until the 

Government mends its ways and sees the error of its ways and the wisdom of listening to the people of 

the Province of Saskatchewan. But we were accused of leaving the opinion with the Members of the 

House and with the people of Saskatchewan that the Government got weak, that the Government 

chickened out when they introduced the Bill. I can assure you that if you are prepared to put this Bill to a 

committee, not one Member of the Opposition will accuse you of chickening out or weakening. I will be 

the first to give you credit if you have got the courage to do it. I don’t think you have, but I will be the 

first. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture went on and just for the edification of the Members opposite this is page 

2061 for anyone of you that do wish to read the particular speech because I do think it has some merit. I 

think the argument was valid then and is just as valid today assuming, that is if we can safely assume 

and there is some doubt, if the Minister of Agriculture still believes in the democratic process. He then 

went on to repeat just to make it abundantly clear to the Opposition, he went on to repeat for I believe 

the third time the motion that he was proposing that the matter go to committee. But then, because at 

that point he still believed in the democratic process and this was a year ago, he went so far as to repeat 

what he said, what he had said in the earlier debate. He was so convinced that what he was doing was 

right, so convinced in the democratic process, he believed in the democratic process, he repeated those 

very famous words of his when he stated again for the second time in the House to make sure that there 

was no misunderstanding on anybody’s part. He went on record for the second time last year, stating: 

 

I expect that briefs will be presented not only by individuals but also by farm organizations and I feel 

certain by local Chambers of Commerce and other civic organizations that will recognize, recognize 

clearly, the importance of stabilizing populations in rural Saskatchewan and to provide the economic 

basis for the survival of towns, and the social basis for thriving church communities, social leisure 

organizations and the like. 

 

Surely, we can use the Minister of Agriculture’s argument that these social and leisure organizations do 

have an input to make. Now is an opportunity for the Government opposite to reinforce and to restate its 

commitment to the committee system and the democratic system, because right now the credibility of 

the Government opposite, and the credibility of the committee system and your use of the committee 

system are obviously becoming cheap, partisan political purposes and it is becoming evident to everyone 

in Saskatchewan. When you get a very contentious issue as you did last year and you immediately 

moved it into committee, surely if you are going to be consistent and rational and logical when you get a 

contentious issue like a compulsory, 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2156 

government-controlled marketing commission you should put it to committee this year. Either that or it 

means that you played cheap politics with the committee system last year. 

 

But again, the Minister of Agriculture really believed in what he had said a year ago in the first debate 

because he repeated again, he repeated again some words that: 

 

In fact, I think it will be the case that they will lay down and give us recommendations that will be 

needed in regard to the Order-in-Council and the regulations that will have to be passed pertaining to 

this Legislature, saying to those people . . . 

 

And this is quoting the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

. . . Mr. Speaker, that we are not by any means conclusively decided in our minds that we are going to 

pass regulations or legislation without contacting and conferring with the farmers in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If it was right to do it then, why isn’t it right to do the same thing now. If it wasn’t wrong in conferring 

with and contacting the farmers of Saskatchewan in 1972, then why is it wrong in 1973. Surely it is right 

in 1973 in light of the fact that you have been in office for nearly two years, it is time to rededicate 

yourself to the democratic process and go out and hear the people of Saskatchewan and listen to the 

farmers of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Obviously the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) was not convinced about what the 

Minister of Agriculture said last year assuming he was in the House, he heard him twice last year. But 

he is still not convinced and he has just asked me, Mr. Speaker, to repeat what the Minister of 

Agriculture said. This is what the Minister of Agriculture said, again for your interest page 2062 of the 

Debates and Proceedings, April 27, 1972: 

 

It is fully expected that through the series of meetings, the briefs that they will be receiving . . . 

 

‘They’ meaning the committee. 

 

. . . during their discussion of the proposed legislation, that amendments will be forthcoming, 

amendments that will be attached to this Act at a later date. 

 

And he also said for the interest of the Minister of Labour: 

 

We are not going to pass legislation without contacting and conferring with the farmers in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He goes on again to give a further argument for the committee. The arguments came by the hundreds 

last year when a committee was desired. I am quoting from the Minister of Agriculture: 

 

This will give us an opportunity to look at the people who are domiciled in Saskatchewan and make 

exemption for those that we think are not domiciled here but are not 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2157 

in any way restricting or causing hardship in regard to transfers of land in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A committee system in this case would be an excellent opportunity to look at the hog producers in 

Saskatchewan who are no longer certain of your Government controlled Hog Marketing Commission. 

“An excellent opportunity”, it is your argument, it was valid April 27, 1972. Surely if you still believe in 

the democratic process that you argued in favor of last year, it is as valid today. Because that is going to 

be an issue on your vote on this particular amendment. 

 

He went on, not convinced that he had made his point either to the Opposition or the Government 

opposite by stating: 

 

On three or four occasions, I attempted with all the clarity possible to try and define what we were 

doing by bringing this Bill in at this time, then structuring a committee to go to the people of 

Saskatchewan to find what amendments it should contain and what it should contain in the regulations 

and the Orders-in-Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite made a great to-do in April of 1972 about the value of the 

committee and the desirability of putting a contentious issue before the committee. 

 

The Attorney General and the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Industry and Commerce, the 

Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley and several other back benchers, the Member for Arm River got up 

in this House and told this House, I believe with all sincerity that they were intending that this 

committee go out to hear the farmers and the people of Saskatchewan. And that is what we urge this 

House do at this particular time is put this Bill before a committee. 

 

Go out again and hear the farmers and listen to the hog producers who have made it quite clear to you 

that they want a plebiscite. And they have made it clear to the Government opposite that they are not 

satisfied with the way that you have handled this matter and the way that you have handled this matter 

and the way that you are trying to ram this down their throats. It is your chance by your words to reassert 

your belief in the democratic process and in the grassroot’s politics that you were proposing a year ago. 

And if you still believe that, you have no alternative but to vote for the amendment proposed by the 

Opposition. 

 

I support this amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — (Morse) Mr. Speaker, just a few words tonight. I intend to keep my remarks rather 

brief. I must compliment the Member from Lumsden (Mr. Lane) for the enlightening words which he 

gave us all tonight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — I am sure that everyone in the Legislature has learned a considerable amount on the 

value of committee work in going out to see the people. 

 

We have before us this evening an amendment that is asking 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2158 

this Government to go out and talk to the people. Gentlemen, I see nothing wrong with this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Especially, Mr. Speaker, after one takes the opportunity of reading plank No. 12 in the 

NDP election platform. No. 12 in the NDP election platform. No. 12 for the Members opposite I will 

read again: 

 

Establishment of a provincial producer controlled Hog Marketing Board. 

 

Now this is what they promised the people of the province back in 1971. I might mention here there are 

two key words in this very promise. One of them is ‘producer controlled’ and the other is ‘board’. 

 

The farmers of this province when they went to vote in 1971 (if that is the criterion that they are using 

for putting in this board in that they have the support of the hog producers) certainly they may have 

supported the board. But I think it is essential that this Government accepts our amendment and goes out 

to the people and tells them why they are not implementing their promise. Why they are not putting in a 

board but rather a commission. 

 

Possibly the main reason why they are not doing this might be illustrated in an editorial which appeared 

in the Leader-Post and if the Members wished I can give them a copy of it. First of all, in essence, Mr. 

Attorney General: 

 

A marketing board is a creation of the producers. It is run by them under a legislative umbrella 

provided by the Government which ensures enforcement of marketing provisions that are agreed upon 

voluntarily. 

 

A board allows the producers the right to vote. It allows the producers the right to make that decision 

and this is what the NDP promised the hog producers in 1971. They promised them that right to vote. I 

think it is essential that that party opposite go out to the people with this committee to tell them why 

they are going to deny the hog producers of this province the right to vote. 

 

Let’s look at what the editorial gives as a definition for a commission: 

 

A marketing commission on the other hand is a creature of the Government which requires producers 

to submit to mandatory regulations over which they have no control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the key to the entire amendment which we have before us tonight. We are asking 

this Government to go out to the producer, ask them if they want this Government to implement these 

types of control. 

 

We have spent a considerable amount of time dealing with just hog producers. But you must remember 

as well that we must go out into the country and ask the cattlemen. Do they want their product under a 

commission? We have to ask the sheep breeders as well if they want a commission to market their 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2159 

product? Or would they prefer a marketing board? Would they prefer a marketing board which would 

allow them the right to vote? 

 

One interesting point (I am sorry that the Premier has left at this moment) but they seem to think that 

what they are doing with this commission is popular. It is up to them to go out — I feel — to see the 

people and find out just how popular it is. An example of his might be in the constituency of Morse. I 

believe it was on March 14, that I held a public meeting in the town of Herbert regarding the Hog 

Marketing Commission. During the by-election I was fortunate to get 50 people out to a meeting in the 

town of Herbert. That night I got 168 people out. 

 

I might point out as well that the next night the Premier of this province held a meeting in the town of 

Morse which is nine miles away. During the by-election the Premier had around 200 people out to his 

meeting. At this meeting it was lucky if he had 110 people out. 

 

Now, I tell you gentlemen there is something completely wrong if a Member of the Opposition can 

outdraw the Premier of this province at a public meeting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — As well, Mr. Speaker, I feel that it is essential that they go out and talk to the people of 

this province regarding this commission because the Minister of Agriculture has stated that there are 

some farm organizations which had indicated their support for such a commission. 

 

First of all he cited the Saskatchewan Hog Producers Association as having their full support. Yet if the 

hog producers are supporting this commission why did they place that full page ad in the Western 

Producer? As well, Mr. Speaker, he also mentioned that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was endorsing 

his actions in this regard. And I have to read a direct statement by any member other than Mr. Boden 

saying that they want the Hog Marketing Commission. As well he says they have consulted their 

membership regarding the Hog Marketing Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I attended two meetings last fall of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. At both of those 

meetings there was no questionnaire asking me what my opinion was regarding a Hog Marketing 

Commission, nor was it brought up at that meeting. I might point out as well that I am chairman of the 

local Wheat Pool Committee . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — And at no time have I, as chairman of that committee, been asked to discuss that with 

my committee members or to the membership at that point. At no time has the Wheat Pool in my 

estimation ever asked me, nor has there been anyone that I know of that have asked whether they want a 

Hog Marketing Commission implemented in this fashion. At times I wonder whether it might be just in 

the mind of Mr. Boden as to whether the Hog Marketing Commission is backed by the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool. 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2160 

As well, talking about — here again I was saying earlier that we have received coupons from people 

throughout the province, from hog producers. But this legislation as well affects other producers of other 

products in this province. 

 

Some of the Members on this side have read from the coupons which they have received. These 

coupons, I am positive, the ones that I have received from my constituency, a little over 80 in number, I 

have checked them out and they are all hog producers in the Morse constituency. I received, . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Did you check the tombstones? 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — . . . and I might point out to the Minister of Highways that each one is alive and kicking 

and feeling very good. But I might point out some of the letters which I have received . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Are you speaking to the amendment? 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Yes, Mr. Attorney General, I am speaking on the amendment. I am trying to convince 

the Members opposite the need for setting up a committee to go out and listen to the people, and find out 

what their views are. 

 

Here is a letter I received from someone who is not a hog producer. Someone who produces cattle for 

example. I will just read this letter to the Members opposite: 

 

I am writing you concerning Bill 50 — an Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972. I 

feel that this Act will take away the incentive and free enterprise of every rancher and farmer in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — 

 

With the purchasing of 45 per cent of Intercontinental Packers and the compulsory selling system this 

Bill would bring, a farmer and a rancher, a situation no better than living in a communist state. 

 

As my representative of the Saskatchewan Legislature, I hope you can fight this Bill and prevent it 

from passing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — I might point out that this individual who wrote me, and I will be quite willing to table it, 

does not have a membership in the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — As far as I am concerned I don’t care what membership he has got. Really, I hope that he 

has a membership in the New Democratic Party because from this letter I am certain that he will be 

supporting me in 1975. Here again I think is possibly another one of the reasons why we should have a 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2161 

committee set up and go out through the province. 

 

Here is another letter from Brownlee, another town in my constituency. This is from someone who is not 

a hog producer. Someone who raises cattle: 

 

Dear Sir: I have studied Bill No. 50 and disagree with the amendments of The Natural Products 

Marketing Act for any farm produce. I hope they will delay the Bill until a democratic plebiscite of all 

the Saskatchewan producers is held to indicate support for this Bill. 

 

And here is the key sentence, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Why was this Bill not brought out before the producers earlier? This is not fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is quite evident, if I may be permitted to wander off the amendment, when the Minster of 

Agriculture introduced this Bill he talked about everything else but what was conveyed in Bill 50. 

 

Members opposite are enjoying these letters so much I may as well read you a few more. This is one 

from Marquis, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I strongly urge the delay of Bill 50 – An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972. As 

we are a democratic society and therefore are entitled to a democratic plebiscite for all natural 

products produced without interference from Government or anyone else. Why should we be forced to 

buy licences for growing or selling our own products. 

 

Another letter from someone who I don’t know what particular membership he holds in what party or 

whether he even belongs to one. 

 

Just a note to urge you to fight against this marketing commission. Let’s keep our country democratic 

one way or the other. 

 

I could go on all night if you fellows want me to. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Go ahead. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Okay. Now this is a letter I like to receive. 

 

Thanks for the fine job you are doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The rest of the letter is too complimentary gentlemen so I won’t bother reading it to you. 

Here is another one. This one is from Mortlach, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Just a line to say that we are against Bill No. 50 and sincerely hope that by some means or maybe by 

an act of God this will not come to pass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2162 

Mr. Wiebe: — Here is another line I enjoy. 

 

Even the NDP supporters around here can’t believe it and say they can’t do that. I am afraid they can 

and probably will. Freedom is a precious thing when you see it slipping away. We are behind you. 

 

Here is another letter which I received and this deals with something else as well as Bill 50. If you want 

to hear it I can certainly read it to you. First of all it starts out: 

 

We object to the Land Bank and we object to the Marketing Board Bill No. 50. I would like to have 

Bill 50 sent to me in print. I am certain 90 per cent of the people in this area are against the marketing 

board, Bill 50. This was fought out before and the same opinion is still there. Why must it be brought 

up again. A bad weed never dies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — “A bad weed never dies.” Here is another letter which I received after a meeting which 

was held in Marquis on March 15th by interested producers in that area regarding Bill 50. 

 

On Thursday, March 15, there was a meeting held in the Marquis Community Hall by farmers of the 

surrounding districts to discuss the amendments to The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972, Bill 

No. 50. The hall was filled to capacity. 

 

I might just mention to the Member from Notukeu-Willow Bunch (Mr. Engel) that if he reads the paper 

he would have realized that this meeting at Marquis was formed by producers from that area and had no 

sponsor whatsoever. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ohhhh! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Continuing on with my letter: 

 

And at the close of the meeting a vote was taken for or against the amendments to this Act. Out of a 

possible 100 people who almost totally rejected this Act there was only three people who stood in 

favor of it. 

 

Throughout this meeting which at the start was called for nonpolitical opinions, these three people 

were very obviously NDP agitators. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — 

 

Being farmers themselves, you would wonder why they would vote for an Act that can only restrict 

the farmers to more rigid controls (total controls) and less money for the product which they produce 

and hope for a reasonable price in selling. I would certainly ask you, Mr. Wiebe as our MLA of 

Morse, to vigorously fight against this Bill. Thank you for your support. 

 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2163 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — These, Mr. Speaker, are just a few letters which indicate the need to adopt the 

amendment which we have tonight and go to the people of this province and ask them for their opinion. 

I think what we have to do is go to the people of this province and ask if they want every possible 

product that is included in this Bill brought in. I think we have to go out and ask them whether they like 

the idea of registering and purchasing a licence. I think we have to go out and ask them if they feel that 

the Government and the commission can tell them where or when to market their product. I think we 

have to go out and ask the people of this province if they agree that the Government itself through this 

commission can tell the producer how his product will be transported. 

 

There are many other things which I would like to cover, Mr. Speaker, regarding this amendment and I 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe the Hon. Member already had one adjournment. The Hon. Member 

adjourned the debate on March 5th and resumed the debate on March 8th. The Hon. Member cannot 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. G. B. Grant: — (Regina Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased that my contribution to this 

subject is received with such enthusiasm, because I am sure I can add considerable light to the haze that 

is being cast over the Session about hog production, hog marketing and control of same. 

 

Just in case, Mr. Speaker, that any of the Members opposite feel that I don’t have the background that 

enables me to speak on this subject, I want to produce evidence. Everybody in the House has been 

speaking on behalf of the producers or on behalf of themselves, but I am probably the only one in the 

House that has received recognition from thousands of hogs as being responsible for their being here in 

the world. I want to show a picture – I’ll leave it here so they can get a first hand look at it – I’ll read it 

for your edification. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — He’s a bore, but I didn’t know . . . 

 

Mr. Grant: — Now, the Hon. Members might just as well save their remarks, because I have the old 

Walter Smishek device turned down, while I hope you can hear me, I am missing quite a bit of what 

they say over there. I am going to read what it says here. I am pictured standing among a lot of – they 

are pigs, I’m not sure of the breed – it says: 

 

Presented to the Hon. Gordon B. Grant (this is while I was still a Minister so I was entitled to use that) 

on the occasion of his retirement as chairman of the Board of the Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation, by the 60,000 hogs he helped bring into the world. 

 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2164 

Just lay that on the table in case somebody doesn’t believe me – I’m not filing it with the House, it is 

just an exhibit. I might want it back. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The one with the hat on is Gordon. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, every day in every way the New Deal for People seems to be working its 

way around to a Bad Deal for People. I don’t know of any session that I have been in where there has 

been so much evidence of a desire on the part of a government to acquire control of everything that is 

going on in the province. Now the session last year indicated some trend toward this because there were 

certain pieces of legislation brought in that indicated that the Government of the day had a desire to get 

their finger in on every possible phase of our lives. While I should like to confine my remarks to the 

amendment suggesting that this matter be referred to a committee, I haven’t as yet spoken, so I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, I am wide open, I’ll have considerably more scope than some of the other members who 

have spoken. Last year we had the indication from the Members opposite of their desire to get into 

business by the Consumer Affairs legislation; this year their desire is evidenced once more by the 

purchase of 45 per cent interest in Intercon, and an acquisition of still further interest in the IPSCO and 

every indication as evidenced by remarks made by the Premier of getting deeper and deeper into the 

business life of this province. 

 

Not being satisfied with that phase of operation, they are jumping into the farming operation in a $30 

million way, acquiring farms that in my opinion they have no desire or no intention of ever disposing of. 

They are getting into conflict with the teaching profession and the trustees, making inroads into the rule 

of local authorities. This is evidenced by the Community Planning Act and there is no doubt in my mind 

that later on this Session we will have a Bill that will ram the ward system down the throats of people in 

Regina and Saskatoon. Cable TV control, the distribution of TV equipment to schools whether they wish 

it or not. Evidence that there is likelihood of some move in the direction of a press council. It was 

interesting last year, they made a little bit of a plunge into foreign ownership, but there was considerable 

noise raised and they backed out of it, this is why I can’t understand their stubbornness in connection 

with this piece of legislation because it is quite evident to us on this side of the House that there is 

considerably more resistance to this piece of legislation right now than there was to the Foreign 

Ownership Bill last year. 

 

Members on the other side have indicated their desire for government participation and government 

ownership of business, they want to get into the oil exploration business, they are already advertising 

Saskatchewan Oil. In tonight’s paper we will read about Mr. MacMurchy’s attitude as far as The 

University Act is concerned. He summed it up when he was asked to withhold it or delay it by saying 

that there is a commitment, I don’t know to whom the commitment has been made, but there is a 

commitment made to bring this legislation in and come hell or high water it’s going to come in. It is 

quite evident, Mr. Speaker, that long, long ago prior to when this Bill was introduced I believe back in 

early February, the Government had 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2165 

made up its mind that they were going to bring in this legislation and this Commission by April 1st. 

Their minds were made up and they had no intention of being deflected. They remind me a bit of Mr. 

Barrett out in British Columbia who in spite of all the farm protest that he is receiving comes out in 

pretty strong terms and says he has no intention of changing his direction and whether they like it or not, 

it is going to come in. A month ago they were advertising for a director for this hog commission. As Mr. 

Steuart pointed out, even advertising down in Des Moines, Iowa. The handwriting was on the wall, there 

was no doubt that they intended to bring it in. 

 

Actually the whole thing has been rushed from the start. I personally feel there was no need for the haste 

that is being demonstrated. It is quite evident from communications read by the Hon. Member from 

Morse (Mr. Wiebe) and by other Members on this side of the House that there is a lot of resistance to it. 

The setting up of a hog commission is not going to solve all the problems of the industry, if they have 

that many problems. The biggest problem recently seems to be the high prices which isn’t a bad problem 

to have. Personally, Mr. Speaker, I feel they should take the sensible attitude that they took a year ago 

when they backed off the Foreign Ownership Bill and referred that to a committee and gave people an 

opportunity to speak and express their views. 

 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, the NDP right from the start have taken the attitude that in June of 1971 they 

received a mandate from the people of this province to do almost anything they wished. Well, the Hon. 

Member from Morse pointed out, if they had this mandate then they should immediately implement 

plank No. 12, the establishment of a provincial producer controlled hog marketing board. But apparently 

they have decided to sidestep that one because they are afraid that the vote would go against them if they 

did take a vote, and they can’t establish a board without taking a vote. It is quite evident that is why 

there is no vote being taken, they are just afraid to do so. But why they are so bull headed I can’t 

understand. There is only one plausible explanation that it is probably two years before an election and 

they feel by that time everybody will simmer down and this will be accepted. They don’t intend to have 

a vote even after the Hog Commission is in operation, I daresay, until about three years from now, until 

after the election is over, they’ll know whether they are in the clear or not. There have been a lot of 

precedents for the request of the Opposition, as evidenced by other marketing boards where votes have 

been taken and the votes have been favorable. I really can’t understand why they are so fearful of taking 

a vote in this case. 

 

It seems to me that once again they only listen when it serves their wishes and for some strange reason 

that may involve the Land Bank, the purchase of Intercon. and many other schemes that apparently are 

up their sleeves, they do not want to listen at this time. I can’t understand the Hon. Member from Regina 

North East, the Minister of Health, sitting idly by and allowing this to take place, because he at least 

voices his opinion about listening to people. Today he gave evidence of listening to various groups as far 

as the dental nurses were concerned and he claims that in discussing the matter of medical personnel in 

this province he has discussed it with the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the University people. 

He for one appears to be ready to sit down and listen to people, but for some strange reason the Minister 

of Agriculture has no desire to listen to these people. 

 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2166 

What is going to happen as I see it, they are going to have so many controls in this province that we are 

going to end up in the same quandary that they have so frequently experienced south of the line. They 

have so many subsidies and so many controls and so many departments climbing over each other that 

sometimes they get a little confused. To show you how the ridiculous lengths to which controls can go, I 

should just like to read a little story and it is entitled, “Hogwash.” It is written by a hog farmer down in 

the United States and it is to, “Dear Uncle Sam.” 

 

My friend Bill Jones here in Chattanooga County received a $1,000 cheque from the government this 

year for not raising hogs. So I am going into the ‘not raising hogs business’ next year. What I want to 

know is in your opinion, what is the best kind of farm not to raise hogs on and what is the best kind of 

hogs not to raise. I would prefer not to raise razorbacks, but if that is not a good breed not to raise, I 

will just as gladly not raise any Berkshires or Durocs. The hardest work in this business is going to be 

in keeping an inventory on how many I haven’t raised. 

 

My friend Bill is very joyful about the future of the business. He has been raising hogs for more than 

20 years and the best he ever made was $400 in 1918, until this year when he got a cheque for $1,000 

for not raising hogs. If I can get $1,000 for not raising 50 hogs, then will I get $2,000 for not raising 

100 hogs, etc? I plan to operate on a small scale at first holding myself down to about 4,000 hogs 

which means I will have $80,000, then I can afford a boat. 

 

Now another thing, those hogs I will not raise will not eat 100,000 bushels of corn. I understand that 

you also pay farmers for not raising corn, so will you pay me anything for not raising 100,000 bushels 

of corn, not to feed the hogs I am not going to raise. I want to get started as soon as possible for this 

seems to be a good time of the year for not raising hogs. Yours truly. P.S. As so often happens, people 

don’t want to get caught in these schemes, can I raise 10 or 12 hogs on the side while I am in the not 

raising hogs business, just enough to get a few sides of bacon to eat? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the ridiculous stage that government control can reach. I daresay that there is a 

possibility of this happening under a hog commission run by the Minister of Agriculture and his cohorts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that the Government opposite are heading up the wrong road in so many respects as 

far as business is concerned and now as far as the farming population is concerned. Why a government 

wants to annoy so many farmers as this Government is doing and the Government in British Columbia 

similarly, I don’t know. It seems that they have suddenly developed an insensitive attitude to so many 

things. They seem to be ready to implement certain legislation regardless of the will of the people and I 

feel that this is another step in that direction. I would hate to take up too much time this evening because 

I know there are some other gentlemen interested in speaking and 



 

April 2, 1973 

 

 

2167 

dealing with other subjects. Mr. Speaker, at this time I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


