



















































Hansard: January 30, 1973


62 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

4th Day 

 

Tuesday, January 30, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. J.E. Brockelbank: (Saskatoon-Mayfair) — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure this 

afternoon to rise and through you to welcome to this Chamber a large group of students from the city of 

Saskatoon. They are drawn from the constituencies of Saskatoon-Riversdale and Saskatoon-Mayfair. 

Fortunately for me their collegiate is located in Mayfair constituency, therefore, I have the opportunity 

to welcome them here. They are from an old and distinguished collegiate in Saskatoon, Bedford Road 

Collegiate. There are about 78 of them here. They are located behind me and in the Speaker’s Gallery. 

They are accompanied today by three of the staff of Bedford Road, Mr. Hughes, Mr. Wilson and Mr. 

Serienko. I am sure that every Member of this Chamber joins me in welcoming them here today, hoping 

that they will find the speeches this afternoon constructive and informative. I hope they will leave this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, more impressed with the democratic system and the need for the democratic 

system than they were before they arrived. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B.M. Dyck: (Saskatoon City Park) — Mr. Speaker, may I add my welcome to the students of 

Bedford Road Collegiate and their teachers, Mr. Hughes, Mr. Serienko and Mr. Wilson. I had the 

privilege of teaching at Bedford Road for a few years and I know many of these students personally. I 

hope that if they don’t find this afternoon’s proceedings at least informative, that they will find them 

entertaining. I should like to see them back here again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Chiropractic Services 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek: (Minister of Public Health) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the day, on 

behalf of the Government I want to make an announcement that will be of interest to the Members of the 

Legislature and to the citizens of the province. 

 

Effective February 1, 1973, chiropractic services will become an insured service in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the program will be administered by the Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Commission and will 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

63 

cover office and home visits and emergency visits and x-ray services. The Government estimates the 

program will cost $1,184,000 in the first year of operation. The agreement between the Government and 

the Chiropractor Association is for a one-year period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in keeping with our Government’s philosophy the Saskatchewan Plan will be unique in 

Canada, being the only one which does not impose limits on number or dollar volume of services an 

individual or family may receive. It is comprehensive, there will be no deterrent fees or deductibles. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Any resident of Saskatchewan covered by Medical Care will be eligible for benefits 

under the new program. Mr. Speaker, I am delighted that the Government has fulfilled another promised 

made by our party to the people of Saskatchewan during the 1971 election campaign in its New Deal of 

People. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the agreement introduces a unique method of payment to the 

chiropractors expected to provide service under the Plan. It involves three important factors. 

 

Firstly, a contract payment based on the number of years in practice since graduation and upon the 

number of services provided by each chiropractor. Chiropractors will receive a base contract dependent 

on years in practice on the following basis. Up to two years $3,000 per year; after three years $4,000 per 

year; after four years $5,000; after five years and over $6,000 per year. 

 

These contracts will be dependent on a chiropractor providing a minimum of 2,250 services a year. If 

the chiropractor provides fewer services than the minimum amount of the base contract the contract will 

be reduced on a pro rata basis. Secondly, a fee for service basis of payment for office visits, with a 

decreasing payment as the number of services are provided per patient. The first service $6; between 

two and four visits $4, subsequent visits $3. After hour visits, home visits and emergency visits will be 

paid on the following basis. Between 8:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. $5 each; between 8:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 

$6 each; and emergency visits $6 each. 

 

Thirdly, a special formula will be used in the payment of x-ray services. The formula involves a total 

annual payment of $150,000 distributed to chiropractors on the basis of utilization patterns. A 

continuing review of services will be carried out and after six months of operation they payment of 

x-rays will be adjusted in according with the utilization pattern. 

 

Under the joint agreement a special Chiropractic Review Board will be set up to study and review the 

utilization of services provided and the associated costs throughout the first year of operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I also point out that in our audience, Dr. Kristianson is sitting in the Speaker’s 

Gallery. He is the President of the Saskatchewan Chiropractors’ Association and 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

64 

I do extend him a warm welcome. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say on behalf of the 

Opposition that we welcome the announcement by the Minister of Health today, especially I think it is 

very fitting the timing of this announcement. I am glad to see that they are carrying on the old tradition 

of the Liberal government in making the announcement, that is, and I know that many, many people in 

the Province of Saskatchewan will welcome this addition to the Medical Care Insurance Program, 

because they have been laboring for a long time under an added burden, those people who look to 

chiropractors for their health needs. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, make note that this is a real announcement. It will work. It is not an 

announcement of a heavy water plant or a . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! This is not a debate. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Quote of Premier’s on Foreign Ownership of Land 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question 

towards the Premier of the province. 

 

In this morning’s edition of the Leader-Post there was an article regarding a quote which he made on the 

recommendations of the Foreign Ownership of Land Committee. The article stated that his remarks at 

that press conference were on tape and that those remarks were recorded accurately. 

 

Yesterday you misled this House and since you were correctly reported in the Leader-Post, I, once 

again, ask that you inform this House accurately as to what the draft recommendations reported were 

that you were referring to in that press release. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It was on tape. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I don’t think we can permit any Member saying another Member’s 

statement given in the House are not accurate or anything else. One Member must accept another 

Member’s statement within the House and we can’t permit debate on whether a statement in the paper is 

or is not correct. That can be raised at an appropriate time on debates or bills. But we cannot permit 

saying that some other Member’s statement was not correct because each Member is recognized to make 

a statement on his own validity within the House. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. The Member from Morse was only 

reporting what the Leader-Post reported this morning as on tape. He was not referring to the debate of 

yesterday. He is asking a question about what the Leader-Post had on tape accurately indicating what the 

Premier’s remarks were. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

65 

Surely the Member for Morse has the right to ask a question regarding an editorial or a news report in 

the Leader-Post this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think if members will check on the rules you will find that statements arising by 

others outside of this House cannot be raised in the House as matters of privilege. It is only statements of 

Members in the House that can be raised here and not statements made outside the House. I would have 

to rule it is out of order. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Address-in-Reply 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon 

Nutana South) for an Address-in Reply. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, we will give the Premier ample time 

later this day to answer the question if he feels so inclined to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should first like to congratulate and welcome back to our ranks the Hon. Member from 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In spite of every effort by the Premier, his full Cabinet, most NDP MLAs and a host of 

government employees, the good people of the North elected Allan Guy for the fifth time. He is a 

valuable addition to the Legislative Assembly in general and our party in particular. 

 

I should also like, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the group of dedicated men and women who brought the 

Silver Broom International Curling Championships to Regina. This has become on of the classic events 

on the international sports calendar and will bring honor and good sportsmanship to this city and 

province. 

 

We all look forward to the visit of Her Majesty, the Queen and His Royal Highness, the Duke of 

Edinburgh in July. Their visit will, of course, be the highlight among those events being planned to 

celebrate the 100 anniversary of the founding of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 

 

The Mounted Police have played a great role in the history of Saskatchewan and have earned the respect 

and admiration that most of us feel for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech, outlining some of the Government’s 1973 program, contains some 

proposals we welcome and will support. More housing for low income groups and the elderly is a move 

in the right direction and I am sure this program will have a substantial help from the Federal 

Government. If the Government is serious about its announcement to help young farmers, small 

businessmen and pensioners, we will, of course, give them our full support. 

 

As a matter of fact, our farmers were given scant attention 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

66 

in this document, mostly a rehash of existing programs and the arrogant announcement that measures 

will be taken to strengthen the compulsory Hog Marketing Commission with no vote of the producers. 

However, Mr. Speaker, the major thrust of the Throne Speech was the Government’s plans for resource 

development. Shorn of all the fancy words and fine sounding phrases, the NDP Government is going to 

gamble the taxpayers’ money on trying to find oil and gas wells and hard rock minerals. On top of this 

they are going into the timber industry in a major way. 

 

Now what is wrong with this? Why shouldn’t the Government develop our resources and keep all the 

profits for the Saskatchewan people? It sounds great, but let’s look at all the facts and remember it’s the 

hard-earned money of the taxpayers that the politicians are playing with. 

 

First, the NDP have announced they will set up a Government owned and financed company to explore 

for oil and gas. The Premier says that the oil companies are taking too much profit out of Saskatchewan 

and not spending enough on oil and gas exploration. 

 

From 1962 to 1971 the oil and gas produced in Saskatchewan was valued at a little over $2 billion. 

Expenditures for the same period were $1,333 million. While it would thus appear that the oil industry 

made a profit of $670 million during this ten year period, I am told that this figure is before corporate 

taxes and without normal money costs being charged. 

 

However, even taking off taxes and interest the industry showed a substantial profit in Saskatchewan 

during the past 10 years. Now to balance this picture fairly, I believe we should look at the balance sheet 

of the oil industry over the last 25 years. 

 

During the late forties and all of the 1950s the oil industry spent far more money on exploration and 

facilities than they took out in sales. In fact, taking off corporation taxes and normal interest, the oil 

industry has shown only a modest profit over the past 25 years in Saskatchewan. 

 

I point this out not in defence of this industry but to allow a clear judgement of the wisdom behind the 

Government’s move to go into the exploration business. If the oil industry is raking in huge profits from 

our oil and refusing to spend enough on exploration then by all means let the Government move in. The 

record does not show that they have made these huge profits when their total investment is taken into 

consideration. But there is no question that exploration has gone down very seriously these last four 

years. 

 

It began to happen when we were in power and has continued under the NDP so it has little to do with 

politics. The truth is the oil companies have honeycombed the most likely areas in their search for oil 

with disappointing results at the shallow and medium levels. Most of what is now left to explore is at the 

deep levels and so far this area has failed to yield any significant finds. Deep exploration is very costly, 

about $150,000 a well. On top of that the prospects in Alberta, the Territories and the Arctic look much 

more attractive. So most of the oil industry’s exploration money is being spent where the chances look 

best. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

67 

Does this mean we in Saskatchewan should just throw up our hands and quit? By no means, Mr. 

Speaker. It is significant that in 1972, under the NDP, the oil companies paid us over $4 million in bonus 

bids, the highest since 1968. This meant that they were still interested in Saskatchewan. However, at 

about the same time, Mr. Thorson, the Minister of Industry, spoke to the oil men taking a very hard and 

threatening stand. Then this year the Premier got into the act browbeating the industry and warning them 

that if they didn’t step up exploration his Government would move in. In fact, he had already developed 

his plans to go ahead with this Crown corporation even while he was speaking to the industry. 

 

I say the Premier is gambling our tax dollars on a very, very long shot. If the Government is going into 

the deep horizons looking for oil, they could spend millions of tax dollars with nothing to show for it. It 

is a gamble that makes the Choiceland iron mine look small by comparison and I think it is unnecessary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We say, Mr. Speaker, encourage the oil industry with incentives as they have done in 

Alberta and take our share when and if they strike the oil or gas. 

 

The oil industry has made suggestions to this Government but has received absolutely no 

encouragement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this last 10 years Saskatchewan taxpayers received over $300 million in oil revenue with 

no gamble, no investment plus our share of the corporate and income taxes paid by the industry. The 

new policy of the NDP will be one more step in harassing and driving the industry out with no guarantee 

of any return in jobs or revenue for our people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The situation in regard to hard rock minerals is as bad or worse. The NDP intend to put 

Government crews in the North prospecting for hard rock minerals. Again, gambling the people’s 

money against unbelievable odds. A better way would be to sit down with the mining industry and find 

out what incentives are necessary to get them back into the North. I say back because we had them there. 

In 1964 and 1965 under the old CCF policy similar to the so-called NDP plan there were only 2,006 

acres staked in the North and only two permits were issued or recorded. We put in an incentive program 

and in 1968-69 1.35 million acres were staked and 169 permits were issued. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In 1970-71 for example, over $8 million was spent by private mining concerns in 

northern Saskatchewan. Our program results in the Anglo-Rouyn mine, the Motka Development and the 

Gulf Uranium Mine at Wollaston Lake. Now this boom has ground to a halt. And the answer is another 

incentive program, not Government crews running all over the North. We will risk millions, we will 

drive out private investors and very likely come up with nothing. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

68 

Mr. Speaker, I shall only mention the stupid decision of the Government to go into the timber industry in 

a large way. They have the same old gang back who drove out and kept out people who know how to 

develop a successful timber industry in the 1950’s. And I predict they will do great harm to an industry 

that is just becoming viable. We have a good timber industry in this province. Sawmills, a stud mill, a 

chipboard plant, creosoting plants and a successful pulp mill. This industry is giving good employment 

and paying good wages to thousands of our people and pouring taxes and royalties into our treasury. I 

tell the Government to leave them alone or we will be back the way it was in the CCF days where most 

of our timber burned and rotted while the Government owned Timber Board rules the forest with an iron 

hand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, it is more than a year and a half ago that the NDP came to power in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. They were elected on a platform of promises unprecedented in the history of 

this province. The NDP platform called “A New Deal for People” contained 182 promises. And 

hundreds more were made on the constituency level. 

 

The Premier would like the people of Saskatchewan to believe that all the promises he made in the last 

election are the 12 contained in this card that he waves around in this Assembly whenever we take him 

to task for breaking or ignoring some pledge made before the last election. 

 

Now even his own Members know that this is not the truth. The large 22 page booklet containing almost 

200 promises was in fact brought into this House in early 1971 and presented as the NDP blueprint for 

their first term if they should be elected to office. 

 

Now last Thursday we heard the Government’s plans for the coming year outlined in the Throne Speech. 

And even adding what they say will be accomplished during the next year to what has already been 

done, this NDP Government has broken or ignored ten promises for every one that they have kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: Now, Mr. Speaker, I contemplate their record with mixed emotions. My first reaction is 

one of disgust at a government that would so arrogantly refuse to honor the pledges and promises that 

they made less than two years ago in their grab for power. But coupled with this sense of relief, that the 

people of Saskatchewan might be spared some of the planks in the so-called New Deal for People. It 

will take us years to recover from some of the promises that they have already fulfilled. 

 

Now as the months go by it is becoming more and more evident that this New Deal may be a good deal 

for NDP members but is a very bad deal for the rest of the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, let’s examine 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

69 

the record and see who had the good deal from the NDP and who has suffered under the weight of their 

ever growing power. 

 

How about the ordinary people looking for work in Saskatchewan? Have they fared under the NDP? 

Well, if you are a defeated NDP candidate, provincial or federal, and NDP president, campaign 

manager, a secretary or an outstanding party supporter, the New Deal has indeed been a good deal. The 

number of high salary jobs, appointments to boards and commissions handed out to defeated NDP 

candidates, well known party hacks and hangers-on is without a doubt a record in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, it is a sorry record and when we get the truth from this Government, if we 

ever do, about the number of NDP supporters feeding at the public trough, I am sure it will number close 

to 1,000 or more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give the Government fair warning that our Members will continue to ask questions until 

they get the whole truth about this sorry mess. Unfortunately for thousands of other Saskatchewan 

people looking for work the NDP have no answer. The exodus from our province has not only continued 

but increased and the number of jobless has risen sharply. In December 1972 there were 3,000 more 

people unemployed than in December 1970. The situation is seen in an even more critical light when we 

realize there are fewer people here today than two years ago. 

 

During the seven years of Liberal government the population of the province fell from 943,000 to about 

926,000, a drop of approximately 17,000 people. In the last provincial election the NDP jumped on these 

figures and waved them around Saskatchewan promising to do better. They had program after program 

that would stop people from leaving the province. Mr. Speaker, I suggest we examine the figures since 

June 1971 and see where we stand today. Statistics Canada estimated Saskatchewan’s population at 

915,000 as of December 31, 1972. This is a drop of 11,000 in 18 months. 11,000 less people, 3,000 

more unemployed under the NDP. This, after one and a half years by the Government who promised to 

end unemployment and reverse the flow of people from Saskatchewan. 

 

Now one of the NDP plans, the New Deal for People, is worth recalling in regard to unemployment. On 

page six of their platform booklet, the NDP accused our Liberal government of selling out to American 

potash companies. Here is what they said and I quote: 

 

Regina Liberals make deals with United States potash interests whereby American mines run at full 

capacity while Saskatchewan American owned mines lay off one-third of their workers. 

 

This NDP document then made the following brave promise and again I quote: 

 

An NDP government will end this potash cartel and restore employment. 

 

In fact, a change in the potash pro-rationing brought in 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

70 

by the NDP Government recently forced one of the two Canadian controlled potash mines to lay off 120 

Saskatchewan workers. 

 

I’m sure that the men and women in Saskatchewan looking for work received, Mr. Speaker, with 

bitterness the news that the NDP Government had a surplus last year of $10 million of which $7 million 

was money voted for public works and unspent. 

 

The Government’s excuse for failing to put this money to work to provide jobs for our people was that 

they found no plans when they assumed office. They claimed it was part of a phony Liberal budget. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the only thing phony about the whole mess was the NDP excuse for their failure to 

use the money and produce the jobs. 

 

They had nine months to plan and get projects under way. We have dozens of architects and engineers 

looking for jobs and thousands of idle tradesmen ready and anxious to go to work. 

 

The Waffflers claimed that Mr. Blakeney is a bureaucrat’s dream of a premier and nothing proves it 

more clearly than his failures to take quick and practical action to find jobs for the unemployed. 

 

The Premier’s answer to almost every problem is to set up a committee, commission, a study, or hire 

some new advisor, anything to stall for time to avoid facing issues. This may be smart politics but in this 

case it was a cruel hoax on our people who are looking for a pay cheque. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the field of health the New Deal looked good at first. An end to utilization fees and no 

premiums for Medicare and Hospitalization for senior citizens. But lately we are seeing the other side of 

the coin. Our hospitals have been subjected to budget slashing and a cut back in allowable beds by the 

Government, so severe that it is affecting not only the right of sick people to hospital care but the quality 

of care itself. We will be bringing this extremely serious situation to the public’s attention as soon as 

possible in this Session. 

 

What about welfare? Always a serious problem. But under the NDP it has become a disgrace. It will be 

revealed in this Session that the cost of welfare in Saskatchewan is rising at a rate that is almost out of 

control. Welfare is being handed out in too many cases with little or no investigation. The NDP have 

begun a costly publicity program actually encouraging people to seek welfare. By comparison the 

handling of the unemployment insurance mess in Ottawa was a model of responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how many people in Saskatchewan realize that under the NDP 

Government individuals as young as 16, 17 and 18 are given money so they can walk out on their 

parents and live by themselves. These young people are living by themselves in apartments and rooming 

houses all over the province with little or no parental supervision or control. If parents abuse children, 

the Government should step in and if necessary place them in foster homes. This we agree with. But to 

encourage children who don’t like normal discipline at home 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

71 

to walk out and live practically unsupervised at Government expense is a disgrace and it should be 

stopped. 

 

If this is the New Deal for people then I say it is a bad deal and the sooner we are done with it the better. 

 

Then we have a New Deal for our farmers instead of the standard NDP program for agriculture which is 

usually to whine to Ottawa and do nothing themselves. We have the Land Bank or “how to con the 

farmer out of his own land with his own tax money”. Along with this is a compulsory hog marketing 

board without a democratic vote to the hog producers. 

 

Jack Messer, the largest small farmer in the province is going to save our farmers, Mr. Speaker, whether 

they like it or not. 

 

In the coming weeks our agriculture critics will outline in more detail the very serious failures of the 

NDP agriculture plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must not forget the New Deal for resource development. The NDP call it conservation, 

everyone else calls it stagnation. They have succeeded in grinding to a halt new resource development in 

Saskatchewan by freezing out private investment. The result has been more unemployment, more people 

leaving Saskatchewan and the great booming optimism we saw in northern Saskatchewan two years ago 

has been replaced by gloom and depression. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Another group who are on the receiving end of the NDP New Deal have been our 

motorists. The Liberals launched the greatest highway building program in the history of Saskatchewan. 

We spend hundreds of millions on our highways to help farmers, industry, tourists and above all the 

motorists. Another major reason for our great highway program was safety. Good highways are certainly 

safe highways. The NDP hated our program, first because it was popular. They attacked it day in and 

day out. They claimed we were wasting money, helping our friends the contractors and starving other 

more worthy projects. These claims were and are as false as most other propaganda put out by the NDP. 

Mr. Speaker, they poured out this unmitigated tripe for so long that when they came to power the 

Premier had no choice but to make a drastic change in the highway program. The appointment of Eiling 

Kramer as the first Minister of this bad roads policy was certainly fitting. 

 

Fresh from a disastrous sojourn as Minister of Natural Resources I am sure he will live up to the 

Premier’s expectations. He has already begun by firing the deputy minister, Lloyd Holmes, a man 

known all across the nation for both his integrity and ability. It will be a sad day for Saskatchewan if this 

Government allows one of the finest highway systems in the world to deteriorate for quick political gain, 

as it seems to be doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, the Department 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

72 

of Northern Saskatchewan was introduced with great fanfare one year ago. This was gong to bring the 

New Deal for people in the North and the native people would move into an age of prosperity and 

self-determination. It only took the NDP about two months to shatter this dream. Their first action 

proved there was no New Deal for our northern people, it was in fact a return to the old nightmare that 

began in the 1950s and ended in 1964. 

 

Under the former CCF government northern Saskatchewan was a virtual dictatorship run by the 

Department of Natural Resources. The DNR told the Indians where, and when and how they could fish, 

trap or prospect. If the Indians dared to fish in the wrong lake or sell them to the wrong buyer the DNR 

seized their nets and dragged them into court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is why the Liberal party won those northern constituencies election after election even 

during the long years of CCF rule. The native people had no use for the heavy handed bosses of the old 

DNR. And who were some of those bosses? Well, there was a fellow called Bowerman, another called 

Churchman, another called Towill and of course the big boss himself, Eiling Kramer. 

 

So Mr. Blakeney became the Premier and he unfolded his New Deal for northern Saskatchewan. Whom 

did he send up North? None other then Kramer, Bowerman, Churchman and Towill. Same old gang only 

this time the Premier armed them with even more power than they ever had before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — So this gang became virtually dictators in the North again. Oh! They had a hand-picked 

group of people whom they are supposed to consult with, most of them from the South and almost all of 

them are NDP supporters. No wonder the native people voted against the NDP Government in the 

Athabasca by-election. No wonder the Indian people of Black Lake walked out en masse when the 

Premier was addressing them. In that community the NDP received only two votes, neither one of them 

native people, but 104 were cast against them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I was there, I watched them, I talked to them. That’s the group of people who said, 

“Oh, the Premier might fool the rabbits and the white people but he will never fool us Indians again.” 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, probably the ugliest incident of the whole by-election was the way the NDP 

treated Ray Jones, the Indian who dared to try for the NDP nomination and who ran as an independent 

after being booted out of the party. Ray Jones committed two sins as far as the NDP were concerned. 

First, he was an Indian and second, he almost took the party nomination away from the four or five 

white men running against him. The NDP called off that nomination, held a kangaroo court and expelled 

Ray Jones from the party. 

 

Using every yardstick by which real progress can be measured, the North has regressed since the NDP 

came to power. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

73 

Fishing is in a mess, prospecting and mining have almost stopped, even tourist development there has 

been frozen by this Government. Welfare is up, the number of government employees increases almost 

daily. There is now about one civil servant for every nine residents in that part of the province. 

Unemployment is higher than two years ago and the population is down. The only hope for a return to 

real development in northern Saskatchewan is a complete reversal of government policy. 

 

I call on Premier Blakeney to re-examine the whole concept of the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan and change it was quickly as possible. 

 

So far, Mr. Speaker, my remarks have centered upon the failures of the Government in the last year. 

Before moving on to what the Members on this side of the House propose to do about these serious 

failures, I should like to speak on two other topics of vital concern to Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The first is the industrial policy of the NDP and the second centres around individual rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the strongest indictments that can be brought against this Government’s 

performance in the last year and one-half is to be found in its own publication, the Year End Review 

1972, by the Saskatchewan Department of Industry. In this pathetically small document, it contains only 

three pages of print, listed are all of the so-called great industrial business developments which took 

place in this province in 1972. It lists 48 expansions and new developments that have come into the 

province in this past year. The largest for $10 million and the smallest for $30,000. At first glance one 

might assume that the Department of Industry had suddenly taken on new life but I propose that we take 

a look at these industries and determine who is really responsible for the development. I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that we review these industrial concerns and find out just how many of them are on this list 

because of actions by the NDP. 

 

Well, the first entry into the Government’s list of industrial expansion is the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

It announced that an expansion of their rapeseed processing plant has been completed in Saskatoon at a 

cost of $3 million. Now for the information of those Members present here today, I should like to point 

out that expansion was announced in 1970 by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and neither Premier 

Blakeney nor his Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) can claim the slightest bit of credit for this 

expansion. 

 

Next we have the Prairie Rose Custom Feeds of Lanigan. We are told in this government publication 

that the firm reconstructed their feed mill and due to reconstruction they now have storage capacity for 

50,000 bushels of grain and their market now covers a 25-mile radius and that their mill employs three 

people. However it is interesting to note that the reconstruction was necessitated by a fire at the feed mill 

and had nothing whatsoever to do with growing confidence in this Government or in this province. It is 

also noteworthy that the increase in storage capacity is not more than five per cent. Their marketing area 

has not been increased, there has been no increase in the number of people employed, it’s still three. 

 

A third example, Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon, 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

74 

which has tripled the size of its packing facilities at a cost of $4.5 million. This expansion began over 

three years ago under the Liberal administration and the NDP sitting opposite had absolutely nothing to 

do with it. 

 

Then there is the Lake Athabasca Native Fisheries Co-operative. This is a fish processing plant that 

employs 40 Indian and Metis people. The project is funded by the federal government. They have 

received $300,000 and will soon be receiving another $200,000 from the federal government. Mr. 

Speaker, you can study this piece of NDP propaganda from cover to cover and you will find not one 

word of credit given to the federal government. 

 

We are also told that Central Canadian Distilleries of Weyburn have built a maturing warehouse at a 

cost of $680,000. For the information of this House, Central Canadian Distillers started operation in 

March 1971 with a substantial grant from the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation under 

the Liberal government and at that time plans were already being made for this warehouse. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are just a few examples. Our critic for the Department of Industry will go 

through this list of industries to give an indication of how false the NDP claims are, that they have 

nothing to do with 90 per cent of them. I should like to point out that out of 48 industries listed in the 

Industry Department’s Review less than 10 of them are actually new developments for Saskatchewan. 

Even out of this small number the Government sitting opposite can take no credit for their appearance 

on the industrial scene of this province. On the contrary, the NDP Government under Premier Blakeney 

has declared a war on business, the result being a virtual standstill in industrial growth while 

unemployment creeps higher and higher and our population drops lower and lower. 

 

This war on business had taken place on two fronts. Firstly, legislation. The NDP passed the Succession 

Duty and Gift Tax Acts. These Acts will provide only a negligible amount of revenue to the province 

and will in no way redistribute a significant amount of wealth. It serves only to discourage family firms 

from moving into or staying in our province. The Province of Prince Edward Island has just announced 

its intention to abolish succession duties. 

 

Secondly, we have the Government Consumer Affairs Bill, also in part an attack on business. This Bill 

gives the Cabinet the power to close down any business in Saskatchewan for five days without 

consultation or without any safeguard for the business concerned. And even more important, it does not 

provide for any compensation for loss of sales or damage of a firm’s reputation if the closure is 

unwarranted. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Cowley) has also been responsible for a 17.6 per cent increase in personal 

income tax and a one point increase in the corporation tax, neither of which will induce business to 

come to our province. In fact, the business community in our province has without a doubt been the 

recipient of the worst part of the New Deal during the last 18 months. 

 

The Premier has also continued the war on business by his own attitude and the attitude of his Cabinet 

towards business 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

75 

and industry. We are beginning to get a clear indication of what the policy of this Government towards 

investment really is. They have done nothing to encourage growth in the private sector of the economy 

and they now seem headed on a course of socialism that could cost the taxpayers millions of dollars with 

no guarantee that there will be any returns in jobs or in revenue. There is little wonder that 

Saskatchewan is once again being written off by most investors throughout the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past summer we had the opportunity to witness events in Saskatchewan that have been 

the cause of concern of all responsible people. Recently the Kraft Corporation of Canada announced its 

intention to build a $15 million vegetable processing plan somewhere in Canada. This processing plant 

will use rapeseed, rapeseed is grown primarily in the Province of Saskatchewan. One might wonder why 

the plant was not planned for this province where the rapeseed is grown. However, Mr. Speaker, if we 

remember that Premier Blakeney has been driving around in a car that carried a “Boycott Kraft” sticker 

and if we remember that the NDP caucus of this Legislature passed a resolution supporting the National 

Farmers’ Union boycott of Kraft, it is not hard to understand why the Kraft Company has pointedly 

ignored Saskatchewan as a possible location for this important plant. Why indeed should they come into 

a province where the Government is openly and actively hostile to them? 

 

Now all of this would have been tolerable had the cause to boycott Kraft been justifiable. Since the 

boycott began we have seen and heard practically every responsible organization that is in any way 

connected with the dairy industry of Canada come out against the Kraft boycott and denounce it is 

irresponsible and term it a cheap trick to gain national attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quote from a news release by the National Dairy Council of Canada issued in June of 

1972: 

 

The President of the National Dairy Council of Canada, Mr. John R. Jackson, stated today that recent 

statements of the National Farmers’ Union in soliciting the support of consumers in a boycott of Kraft 

foods have not only been misleading but have been outright lies. 

 

Here is a quote from a letter in the Toronto Globe and Mail of August 30, 1971, by David G. 

MacFarlane of the Department of Economics at McGill University in Montreal: 

 

The irresponsibility of some farm organization leaders is revealed in the NFU boycott. I have no brief 

to make for Kraft Foods but I can think of few things more detrimental for farmers’ interests than to 

attack this company which has nothing to do in establishing milk prices. The point in this letter is to 

pay tribute to the NFU for its expertise in confusing farm policy issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is another quote. It comes from a statement made by the Chairman of the Ontario 

Milk Marketing Board, Mr. George McLaughlin. The Ontario Milk Marketing Board represents 20,000 

milk producers in that province, and I quote: 

 

This NFU group has been consistently trying to mislead not only certain small segments of dairy 

farmers but also the general public and their elected Members of Parliament. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

76 

Now these are just three of the outright condemnations that have been made by responsible farm 

groups and responsible individuals including the Minister of Agriculture for the Province of Ontario. 

Yet Premier Blakeney and his Government have hopped onto this empty bandwagon and the result has 

been the possible loss of a potential and valuable industry to this province. Is there any wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, that when the Premier takes this type of irresponsible action, that investment community 

across Canada looks on him, his Government and, unfortunately, this province as a bad joke? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to appear to be unjust to Premier Blakeney and his Government. I 

think that it is only fair that we recall to the members sitting here today how very active the 

Government was in attempting to establish at least one industry in this province. I refer, of course, to 

the Roumanian tractor assembly plant. On December 8, 1971, a headline in the Regina Leader-Post 

proclaimed for all Saskatchewan to see – “They’re Coming, They’re Coming”. I thought it was the 

Russians or the British but it was the Roumanians. “They’re Coming, They’re Coming” – December 

1971, this was the first of a seemingly endless series of announcements regarding the NDP 

Government’s latest attempt at attracting this industry to the province. 

 

Despite this auspicious beginning, nothing much seemed to happen other than weekly and at times 

daily speculations in this Press and over the air as to where and when the Roumanians would build 

their tractor assembly plant. As early as December 15, 1971, the Roumanians themselves stated and 

this is worth remembering: 

 

The final decision will be based on hard economic factors and the labor and facilities available. 

 

They declared a definite preference for a Saskatoon location. In the Star-Phoenix of December 23, 1971, 

we read “Tractor Plant May Open In City In Year’s Time”. S.G. Fawcett who at that time was tine 

Industrial Relations Officer for the City of Saskatoon said: 

 

The Roumanians are being very realistic in a target date. They are allowing an extra month for 

construction of the plant, an extra month for training personnel and an extra period of time for the 

installation of equipment. 

 

They even allowed a two month period for a provincial government market survey. 

 

Now January 1973 has come and almost gone and not only has the Roumanian tractor assembly plant 

not opened its doors for business, not hired or trained any of the 100 to 1,500 Saskatchewan people it 

was reputedly going to employ, but there has not been one single brick laid nor one single nail driven 

towards the construction of this plant. In fact, no final agreement has been signed. 

 

Much of the blame for this delay is directly due to the political manoeuvering of Mr. Blakeney and his 

Government. The Roumanian Government first conducted their own feasibility study of major centres in 

the province for a plant site. They surveyed Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Yorkton and Kindersley and they 

decided that Saskatoon was the best location. Hoping for cheap political 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

77 

gain, Mr. Blakeney then began touting Moose Jaw as the preferred site for the tractor assembly plant. He 

knew in December of 1971 that the Roumanians had made the decision in favor of Saskatoon. He knew 

or he should have known that they were unlikely to change their minds and build in Moose Jaw but he 

wanted to show the citizens of Moose Jaw how truly concerned he was with their economic difficulties. 

He needlessly held up work on the factory and raised false hopes for the citizens of Moose Jaw. Because 

of Mr. Blakeney’s phony protestations the City Council of Moose Jaw was encouraged to send a 

five-man delegation on a fruitless mission to Roumania. This was in February and negotiations between 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Roumania regarding the location of the tractor 

plant dragged on through March when we read the following headlines in the Leader-Post, March 18, 

1972 – “Moose Jaw Extends Roumanian Tour, Plant Statement Monday”. In April there were more talks 

but still no action. Here’s another headline in the Leader-Post, April 6, 1972 – “Saskatoon Complains To 

Government”. Another headline – “Moose Jaw Favored”. This was a statement by the Minister of 

Industry (Mr. Thorson) that the Government of Saskatchewan would prefer Moose Jaw but again that 

‘the final decision should be based primarily on hard economic facts’. Exactly what Saskatoon’s 

Industrial Officer and the Roumanians had said four or six months earlier. 

 

Another headline – “Government Said At Fault If Tractor Plant Lost”. Alberta and Manitoba are now 

being rumored as alternate sites. In the Leader-Post and Star-Phoenix of April 13, 14 and 15 there were 

headlines reading as follows: “Factory Location Unknown”; another headline – “Where Oh Where?”; 

and another – “Nobody Really Knows”. Then on April 17 the Premier got into the act again and we read 

this unbelievable statement – “Blakeney Raps Tractor Dispute”. Here, this self-righteous Premier asking 

one and all to behave responsibly when in the past three months he has been heaping fuel on the 

controversy. The situation, understandably, did not resolve itself even in May. 

 

Here is another headline – “Tractor Plant Problems” reads the headline in the Leader-Post on May 10 

and I quote: 

 

A feasibility study currently being conducted regarding the proposed Roumanian tractor plant in 

Saskatchewan has shown up some little problems in regard to marketing but negotiations are 

continuing, Premier Blakeney said Wednesday. 

 

Communications between the Governments of Saskatchewan and Roumania seemed to have worsened 

in June. “Roumanians Expected By June 15” – the Leader-Post cried June 6, 1972. Ten days later by 

June 26 the Leader-Post had another headline – “Roumanians Expected To Arrive Next Month”. In July 

there was a flurry of speculation regarding the elusive Roumanian delegation. “Roumanians Are Still 

Coming . . . But When Still Question” – said the Moose Jaw Times Herald of July 4, 1972. The 

Leader-Post of July 11 said – “Two Roumanians, Other Expected Later”. But then we get to the July 14 

Leader-Post three days later – “No Sign of Roumanians Yet”. By July 19 the Roumanians finally arrived 

but the headlines read in the Leader-Post – “Tractor Plan Still Up In Air”. 

 

As last on July 25, 1972, after eight long months of negotiations it was announced that the tractor 

assembly plant was to be built. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

78 

Mr. Blakeney: — By whom? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh well, we’ll get to that. You’ve just stirred up enough troubles so just keep quiet for 

a little while, you’ll get your chance. 

 

The Roumanians had made their decision in December of 1971 and they spent the next eight months 

pleading with the Government of Saskatchewan to allow them to start work. The day after the official 

announcement the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix ran the following headline – “1,500 Jobs? Roumanian Blasts 

Provincial Government”. That was one Roumanian that shouldn’t have showed up as far as Blakeney is 

concerned, I think. The Roumanian who made that statement was Ted Puskas, President of Western 

Importers Ltd. of Alberta, the Canadian firm which is representing the Roumanian interests. He was 

highly critical of the Saskatchewan Government and the way in which the site for the tractor plant was 

chosen. I am quoting what he said: 

 

We had some tough talks with the Provincial Government but I could not understand the attitude of 

the Premier. 

 

He is not alone in that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Puskas said that Saskatoon was always the choice location as 

far as the Roumanians were concerned. Six months have passed since that time that Mr. Blakeney made 

his announcement and still no work has been started on the tractor plant. The tractor company has to 

date been unable to obtain a Department of Regional Economic Expansion grant because it and the 

Provincial Government refused to provide the Federal Department of Regional Economic Expansion 

with the necessary information as to how the plant is to operate and how it in tends to market its tractors. 

You haven’t given the information. Of course, it’s rubbish, it is rubbish and the nonsense you have 

talked about is the prime example of the rubbish. If you would give them that information, I know you 

haven’t given them that information, you might get the DREE grant. This is the same NDP Government 

which only four months ago was parading up and down the province condemning the Liberal Federal 

Government for giving grants and I quote them, “to corporate welfare bums”. Especially to old 

corporate welfare bums. Now what is he trying to do? Well, according to them it is trying to rip off the 

Canadian taxpayer to the tune of $1 million to subsidize a company controlled by the Government of 

Roumania. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this tractor plant ever does begin operation and if tractors ever do roll off its production 

line, it will undoubtedly be true that the NDP Government has made more mileage in the media out of 

the Roumanian tractor plant than any farmer is ever likely to get out of one of their tractors. The whole 

episode would be a dad joke if we didn’t need the industry and the jobs so badly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have touched on some of the more glaring examples of the Government’s failure to live 

up to the platform on which they were elected. I have tried to show how unfairly their so-called New 

Deal is working. It is a good deal for NDP insiders but it is a bad deal for most of the people in 

Saskatchewan. But the most serious failure has been the clear cut policy for job producing development 

of our resources, both human and material. Most of these could be called sins of 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

79 

of omission, things they have failed to do, issues they have refused to face, problems they have swept 

under the rug, of study groups or on-going committees. 

 

I should like to deal for a few minutes with what we in the Liberal Party are convinced is by far the most 

serious situation created by the Blakeney Government in this province. Mr. Speaker, I am referring to 

the steady erosion of individual rights in Saskatchewan that has taken place these last 18 months under 

the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The takeover of individual rights and freedoms by the Government is the hallmark of 

all socialist administration. The basic philosophy of socialism calls for the government to plan and 

regulate the means of production and distribution of the goods and services we use in our everyday life. 

They call it the planned economy and it sounds reasonable and worthwhile. Mr. Speaker, let no one be 

in doubt there is a vast difference between setting certain economic goals and then laying reasonable 

plans to achieve them and the socialist idea of a master plan covering all or almost all of our activities. 

 

These super plans must be their very nature demand a great degree of control over the individual. The 

government under socialism becomes the be-all and the end-all and it gradually ceases to be our servant 

and eventually becomes our master. The people say it can’t happen here. No one can convince me that 

Premier Blakeney or Roy Romanow or Jack Messer or all those nice young NDP school teachers or 

preachers are planning some evil design to take away our freedom and independence. I am convinced 

that the NDP like most other political parties is sincere and well intentioned. The NDP want to improve 

the lot of our people and in many areas they have succeeded. It is not their intentions we quarrel with, it 

is not their goals that concern us, it is the method they use and the road they are taking us down to 

achieve those goals we don’t believe in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We will fight against this as long as we exist as a political party. We in the Liberal 

Party believe in the individual, this means we will protect his rights, fight for his rights to determine his 

own destiny with government help if necessary but with as little government interference as is possible. 

We are convinced these rights are being lost to individuals under the NDP’s headlong rush to plan our 

lives and to save us from all kinds of evils, both real and imaginary. 

 

Let me list some concrete examples of what is happening to our independence under the NDP 

Government. The Land Bank, it is a good idea, but for all practical purposes the right of the individual to 

own the land he works is being denied. I have mentioned the Department of Consumer Affairs, The 

Hospital Standards Act which was amended last year taking away many of the basic rights from those 

who now own and operate our hospitals. The Trade Union Act was amended by the NDP and while 

some of the changes are valid, one clause was inserted that takes away their right to free speech from 

individual union members. The amendment to The Mineral Resources Act gives the NDP Government 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

80 

almost unlimited power to take over and operate all or any part of the mineral industry. The Act setting 

up the Department of Northern Saskatchewan makes government officials absolute masters in northern 

Saskatchewan. The rights of our northern citizens are now severely limited. Mr. Speaker, The Family 

Farm Protection Act was another interference with basic rights in our province. The NDP Foreign 

Ownership of Land Act was the most blatant attempt of all to take away the democratic right to own and 

dispose of land with undue government interference. I urge the people of Saskatchewan to take a hard 

independent look at what is happening to our province and our rights as individuals. 

 

The NDP is interfering with our family relations and our right to own land, with our right to do business 

and even with our freedom of speech. In some areas they have given themselves the power actually say 

whether an individual can make a living or not. This power grab must stop and we in the Liberal 

Opposition are going to propose a series of measures designed to give the Government an opportunity to 

back-off from this power trip they are on and restore basic rights and freedom to our people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — My colleagues will present a number of amendments to various bills which will take 

out the unnecessary government power and restore the rights of the individuals. Among other steps we 

will be proposing, the Liberal MLAs will introduce amendments to the following Acts: The Land Bank 

Act, The Consumer Affairs Act, The Mineral Taxation Act, The Hospital Standards Act, The Trade 

Union Act, The Department of Northern Saskatchewan Act, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission Act, and The Motor Dealers’ Act. The Motor Dealers’ Act was put on the statute books 

during our term of office, I never agreed with the powers in that Act that were given to a civil servant 

and so we will present an amendment to restrict these powers. In addition, Mr. Speaker, our Members 

will bring before this Assembly other bills and resolutions designed to focus the Government’s attention 

on problems that are facing the people of our province. 

 

We will also propose measures designed to improve the economy of the province and to assist the 

Government in overcoming their failure to attract job producing business and industry. These proposals 

are in line with our pledge, not only to criticize the Government when we think they are wrong, but also 

to put forward positive alternatives for their consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another area in which I believe our Provincial Government could, if they have the 

best interests of our people at heart, show more co-operation and that is in the field of federal-provincial 

relations. The Federal Government is prepared to take action to help us solve some of our more serious 

problems. The Prime Minister indicated this on his visit to Regina, it was emphasized in the federal 

Throne Speech and I have concrete evidence of it on my recent visit to Ottawa. I recognize that there are 

many things that divide the New Democratic Party and the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, we disagree on 

most basic issues and our philosophic differences go very deep and they are very real. However, we do 

have some things in common and we do agree on the serious problems that face our people even if we 

can’t see eye to eye on the solutions. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

81 

For example, we all know Saskatchewan suffers from discriminatory freight rates. Few Saskatchewan 

people would quarrel with the statement that tariffs which generally help Eastern Canada have hurt our 

farms and increased our cost of living. Mr. Speaker, we all know that one of the major reasons for 

western discontent as we move through the 1970s is the fact that too many of our decisions, the 

decisions that guide our lives, that guide prairie destiny are made in Toronto, in Montreal and in Ottawa. 

We all know that we have little or no control over our financial problems because the major financial 

institutions are headquartered in the East and they are too often unaware or uninterested in our plight. I 

believe there is some common ground on which we can agree on our fight for a fair deal for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Members will introduce resolutions which I hope Members opposite will support, 

calling on the Federal Government to put an end to the most glaring inequities facing the West. For 

example, I would point to a resolution that the Hon. Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) has placed 

before the House urging the Federal Government to immediately construct a rail line to connect the 

CNR and the CPR main line to the British Columbia at Clinton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We might even call it the “Romanow Short Railroad”. 

 

This will guarantee, as you know, the movement of tremendous quantities of western grain when the 

main lines are plugged with snow and be a great help to our farmers. 

 

This resolution is typical of others we will be introducing and I am sure will receive the support of all 

Members of this Assembly. This lack of control over our own destiny has hurt our farmers, our workers 

and our businessmen and impeded much needed development in this province. We are suggesting, Mr. 

Speaker, rather than grandstand plays indulged in by the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) that we in 

fact join our forces and we are prepared to do that. 

 

As a result of our recent convention in Regina, the Liberal Party will hold a policy convention in 

Vancouver early this spring. I will be at that meeting with a large delegation from Saskatchewan and I 

assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will be fighting for the real needs of our 

province regardless of political consideration. I urge the Premier and his happy little band of NDP to do 

the same thing when you go to the meeting of the federal and western provincial governments. It will be 

a great opportunity to achieve some positive gains for the West in general and for Saskatchewan in 

particular. I hope partisan politics will not be allowed to destroy the chance being offered to us by the 

Prime Minister and the Federal Government to right some of the injustices we have faced since 

Confederation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning of my speech that the NDP has broken 10 promises for every one 

they have kept. I have touched on just a few of their more outstanding failures. I have pointed out the 

serious drift into more and more government control that is taking place under the NDP. I only scratched 

the surface of the Government’s arrogant use of public funds to 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

82 

reward their party hacks. Our Liberal Members will bring more evidence to light in the weeks ahead to 

prove the bad record of the Blakeney administration. In view of what I have put on the record and what 

will be brought up in this and other debates, I cannot support the motion, in fact, my colleague from 

Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) will introduce a motion of non-confidence in this Government which I will 

support along with all fair-minded Members of this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.C. McIsaac: (Wilkie) — Mr. Speaker, at the outset of this year’s Throne Speech Debate I want to 

congratulate the three new additions to the Cabinet opposite. I want also to congratulate the Mover and 

the Seconder for the excellent job they did yesterday in trying to make a poor effort sound good. I shall 

have more to say on remarks of both of them later. 

 

I want to congratulate as well the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — . . . for his successful re-election last September and we are happy to have him back in 

this House. I am sure the people of the province are happy to see him back in this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, the content generally of last Thursday’s Speech from the Throne is a 

clear indication once again – not that we need another – of where the NDP Government intends to leave 

the province. Last year we saw them launch an experiment in public ownership of farm land, this year it 

is oil and gas exploration plus timber development, plus mining exploration and other activity in 

northern Saskatchewan. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, it is also clear that they are still unsure how they 

are going to get there in this venture to socialize every aspect of our resources. They are not obviously 

too concerned about what is going to happen to the province, its people and its other natural resources as 

they launch these warmed up socialistic experiments. So far we have no evidence that they are going to 

have any new or innovative ideas to carry out these objectives. 

 

I rode down to Regina on the opening day of this Legislature with the former Member for Prince Albert 

East, Mr. Berezowsky, and he was telling me of an opportunity they turned down last fall. It did seem to 

me like a reasonable venture if indeed they want to get into public ownership of mining and training of 

mining personnel. As I understand it they have turned down that opportunity so I am anxiously awaiting 

as this debate wears on and this Legislature continues to deal with all these items to see the details of 

some of the various plans they are going to put forward. 

 

I mentioned that the Mover and the Seconder did what I thought was a commendable job yesterday. 

They didn’t really eulogize the government blueprint for socializing timber or oil 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

83 

and gas, they left that alone and that was probably the smart thing to do. The Member for Nutana South 

(Mr. Rolfes) spoke very glowingly of his Government’s great sensitivity to the wishes of the people. He 

said, and I believe this is roughly what he said, we are prepared to listen, prepared to change our mind, 

prepared to go out and seek the views of any and all people from all walks of life. 

 

Oddly enough, Mr. Speaker, I personally and other Members on this side have heard dozens of 

complaints about how difficult it is to get to see the NDP Cabinet Ministers because of the phalanx of 

executive assistants one must wade through first. Interestingly enough, just before the House opened 

today, we had a copy of the Carillon, the local university Regina Campus Press, placed on our desks and 

I will quote from an editorial in that. They are referring to discussions with Regina Members over 

possible changes in the university structure in Regina. They point out Mr. Blakeney was unavailable for 

comment. 

 

He is so well insulated by secretaries and assistants that it is virtually impossible to contact him. 

 

They go on to point out later on that they were always able to contact the former Premier, Ross 

Thatcher, any time they wanted to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I wonder about their listening ability with respect to denying the rank and file hog 

producer in the province a vote on the proposed Hog Marketing Commission. Is this what the Member 

for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) thinks is listening to the voice of the people. Mr. Speaker, such a 

commission may well be a good move but nobody knows yet what the plan specifically proposes and if 

the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) does he most certainly hasn’t told very many people what are 

the details of this plan up in our area. I am sure the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) can vouch for 

this, that the number of people is fairly large in hog production. There are others who are buying and 

handling hogs and none of them seem to know where they are going to fit into the new structure. I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister is creating undue concern and apprehension in the minds of a lot 

of people by his high-handed approach to setting up this compulsory marketing system. I am 

disappointed particularly in the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) because I thought he would have 

learned his lesson last year by his mishandling of the foreign ownership legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Oddly enough that is a committee that we don’t hear too much about of late. You may 

recall, Mr. Speaker, that this was one committee that sort of changed course in the middle of stream last 

summer. Now we are not sure whether there is a report available, whether there is an interim report 

being prepared. I am sure we’ll learn sooner or later but really that committee has apparently been trying 

to die as far as the Government is concerned. 

 

The Member for Nutana South yesterday also tried to defend the politicking of his new Minister of 

Welfare (Mr. Taylor), the 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

84 

new Minister who is holding a series of public informational meetings across Saskatchewan to promote, 

I suggest, Sir, not the greater welfare of the people but the greater welfare of the NDP. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Misuse of public funds. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Member for Nutana (Mr. Rolfes) who is back in his seat, 

really supports the kind of advertising carried out by the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer). I am sure 

he has seen this little picture of my good Member along with a telephone number to check on road 

conditions. Now I’m not sure what in the world the Minister’s picture is there for or how using tax 

dollars to put his picture there helps provide information on roads. My only complaint is, I wish he 

would use a better picture of himself. He has a better hat than that old straw hat, I know he has, and I 

should be glad to lend him my stetson if he so wants to keep his picture in the public eye. 

 

I shall be interested, Mr. Speaker, in the new legislation that is projected in the Throne Speech to control 

election expenses. It will be revealing indeed. But how will this new law control the abuses of political 

advertising being conducted by this Government under the guise of public information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Last fall during September and October there was a very intensive advertising 

campaign telling taxpayers to file a claim for their Property Improvement Grant. Mr. Speaker, just a note 

of information here – that’s the NDP name for the Liberal Home-Owner Grant program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — But there were advertisements placed in every weekly and daily newspaper and others 

in this province during September and October. More advertisements than we have seen in any other of 

the ten months combined. Now you might think, Sir, was it because the taxpayers had to file their 

applications by the end of October? No, it wasn’t because the date for the closing of applications is 

February 15, about two weeks away and I haven’t seen any ads recently in local papers of note. But 

there was another event on October 30 and that was a federal election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Shame, shame! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Why this big program during September and October if for no other reason than to 

help their federal counterparts in that election? Any new legislation to control election and campaign 

expenses, Mr. Speaker, will most certainly have to control this type of blatant abuse of spending dollars 

to support purely partisan political advertising. I could cite more examples, Mr. Speaker, and as this 

Session progresses the Opposition Members will be further illustrating that the NDP aren’t as virginal in 

this regard as they would try to make out. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

85 

The Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) yesterday got carried away a bit as he often times does in 

reciting a list of accomplishments of his Government. Mind you, most of them were still in the 

development stages. For the record of this House, Mr. Speaker, I want to correct him on one statement. 

School grant legislation that removed the previous inequities against separate school systems in this 

province was introduced and was law not by the present Government but by the former Liberal 

Government. I just want to correct the mis-statement to the House yesterday made by the Member for 

Nutana South in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross), a young Member, a new Member, did 

a very credible job. I hope and I know he doesn’t believe all of those things that he said there yesterday. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did he write it? 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Well, I’m not sure. I’m sure he did write it. He spoke of one issue that has come up 

again during the course of the campaign. He mentioned the question of rail line abandonment in the 

province and what terrible plans the Commission has or the railroads have for pulling up railroads all 

across this province. And the fact that these plans are not proceeding, Mr. Speaker, is because of the 

Liberal Party when we were the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — That’s the reason those plans are not proceeding. The only railroad that was pulled up 

in Saskatchewan as my leader, the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) pointed out yesterday, 

was when the NDP were in power here in this province. The total track mileage, as a matter of fact, was 

increased under the Liberal Government here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — The reason for that was the development of a number of industries. I am sure that we 

are not, on the evidence so far going to see the same kind of extension of track mileage under the NDP. 

 

I don’t blame the Member for Gravelbourg for his sort of an ostrich-like approach to this question of rail 

rationalization because his senior party colleagues from the Premier on down have set the example in 

this regard. The Premier himself made some utterances on rail abandonment during the course of the 

federal election. I am not sure what prompted those remarks at that time. Perhaps there are things 

happening that he knows about that were not obvious publicly to the rest of us. But I think this, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to suggest to all Members, both the Liberals and certainly to the Members on the 

Government opposite, that they sit down and read the new transportation legislation, the various 

procedures that are there, the various factors that must be taken into account before any railroad can 

even consider any line for abandonment. Obviously, they don’t know that those procedures are. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

86 

I suggest also, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP approach to rail rationalization in rural Saskatchewan is a real 

example of how they have let rural communities fade away. They cry and wail about rural life and yet 

refuse to recognize, and there is nothing wrong with recognizing it, that there are and have been 

changing patterns of rural life, of farming and living in this province. So that the type and size of 

community that is needed to serve rural people today, the type and the size of community that people 

will indeed live in and support in rural Saskatchewan is different than what it was 50 years ago or 20 

years ago. And if this Government would accept that fact then some progress could be made in taking a 

real look at rural problems in Saskatchewan to date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Rail rationalization and this entire grain-handling system are two very basic issues that 

do require good, sincere and solid discussion. Until they do, I am sure they will continue, the NDP 

Government opposite, at their own efforts at solving modern day problems with an old hat political 

rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased to follow the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) in this 

debate. His speech today both in content and delivery is solid evidence, I suggest, Sir, of why he won 

the leadership of the Liberal Party a year or more ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — The Saskatchewan Liberal Party held a most successful convention in December last, 

Mr. Speaker. At that convention his performance certainly united Liberals and a lot of non-Liberals 

across this province behind his leadership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. McIsaac: — And his performance there and his performance today and his performance of recent 

months is further evidence of why he is going to be sitting over in the Premier’s chair after the next 

provincial election in this province. While the Blakeney Government continues to work against federal 

authorities for their own political purposes, I am convinced that on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, the 

Leader of the Opposition in Saskatchewan has been actively and I think successfully trying to promote 

improved relations with the Federal Government. Sure, it took the October 30 election to make many of 

the federal liberal officials elected and non-elected to recognize that there was an alienation in Western 

Canada and Saskatchewan particularly. 

 

I think the NDP, the fact that they refused to sign the Small Farms Development Policy with the Federal 

Government, is just one excellent illustration of how they are trying to frustrate any effort made by the 

Federal Government to promote the interests of Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan people. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is a program that will help both retiring farmers and young farmers wishing to strengthen 

or enlarge their operation in farming. They refused to sign for the simple reason that they don’t want the 

socialist Land Bank scheme to look any more sickly than it now is. The NDP don’t want Saskatchewan 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

87 

farmers to have an alternative policy for land transfer. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) himself, 

on an open line radio show a week or two ago that I had the pleasure of listening to, told his listeners 

that the province would sign the agreement as long as the Provincial Government and his people 

retained the authority to put all or any land being offered for sale into the Land Bank first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Oh, oh! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Terrible! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — He took a little time to get it said but that is certainly the essence of his remarks that 

day. The Liberal Small Farms Development Policy does have weaknesses as far as Saskatchewan is 

concerned. There’s no question about it. We don’t deny it. But the Government opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

are not trying to improve the scheme, they are trying to scuttle it instead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — In this regard the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and other Members of this 

caucus have urged Ottawa to make some improvements and some changes in that plan and make it 

available to Saskatchewan farmers and I urge the Government opposite to co-operate with Ottawa in this 

regard. 

 

I want to suggest though, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of the efforts of the Leader of the Opposition, that 

plan will soon be available to retiring Saskatchewan farmers who want to sell their land, who want to 

sell their land to the Government through Farm Credit and in turn have their sons or daughters or 

neighbors, for that matter, the opportunity for buying that land, an opportunity that isn’t available under 

the Land Bank scheme today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: There are a lot of people interested today in transferring land, in enlarging small 

holdings, that want no part of the present provincial Land Bank scheme. 

 

I think there is one other illustration of the efforts of late of the Leader of the Opposition to further 

Saskatchewan interests and that is the announcement from Ottawa that a DREE office will be set up here 

in this province. That came as a direct result of Mr. Steuart’s efforts of recent weeks. The Premier on the 

other hand saw fit to trot off to the old stamping grounds down in the Maritimes and proceed to kick the 

program apart during the course of the federal election campaign. He complained about lack of 

co-operation, complained we weren’t getting a fair deal, that Quebec was getting all the money and so 

on. At the same time, he hadn’t done his homework or didn’t at that time, as reported in the Globe and 

Mail, with respect to properly filling out the application form for a DREE grant for the Roumanian 

tractor plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few moments to comment on some of the things the Throne Speech did not 

say. There is nothing in the Throne Speech this year for the support or 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

88 

the strengthening of local governments in this province. There is very little mention of any effort on the 

part of this Government to assist municipalities. Everyone will remember in their last term of office, 

they attempted to foist what at that time may have been a good structure but they were doing it 

prematurely and in a wrong manner, a premature county structure on rural Saskatchewan. Now, so far in 

their present term, the NDP seem determined to leave municipal governments floundering in their own 

growing problems. They are doing nothing to help them. No mention is made in the Speech of any new 

program, no new road programs for rural Saskatchewan. In short, there is no New Deal for 

municipalities. 

 

We are told that a Housing Authority is to be created and this, of course, is a piece of window dressing, 

Mr. Speaker. It will depend entirely and largely, I suggest, on federal funds for its financing. All of the 

various moves that are mentioned in the Throne Speech were referred to last night in a CBC news item 

of new federal legislation that is going to make them possible. I suggest also that present legislation on 

our Saskatchewan statute books would allow the Government to proceed and to carry out any of the 

programs being put forward by Ottawa. 

 

There is one statement in that section dealing with the Housing Authority that I think is noteworthy, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is this, “that hundreds of new jobs will be created directly and indirectly”. We know 

what this means under the Blakeney Government. The new jobs will be in the Civil Service. They will 

be on the public payroll. And I have no doubt, if their past record in other new departments is any 

indication, that there will indeed be hundreds of new jobs created. As has been pointed out earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, the unemployed in Saskatchewan have two real options under this Government. They either 

leave the province or get a job with the Government itself. I am not sure which route at the present time 

is absorbing the most number of people. 

 

New departments, new authorities and new commissions have been the order of the day since this 

Government took office. This year they are slipping somewhat, I believe. A quick check shows 

reference to only three new departments or new agencies this year. 

 

Now the thrust of the Speech from the Throne (I borrow that word “thrust” from the Minister of Health 

(Mr. Smishek) and others) is a further erosion of individual rights and individual freedoms. The Liberal 

Opposition will oppose every piece of legislation put forward by the Government opposite that further 

erodes individual freedom, that restricts individual choice, or that restricts individual opportunities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that all governments regardless of their political 

stripe are guilty of legislation that is on our statute books both here and in Ottawa supposedly for the 

collective good of all citizens and yet, at the expense, in too many cases, of various individual rights. We 

were certainly guilty of it and there is no way any government can avoid some of that. In this respect, 

however, Mr. Speaker, any other party and any other provincial administration runs a poor second to the 

Saskatchewan NDP. At the same 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

89 

time, the Blakeney Government is building a political machine and a bureaucracy the like of which we 

haven’t seen in this country for years and years. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Ever seen. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Ever seen, probably correct. The Liberals will continue to fight to protect and restore 

the place of the individual and the family as the basic unit of society which is so often forgotten as we 

go about framing legislation to protect people from themselves. We will develop and put forward 

policies and programs dedicated to that purpose both inside this House during the course of the various 

debates and outside of it. 

 

One certainly looks in vain, Mr. Speaker, at the Throne Speech for any evidence of those many new and 

imaginative programs the NDP campaigned on in 1971. 

 

The Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) gave it a trial last summer for two new policies, two new 

policies as far as he was concerned, that were carry-overs of policies established by the former Liberal 

Government. About five years ago under the Liberal Government a program was introduced to connect 

smaller urban centres to main highways. Existing roads were rebuilt and widened by the Grid Road 

Authority and the roads were then taken into the provincial highway system. Now I am sure the Member 

for Watrous (Mr. Cody), if he were in his seat, would be aware of this because the town of Bruno was 

one of this first of many communities to be so served. Unlike the liquor stores, it’s one thing he can’t 

move, he can’t move the road. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He can’t take it out of there but he can wreck it though. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — There was also another Liberal program inaugurated that took in something over 

1,000 miles of municipal grid road into the provincial highways system. And other policies that 

provided for hard-surfacing of hundreds of miles of grid road in the province, dust-proofing with oil, 

dust-proofing with salt, and dust-proofing lime stabilization and other techniques. I am glad to see the 

NDP continue those policies. They were good policies and they still are. There is one little difference, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is that these programs and policies are now under the Department of Highways 

and the political touch of the highways Minister. Formerly, they were under the Municipal Road 

Assistance Authority. Actually perhaps there are more differences than that. One knows roads linking 

one community out to the highway normally follow a straight line out to the highway. No so with 

“Operation Open Road”, if any of you have seen the map. The program and map that the Minister had 

printed and distributed around and I am sure all Members have a copy. It will show you that the first 

such project which is now pretty well completed, partly in the Member for Redberry’s (Mr. Michayluk) 

constituency, partly in The Battlefords riding. And it is approximately 40 miles, it is a good little road. It 

is a road that is enjoyed by everybody. But I ask you just to take a look at the map and see if you can 

determine the shortest way or the longest way from Rabbit Lake either to Highway 40 or Highway 4. 

The road comes out south, then it goes west, comes south, goes west again, south again, west again, one 

final scenic jog before it gets out to Highway 4. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

90 

Mind you, the only real explanation for this that is currently being given a good deal of publicity around 

that area is one other point that the Government has always stressed and stressed considerably. That has 

been their great concern for tourism and attracting and expanding tourism in the province. This is a 

move and a policy that we support. The only way they can explain the kinks in this road up there is that 

the Minister indeed was trying to promote tourism as they road took all the various scenic jogs out to 

Highway 4. It just happens to miss the Minister’s ranch where it takes one real turn and nobody can 

really understand this. It goes on and it drops south and comes into North Battleford through a district 

that has long had a history of voting solid NDP. Now I am sure, of course, that voting pattern really had 

nothing to do with the location of that road but one can’t blame people for thinking things like that up in 

that area. There are about four or five alternate ways to go straight out, a lot shorter, a lot more direct. 

 

Another Liberal policy that I’m glad to see continued is a program of oiling or paving the main streets of 

urban communities and urban centres in this province. And once again the Government has dug up a 

new name for their plan. Literally dozens of towns and villages in Saskatchewan today have paved and 

oiled roads as a result of this good Liberal program. And again I congratulate the Government for 

carrying that program on. 

 

The Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) is however launching one other policy that is a new policy, and 

it isn’t a Liberal policy, that I want to say a few words about. It won’t receive our support and it won’t 

receive the support of the Saskatchewan people and that is his “cheap road scheme”. He says we’re 

through building quality roads. In a Press report he says there will be no more “champagne roads” I’m 

not sure where the champagne comes into the picture but it certainly wasn’t on the road and it wasn’t 

part of the former Minister’s policy, the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt). In our part of the province 

we have real reason to be alarmed at the Minister’s plans in this regard. About 10 or 12 years ago a new 

section of highway at that time (It broke through new country) was built between Wilkie and North 

Battleford and was known as Highway 29. It was a narrow, dusty road and the overall engineering 

standards were certainly below grid road standards in the province at that time. That road became known 

as “The Kramer Trail”. It has since been rebuilt by the Liberals, it has been widened, engineered better, 

it has been oiled and is today a very acceptable road for the traffic that it handles. But I say, Mr. 

Speaker, and I tell the Premier that the people up there haven’t forgotten what that “Kramer Trail” 

looked like. They don’t want to return to that kind of cheap highway as highway policy for the province. 

 

Of all the weak arguments ever put forward, Mr. Speaker, the Minister justifies a cheap road with a short 

life span by saying it will be great for employment. It will be another way of hiring a lot of people to 

keep patching up holes and I believe I am quoting him fairly correctly as far as the sense of his words in 

this regard. It is just another of this Government’s subtle scheme to hire more of their supporters on the 

public payroll. Again, I ask the Premier and his backbenchers opposite to maintain the quality highway 

program that was initiated by the Liberal Government and to keep building good quality roads in this 

province to continue to provide roads that we can be proud of. And roads that their supporters opposite 

are just as proud of as any one else in this province. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

91 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this Government’s proposed venture in oil exploration. More about that at 

later debates. I certainly cannot support their sorry record in promoting industries. 

 

In particular I want to say just a brief word at this time about their record and their many promises in the 

field of education. Just one or two comments at this point in time. Reference is made in about four lines 

in the Speech from the Throne for new bargaining legislation. 

 

The present Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) set out about four years ago to do his utmost to 

destroy area bargaining. I think it was December 1968 when he was Chairman of the Govan School Unit 

and he alone among something over 100 school board chairmen in the province saw fit to go out and 

sign a collective agreement with his teachers. This he knew and the trustees and the teachers knew, 

everybody knew was going to be null and void under new legislation that was then coming forth. He did 

it then to show his contempt for the government at the time and for the new legislation. He set out to 

destroy it without any thought of a constructive replacement. They campaigned on that. 

 

Last year we expected to see new legislation, instead we see a committee report. This year we see new 

legislation promised in the Throne Speech. Yet a Press report of a few days ago tells us the Minister is 

still dealing with both trustee and teacher representatives trying to come to some conclusion about an 

acceptable piece of legislation, four years after he started to destroy it. Now he certainly demonstrated 

his ability, I regret to say, for the negative approach in this area. He has yet to come up with any new 

ideas. If he has we haven’t seen them. I do hope they are coming forward. I shall be anxiously waiting 

for that piece of legislation, but I do question seriously, Mr. Speaker, whether we shall see any 

innovations in this regard during this particular Session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I cannot support this Government’s proposed venture into oil exploration. 

I cannot support their sorry record in attracting industries and the number of unemployed in the 

province. Accordingly, I move, seconded by my seat mate, the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald): 

 

That the following words be added to the motion: “but this Assembly regrets that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has failed miserably to attract job producing new industry to our province, that it is 

unable to cope with rising unemployment in Saskatchewan and through its various programs is 

contributing further to the erosion of individual rights of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Debate will continue on the motion and on the amendment concurrently. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, may I first extend my congratulations to the Mover and 

the Seconder of the motion, the Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) and the Member for 

Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross). I think that Members on both sides of the House will agree that they did a 

creditable job and they brought distinction to their constituencies by their speeches in this House. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

92 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I’m very proud that I have the honor to lead a party which has new Members and 

young Members who have the obvious ability of the Members from Nutana South and Gravelbourg. 

May I say how pleased I am that since we last gathered in this House I have had the support of three new 

Members to the Cabinet. The Members for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Taylor), Biggar (Mr. Cowley) and 

Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski). Again, Mr. Speaker, I think it will be agreed, whatever may be the 

political view which the speaker holds, it will be agreed that each one of the Members is able and 

dedicated and is making a substantial contribution to the Government of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — May I extend also congratulations to the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). Sporting 

as he does what must be one of his biggest majorities in years . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . 31 I believe. I am sure he feels much more confident than he did after previous 

elections. I can remember in a previous election that the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) 

who then, I think, was sporting a majority of about 85, described himself as “landslide Steuart”. I don’t 

know whether we can call the Member for Athabasca “landslide Guy” or “half landslide” or “quarter 

landslide Guy”, but it was none the less a win for which we congratulate you. It certainly wasn’t one that 

we knowingly made any contribution to, I will say that. 

 

I think that when we heard the speeches of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and the Member 

for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac), one of the arguments that they stressed was the fact that this province has lost 

population and that jobs are fewer. When coming to grips with that sort of argument I think one is 

reminded of the old bromide that there are lies, damn lies and statistics and they were using the statistics. 

The Member for Prince Albert West talked about the population when his Government took office and 

the population when his Government left office. And by a fairly careful selection of figures he seemed to 

be creating the impression, I hope it wasn’t knowingly, that the population of this province has not been 

declining rapidly during the years when he was in office. As a matter of act, it is true that on the wave of 

prosperity which his Government inherited in 1964 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . population increased from 1964 to 1965 by 8,000 people. Then the rot began to 

settle in slightly and the next year the increase was 5,000 people. The year after that it was 2,000, the 

year after that it was 3,000. Modest recovery. Then in 1969 the skids began. In 1969 down 2,000 people. 

In 1970 down 17,000 people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

93 

Mr. Blakeney: — In 1971 down 15,000 people. Now in the last year it has been down 10,000 people. I 

must say that is a happy upward trend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — 5,000 better than the last year when Members opposite were on the treasury benches. 

I think that the population loss has been stemmed. I say this because the employment figures continue to 

go up and up. The Members opposite say that unemployment too is going up. That is unfortunately the 

case. We are however, in a position where more and more people are now seeing the possibility of 

getting a job. And more and more people are offering themselves for work. And more and more people 

are being placed in work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In the last quarter of 1972 the working force of this province went up an average of 

8,000 people a month over the previous year. 

 

An Hon. Member: — All defeated federal candidates. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is not our party that has serried ranks of defeated candidates in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is not our party that sends one single lone representative to Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No indeed. I should like to deal with the matter of defeated Liberal candidates but it 

would take a great deal of time of the House. Even to deal with the ones who are on our payroll. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Member from Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) waves his hand and well he 

might. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I will deal only and I will be merciful today, I will deal only with the defeated federal 

Liberal candidates who are on the payroll of the province. One was on the payroll of the province when 

we took office and he is no longer there, a Mr. Duddridge. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Who? 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

94 

Mr. Blakeney: — A Mr. Duddridge. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He was decentralized. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Right. But may I recall to your mind the fact that there is a man by the name of Clark 

in the Provincial Youth Agency of the Department of Culture and Youth and there is one by the name of 

Larson who is the Agent General for Saskatchewan. He was the Member for Kindersley from 1949 to 

1953, the Liberal Member for Kindersley. No one suggests that these people are not doing a good job. 

And I hope Members opposite are not going to suggest that, similarly, people who may have a different 

party label are not equally doing a good job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to raise one other point. A suggestion was made in the 

House that income taxes have gone up. I think the figure of 17.6 per cent was used and I heard the 

Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) on television the other day using a figure of 18 per cent. This is 

arrived at by mathematics which only can be called Liberal mathematics. Because they take the taxes 

when they were in office of 34 per cent of basic tax and then they take the 1972 tax which became 37 

per cent, but of a quite different figure, and they say that is an increase of three points. May I point out 

that after the increase of three points in 1972 the provincial taxes were lower for every single salary 

bracket than they were in 1971. Every single salary bracket. From amounts of annual income of $2,800 

to 100,000, you pick any figure in there for annual income and that man paid less provincial income tax 

in 1972 than he did in 1971. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And therefore it is entirely improper to suggest that there has been an increase in 

provincial taxes at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There is in the year 1973 going to be an increase in tax but it will be very modest for 

most people. Comparing the taxes in 1971 when Members opposite sat on the treasury benches and 

taxes in 1973 after the new tax changes are in effect, a married man with two children, with an income 

of $4,500 will pay 20 per cent less tax. A person with $8,000 income will admittedly pay around nine or 

10 per cent, and this seems to be about the maximum increase. When Members opposite use a figure of 

17.6 per cent as the Member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) did today or 18 per cent as the Member for 

Lumsden (Mr. Land) did the other day, he is using incorrect figures, totally incorrect figures, figures 

which cannot be justified by any application of the tax tables which they have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now may I make a couple of other comments on the remarks of the Member for 

Prince Albert West. He talked about the Kraft boycott and he heaped a great deal of scorn on anyone 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

95 

who supports the Kraft boycott. I want to say this, firstly, I know of no prospects of Kraft building a 

plant in this province either when we were the Government or when they were the Government. And I 

say this, if asked to choose between a plant owned by Kraft making margarine or shortening or a plant 

owned by our own Agra Industries Limited, I’ll take Agra. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Not you boys. I asked to choose between a cheese plant owned by Kraft and one 

owned by Co-op Dairy Producers, I’ll choose Co-op. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Not you boys. You Liberals will go for the Easterners every time. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And that’s why in the last I’m very proud to say that Agra has announced that they 

are expanding their operation to produce packed margarine for the first time in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I am pleased to say that the Co-op Dairy Producers are building manufacturing 

milk plants at Saskatoon and Yorkton to manufacture cheese on a large scale in this province for the first 

time in many, many years. 

 

I will now turn to the other topic, the Roumanian tractor plant. The Member for Prince Albert West 

talked about the Roumanian tractor plant and he read announcements and more announcements and still 

more announcements by the Premier or the Minister indicating that a plant would be built. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I didn’t say that. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — He quoted people from the City of Saskatoon, he quoted people such as Mr. Puscas 

who is with a subsidiary company, he quoted people from Moose Jaw. Why doesn’t he quote someone 

from the Government? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You want to give me a minute. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I will give the Member a minute if he will quote some thing which says that we said 

the plant was coming. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Thorson, that’s who. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, there he is, the Minister of Industry. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Thorson said Roumanians could not have expressed . . . Saskatoon Wins Plant – 

Leader-Post, July 26, 1972. 

 

Mr. Thorson said the Roumanians could not have expressed their preference in stronger terms . . . the 

plant will be built in Saskatoon. He said three factors weigh 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

96 

heavily . . . and we have come to agree . . . plant to be built in Saskatoon. 

 

There it is – Leader-Post of July. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I don’t think that we can have Members getting up and requoting papers 

that way because it doesn’t contribute to an orderly debate. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — As we suspected, what the quote said and he had all sorts of opportunities to quote 

me, what the quote said is that we agreed that if the plant would be built it would be in Saskatoon. At no 

time, I repeat, at no time has the Government of Saskatchewan ever said that plant would come to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, we would be delighted to have it here and we will do everything we can to get 

it here, but we have not at any time said it would come here. We have heard people from Saskatoon and 

Moose Jaw, we have heard the Member for Prince Albert West who wished it would come to Prince 

Albert. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh no! I didn’t say that. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am sure that if he had any quote which would support his proposition, he would 

have done it and he has failed to do so. 

 

Now may I refer to one other thing that he talked about, this erosion of personal freedoms. He talked 

about amendments to The Trade Union Act to guarantee free speech. Now I want to point out to the 

Leader of the Opposition and to every Member of this House as clearly as I can that the amendments 

which were made with reference to free speech were amendment which returned The Trade Union Act 

to the position it was before 1964. It removed the amendments put in by his government. And I want 

him to ask any trade unionist in this province, did he feel more free before 1964 or did he feel free under 

the government of the Members opposite? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Did trade unionists feel free when they were being hammered and harried by the 

former government? 

 

An Hon. Member: — They still do. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh no! I didn’t say that. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, perhaps I’d better not assume what he has in mind. It’s a pretty large 

assumption to know what he has in mind. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

97 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Member for Prince Albert West talks about The Family Farm Protection Act. 

Now I want to say that we stepped in to protect farmers at a time when they needed protection, and we 

make no apology. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — More like the Farm Baloney Act. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to one other topic and this surely must be in the realm of 

humor. He was talking about ways to get something from the Federal Government and how the Province 

of Saskatchewan should not be abrasive with the federal government. We shouldn’t be critical of the 

Federal Government. We shouldn’t launch criticism of the DREE program. We shouldn’t do anything 

that might prejudice the bargaining. Well, now, I think Members can cast their minds back to when the 

Members opposite sat on these treasury benches. We can remember the stance they took towards 

Ottawa. There was nothing sufficiently abusive for them to say about Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They were wrong. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have a number of clippings here. I really don’t want to deal with them at length 

because they deal with the late Premier (Mr. Thatcher) but I think it is very, very clear that the late 

Premier took a firm and strong stand against the Trudeau Government. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And he was right. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite ask us to have confidence in that same federal Liberal 

Government with respect to rail line abandonment. They ask us to have confidence that same Liberal 

Government will have the interest of Saskatchewan at heart. That same Liberal Government that 

appointed as Chairman of the Canadian Transportation Commission, one Jack Pickersgill. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh! You know Jack? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Yes. From Ontario, from Ottawa and then when Jack went to his reward in the Senate 

whom did they appoint? They appointed someone from where was it? They appointed Mr. Benson. Now 

Mr. Benson was born in Belleville and that’s in Ontario and it’s between Toronto and the Quebec 

border. He then went to school in Kingston which is between Toronto and the Quebec border and then 

he went into private practice in accountancy in Kingston between Toronto and the Quebec border and 

then he was elected to Ottawa and he went to Ottawa and that too is between Toronto and the Quebec 

border. He has detailed knowledge of that little cocoon of Canada where they don’t care a hoot about 

freight rates. He is put in charge of the Canadian Transportation Commission. And I tell you, we in the 

West and, yes, those of us who came from the Maritimes, know something about freight rates and we 

know something about central Canadian oppression in freight rates and Edgar Benson knows nothing 

about it and he was put in charge of transportation by the Trudeau Government. 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

98 

Mr. Romanow: — A Liberal payoff, that’s all it was. 

 

Mr. Lane: — At least he wasn’t a defeated candidate. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — He got out in time. 

 

Well, I just want to make one more comment before I take up a point raised by the Leader of the 

Opposition yesterday. The Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) referred to “Operation Open Roads” as an 

old Liberal program and he said that the road was a small road and that it missed the Minster’s ranch. 

How different from the previous Liberal policy when there were large roads, four-lane roads and they 

went right to the ranch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with a couple of pointed raised by the Members 

opposite and I think one of the points raised by the Members opposite and I think one of the things 

which struck me as most remarkable about the speeches of the Members opposite was their assertion 

that we were an arrogant Government and they, when they were the government, were a perceptive 

government, listening to people, never in difficulty with the public. Well, I don’t know how short they 

expect people’s memories to be but all I can do is to characterize the government which they sat in in the 

words of the Globe and Mail, June 25, 1971. I have a very short quote. 

 

People don’t like being pushed around; perhaps that sentence would capsule as well as any the 

sentiment in Saskatchewan which concentrated this week to toss the Liberal Premier out of office and 

hand an overwhelming and surprising victory to the New Democrats. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — People don’t like being pushed around. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You’ll find that out. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And there are literally thousands of people who were being pushed around by the 

Liberals and right in there pushing the hardest was the current Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Speaker, he is pretty careful of whom he wanted pushed around. When he 

was talking yesterday he suggested that our Government was pushing around Carling’s Brewery. Now 

let me talk a little bit about the background of the Carling incident and I want to do this because it has 

been seriously misrepresented on many occasions. 

 

On Wednesday, October 4 of last year, a meeting was held with all the brewery presidents in this 

province, including the president of Carling’s Saskatchewan company. At that meeting the Government 

stated that Liquor Board regulations with respect to promotion and advertising would not be changed 

until 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

99 

the report of the Legislative Liquor Committee has been received and considered. The breweries were 

invited to make any suggestions about changes in the regulations to that Committee. At the meeting it 

was agreed by all the brewery representatives, including the president of Carling’s, that the regulations 

would stand and be adhered to. The regulations as they stood then specifically provided that “the giving 

or offering of gifts or gratuities to licensees and/or their staff or family is strictly prohibited”. Everyone 

knew and understood that and they understood that it prohibited paying for outings for licensees or their 

families. It prohibited any payment of gifts or gratuities to hotelmen. That was the guts of the rule. On 

the following weekend Carling’s undertook a major promotion directed to hotel operators, perhaps the 

most effective kind of promotional advertising possible, to promote the sale of beer. And certainly a 

form of promotion clearly prohibited under the regulations of the Liquor Board. 

 

Now immediately following the events the facts were checked, the evidence was considered by the 

Attorney General’s department. The breach of the regulations was clear. The Liquor Board then acted. 

In the light of the facts the Liquor Board was required to act in order to enforce the regulations, in order 

to deal fairly with the other breweries and in order to ensure that the recommendations of the Liquor 

Committee of the Legislature would not be made meaningless by prior action by a single brewer – 

Carling’s. Accordingly, the Liquor Board advised Carling’s that one of their products, Calgary Export 

Lager beer would be delisted for a period of two months. This, in effect, meant that this beer would not 

be sold to the Liquor Board or to any of their licensees for that period. Now on November 15 I met with 

the Canadian president of Carling’s, which, by the way, is a subsidiary of Rothmans international 

organization. At that time the delisting of the Calgary Export Lager was discussed. The president of 

Carling’s, the Canadian president, requested a reconsideration of the penalty and he volunteered to make 

the following commitments and he very shrewdly, I may say, volunteered to make these before he asked 

me what my position was. He volunteered that as president he would make a public statement that his 

company had committed a serious beach of the regulations, that whether or not the initial suspension 

was reduced no employees would be laid off by his company during the period of the delisting, and that 

his company agreed to adhere to all the regulations in the future, to act as good corporate citizens. 

 

Based on these undertakings I reviewed the penalty and accordingly reduced the suspension from two 

months to one month. Carling’s Brewery were permitted to sell its present inventory prior to the 

effective delisting period which was not at their choice but one set by the Liquor Board. 

 

We believe the action of the Government was fully justified on at least three grounds. Firstly, the 

regulations were clearly, obviously and knowingly broken. It is not much use to have regulations if clear 

and intentional breaches do not bring measures of enforcement. Secondly, an agreement was made by 

and with all of the brewers. Fair play to the other brewers required action against Carling’s. Thirdly, the 

Liquor Committee of this Legislature was at that very time, early October, meeting to write its report 

dealing, among other things, with advertising and promotion. If the report was to have any value we 

could not, as it seemed to me, permit one brewer to make a set of new rules, new rules which would 

inevitable have to be copied by the 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

100 

other breweries with the result that we have a new set of rules not made by the committee but by the 

unilateral action of one brewer. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) complains that delisting is the wrong penalty. Yet when he 

was the government his Government suspended licence after licence of the little hotelman, far more 

serious than the delisting of one product of a brewer and there weren’t any court proceedings then. He 

didn’t talk about arbitrary or arrogant action then. No, no! When he is dealing with the little hotelman he 

put his foot down, no talk about arrogance then. But when he is talking about a big international brewer 

like Rothmans he says to us, “Shame on you, why didn’t you take them to court?” If the Leader of the 

Opposition feels that this Government is arbitrary in dealing with brewers and hotelmen, I invite him to 

ask the hotelmen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They will tell him which Government is arbitrary. They will tell him which 

Government is arrogant. Our Government although we cannot always and perhaps often do what the 

hotelmen and the brewers want, we are willing to listen and consider their problems. We won’t say that 

we will satisfy the brewers and we won’t say that we will satisfy the hotelmen but we do say that we do 

listen to their problems and consider them fairly. That is in sharp contrast to the arbitrary treatment they 

received when the Leader of the Opposition sat on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to one other item in the Speech from the Throne. I want 

to talk a little bit about health and senior citizens. This Throne Speech outlines our proposals to take 

further steps to fulfil our election promises, the specific promises set out in our program card, the now 

familiar orange card, and I am glad to see the Leader of the Opposition has a copy because I supplied 

copies to all the Members of the Opposition last year for their reference. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I lost mine. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) says he has lost the card. He has never really 

made any habit of keeping the promises that he made so he doesn’t see why he should keep the promises 

that we made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I refer also to the more general platform outlines in our booklet the New Deal for 

People, that splendid booklet, and I will deal this afternoon with two of the major planks, those with 

respect to health and with respect to senior citizens. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, let me call to your attention the fact that on February 1 chiropractic care will be an 

insured service under the Medical Care Plan . . . 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

101 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . as we promised it would be, Mr. Speaker. When the Member for Regina North 

East (Mr. Smishek), the Minister of Health made his announcement, the Member for Prince Albert West 

(Mr. Steuart) referred to the fact that the announcement had been made on a particular day in the House 

and that we were continuing the old Liberal tradition. May I say that we are not continuing the old 

Liberal tradition. The old Liberal tradition was to make announcements that were totally hollow. I 

remember one day in this House, a grand day, February 23, 1965, when they scored high on two counts. 

One the front page there were two headline. One said Big Heavy Water Plant At Estevan and the other 

one said Steuart Says Small Hospitals Won’t Close. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — On the same front page, Mr. Speaker. We have, since taking office, fulfilled promise 

after promise in restoring and extending health care to the people of Saskatchewan. We have abolished 

deterrent fees. We eliminated the payment of medical and hospital premiums for those 65 years of age 

and over. We have insured chiropractic care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this Session we will take the first step toward providing hearing aids at greatly reduced 

cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We will move a step closer to the start of our program of free dental care to all 

children up to the age of 12. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We have been already in training dental technologists. You will be asked at this 

Session to approve legislation establishing standards for these technologists. Before the end of 1974 we 

expect to begin providing basic dental care to children all across this province without charge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It will take some time for the program to work in but we look for it to be another 

pioneering health program, pioneering for North America. 

 

This will be a gigantic step forward in improving dental health in Saskatchewan. The institution of early 

dental care and effective training of children in the proper care of teeth will make a tremendous 

difference in general health of all our citizens in the years ahead. 

 

And for the older citizens, Mr. Speaker, let me make a note of another promise fulfilled. We have long 

been aware of the plight of many senior citizens who are not acutely ill but who need nursing care. Were 

they in hospital they would have their care paid for but there has been no provision up till now for the 

payment of nursing care. We promised to pay for basic 



 

January 30, 1973 

 

 

102 

nursing care for people in nursing homes and, Mr. Speaker, we propose to do that effective March 1. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, that is another promise made and another promise kept. Contrast that 

with the dreary record of the Liberal Party, a record studded with arbitrary hospital closures after 

promises that they would not take place, the cutting of grants to nursing homes, the heaping of deterrent 

fees on the sick. That record is known to the people of Saskatchewan and they will remember. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal more to say about the remarks of the Members 

opposite and about the program set out in the Speech from the Throne and accordingly I beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:07 o’clock p.m. 


