
























































Hansard: April 19, 1973


2887 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session – Seventeenth Legislature 

61st Day 
Thursday, April 19, 1973. 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Second Readings 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley that Bill 
No. 97 – An Act to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following Recorded Division. 
 

YEAS — 33 
Messieurs 

Blakeney Pepper Taylor 
Dyck Michayluk Matsalla 
Meakes Byers Richards 
Wood Thorson Faris 
Romanow Whelan Cody 
Bowerman Kwasnica Gross 
Thibault Carlson Feduniak 
Larson Engel Mostoway 
Kowalchuk Owens Rolfes 
Baker Robbins Kaeding 
Brockelbank Cowley Flasch 
 

NAYS — 10 
Messieurs 

Loken MacDonald McPherson 
Guy (Milestone) Lane 
Grant Gardner Wiebe 
Boldt MacLeod  
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill 
No. 102 – An Act to amend The Public Service Superannuation Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) May I first of all assure the Hon. Minister, the 
Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley, that I had no intention of disrupting his schedule when I adjourned 
debate on this Motion. I actually entered the House just before the question was put and I did want to 
raise one point with respect to this particular Bill. I have had some discussions with the Minister and 
with some other people with respect to a clause in The Public Service Superannuation Act and also in 
some of the other Acts which causes me concern and I should just like to make a few 



 
April 19, 1973 
 

 
2888 

remarks with respect to it and bring it to the attention of the House. 
 
I believe the Minister indicated that Bill 102 will have a proposed House amendment to it removing the 
ceiling on which superannuation contributions will be made. Might I say I agree with that proposal. 
Checking back in the records I find that at one time the ceiling on which contributions could be made 
was $10,000. It was later raised to $11,500, then to $16,000, then to $18,000 and it is now proposed to 
be removed entirely. However, I think this creates some anomalies in terms of pensions and I’m talking 
not only of this particular Act but of some of the other Acts. There are some people who elected to make 
contributions beyond 35 years. I’ll just cite one or two examples without naming names because this is 
confidential. I think of examples of people not only in the Public Service but also in SaskTel and Sask. 
Power who had 35 years of contributory service in their early ’50s, some of them as early as 52 and 53 
years of age. They were in a rather peculiar situation at that time when they were not old enough for 
retirement. They had completed their 35 years. They were under the ceilings then applicable in relation 
to pension and they were asked the question, “did they wish to continue to contribute or not?” They 
could have chosen not to continue to contribute, that’s true. I can cite examples to illustrate, in the light 
of existing conditions at that time, that it made sense for some people to make the choice that they would 
continue to contribute. The Act also says that once they made the choice to continue to contribute they 
must continue to contribute until they were actually retired or ceased work. My contention is that 
removing the ceiling upon which contributions may be made in terms of superannuation is fine but 
serious consideration should be given to raising the ceiling on which the maximum pension may be paid. 
 
May I cite an example to illustrate? A person with more than 35 years of contributory service and a 
pension under the $7,000 ceiling gets two per cent times the six highest years, times the years of 
contributory service. If that person had an average income of $6,000 in that particular period, two per 
cent of that is $120, multiply that times that persons total contributory service and you can come out 
with a pension of $5,400 per year, which is actually 90 per cent of their average income in their best six 
years. However, if that individual had a $9,000 average income in his best six years, taking two per cent, 
$180 times the 45 years for which he contributed, he would be entitled to a pension of $8,000. But he 
doesn’t get it. He’s cut off by the $7,000 maximum. Now either one of two things should happen. The 
ceiling should be raised or it should be removed. 
 
I know what the argument is. I know the argument is that this might not be fair to people already retired 
and who have had the ceiling applicable to them. Frankly, I can’t agree with that argument. Obviously 
the rules that applied when a person retired do apply. It seems to me we are being very remiss because 
the previously mentioned factor if we do not make some adjustment n that ceiling at the present time. 
The theory is, of course, that it’s a statutory pension, that’s it payable for 35 years and, therefore, the 
individual gets 70 per cent of his six best earning years u to the maximum, but how could people ten 
years ago who had 35 years of contributions in, visualize that inflation would raise salaries appreciably. 
How could they possibly know that the in-current position would be that they are now making 
contributions to their pension 



 
April 19, 1973 

 

 
2889 

plans with no probably result for them in terms of those contributions? 
 
I can cite you cases of individuals who are paying seven and eight and nine hundred dollars per year into 
the pension plan who might just as well burn their money. It is largely pointless insofar as they are 
concerned in terms of arriving at more pension. They are, in the main, cut off by the $7,000 ceiling. 
They are not, however, permitted to cease contributions. If they could they could take that money and 
put it in a registered retirement plan and increase their pension. There are not a great many people in this 
category but it is obvious that these people are caught in a very, very difficult situation. In addition, I 
should point out, that although they are having the contributions taken off and it flows into the Public 
Service Pension Plan or Power or Telephone or whatever, they do not get any benefit in terms of the 
Canada Pension Plan because it’s integrated in those plans. If they had elected to cut off contributions at 
35 years their employer would be deducting for them and paying directly to the Canada Pension Plan 
and they would end up with a second pension out of that plan. Mr. Speaker, there is no way these 
individuals could have foreseen that situation because the Canada Pension Plan came into effect in 1966 
and I can tell the House that of the examples that I know of, some of these people made the choice back 
in 1963, 1964 or 1965. 
 
I want to draw to the attention of the House that this is an anomaly. It’s there and I fail to see why we’re 
not going to choose to alter it. What are the arguments going to be against it? Admittedly, I’m sitting on 
the Pension Commission and I could raise these points there and I shall, but some of these people are 
very close to retirement now and have very urgent problems. That, Mr. Speaker, was why I wanted to 
make some remarks with respect to this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) I don’t know what’s happening to the House. I think it’s 
the lateness of the season but I find myself for the second time within 24 hours agreeing with the Hon. 
Member who just spoke, and I’ll put it down to the balmy spring air that we are getting. I believe that 
one of the benefits of working for the Government may well be a good pension when you retire. And I 
believe in the principle of a full pension for full service. That has not been the case up to now. Those 
people at the higher levels of pay in the Public Service have had their tops trimmed off, unfairly I think. 
And I am in agreement with the remarks just made by the Hon. Member. I must say that in doing so that 
we ought not to be niggardly in the pensions to the people in the higher branches of service, the higher 
categories and the higher pay. 
 
One of the incentives to work for a promotion is not only the status it entails and the responsibility 
involved but also the additional pay at the time of service and the additional superannuation upon 
retirement. Nothing can be a better sales tool for the public service of Saskatchewan than to point with 
pride to an excellent superannuation plan. To date our superannuation plan has, under both 
Governments, both Liberal 



 
April 19, 1973 
 

 
2890 

and CCF-NDP Governments, been hampered in the sense that the higher you got in the civil service the 
more we seemed jealous of the pension that we were paying. Because of that, Mr. Speaker, I support the 
principle enunciated by the Hon. Member. 
 
I want to go on record, however, as stating that there are some other aspects of the pension program that 
I have not yet fully resolved in my mind. One of them is the full fundable feature of the pension. The 
pensions which are now being paid by the Provincial Government are not fully funded at all. There have 
been some pressures to make it a fully funded pension. There are some pressures and suggestions that 
pension moneys should be portable. I should like to state at this time that I, at this moment, have not yet 
concluded that either of these additional steps would be justified or in the long-term benefits of either 
the public servant or the Government of Saskatchewan. That does not mean that I oppose them, but I 
think there are some arguments on both sides which must fully be examined before coming to a 
conclusion. But I do agree with the remarks just made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A. Taylor: – (Minister of Social Services) Mr. Speaker, very briefly, I appreciated the other day 
when the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) said that they would be supporting this Motion, this Bill 
before us. He did have one mistake in his presentation. He said that his only disappointment was in what 
the Bill did not contain and that was an improvement in pensions. I am sure he is aware now that a Bill 
has been laid before the House with supplementary provisions which will improve the past pensions he 
was concerned about. It comes under another Act at this time. 
 
The Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) makes reference to the policy of cutting off the top. This is 
what this Bill is all about, to get away from that, both to bring us into conformity with other parts of 
Canada and also to improve employee benefits for recruiting as much as for anything else. I disagree 
with my colleague who has expressed his concern for the past ceilings that are being maintained, that we 
have not changed this. The people he refers to did elect to contribute beyond the 35 years. They have 
received some benefits in terms of a different period on which their pension would be calculated. They 
received a benefit in terms of dependent benefits that were in force, a type of insurance, in the 
meantime. It is certainly one of the things that I hope the Superannuation or Pension Commission will 
look at very seriously, but we are not prepared at this time to make this change. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of students from the 
day school at Marieval. Marieval is located 



 
April 19, 1973 

 

 
2891 

on the Cowessess Indian Reserve, north of Broadview. There are about 50 students and they are 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Laurence Krysor. 
 
Today we are Committee in the Legislature which is a little from the usual procedure. I hope they enjoy 
their stay here and we welcome them to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION 
 

Adjournment of House 
 
Mr. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Thorson, by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 19th, 1973, being today, Mr. Speaker, that 
it stand adjourned until Monday, April 23, 1973. 
 

The rules now provide, Mr. Speaker, that we come together at 10:00 a.m. so we don’t need to put that in 
the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:31 o’clock p.m. 


