



















































Hansard: March 23, 1973


1815 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

42nd Day 
 

Friday, March 23, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. R. Gross: — (Gravelbourg) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you, 18 

Grade Seven and Eight students from Glen Bain. Today, they are accompanied by Mr. Norman Hymers, 

the principal at Glen Bain. I am sure that Members on this side of the House recognize what Glen Bain 

would mean to me. It is my home town. I had the honor of being a student of Mr. Hymers for many 

years. I would hope that they have a good day and that this may be an excellent learning process. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. H. Lange: — (Assiniboia-Bengough) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce 72 Grade Eight 

students from the town of Assiniboia. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Powrie, Miss 

Williams, Mrs. Hunt and Mrs. Ermel and drivers, Mr. O’Neill and Mr. Richards. They are, among other 

things, students of history and I think it is significant that students from the town of Assiniboia should 

be visiting the Legislature, because there is probably no other word that represents a territory that has 

come up as often in this Chamber, as the word Assiniboia. 

 

The town of Assiniboia was named, incidentally, when the Canadian Pacific Railway went through, 

after the territory of Assiniboia which was part of the old district of The Northwest Territories. And the 

word Assiniboia itself is a very poor English derivative of the Indian word Assiniboine. Assiniboine is a 

Cree word which means Stoney Sioux. The Stoney Sioux Indians were Indians who had settled around 

the Assiniboine area of southwestern Manitoba, along with the Assiniboine Indians. So it is a very 

complex word and it is extremely significant that students from that area should be visiting the 

Chamber. 

 

I predict a very exciting afternoon for them and when they leave the Chamber we are to meet in the 

caucus room of the Leader of the Opposition to discuss some of the less controversial bills, such as The 

Hog Marketing Commission. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I. W. Carlson: — (Yorkton) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to this House on behalf of the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) a group of 40 Grade Eight students from Porcupine Plains. The 

Minister is in Porcupine Plains this afternoon and therefore is not able to be in the House to introduce 

these students. They are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery and when they leave this afternoon I intend to 

meet them and answer any questions they may have. They are accompanied by their principal, Mr. 

Lozinsky and 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1816 

teachers, Mrs. Luke and Mrs. Wichorek. I am sorry if I pronounced that wrong. I have this in 

handwriting and I am not sure how it is spelt. Also their bus drivers, Mr. Graham and Mr. Kwiatkowski. 

I want to welcome you here and I am sure you will have a very enjoyable afternoon and I hope you have 

a good trip back home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might just add a word of 

welcome to the group from Glen Bain. I have known Mr. Hymers for a long time. A year or two ago I 

had the privilege of going into that school and teaching a class in mathematics. I hope they won’t hold it 

against me. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Establishment of an Alfalfa Cubing Plant at Outlook 
 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask a 

question of the Minister of Government Services (Mr. Brockelbank). I should like to read one sentence 

from a Press release and have him comment on it. 

 

This is from the Cabinet Press office, dated March 21st and it says: 

 

The Liberals are masters of misinformation. 

 

This is in a speech that he gave to his constituents. 

 

It is our responsibility not only to inform people about what the Government is doing, but to correct 

false impressions. 

 

Now later on in the release he goes on to talk about the cubing plant at Outlook and he talks about what 

the Government is doing and he says: 

 

In fact, we are spending almost $750,000 on an establishment of an alfalfa cubing plant there. 

 

Now I should like his comment. Is this correct that the Government, “in fact, we are spending almost 

$750,000 on an establishment of an alfalfa cubing plant.” Would he comment on this? 

 

Hon. J. E. Brockelbank: — (Minister of Government Services) Mr. Speaker, the area of financing in 

this instance is Government guarantees as well as cash. For further details I suggest that you check with 

the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Is it correct then that the NDP Government of this province, in effect, is buying one 

share for cash with $500, and that $500 is the total cash commitment that you are making to this plant? 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1817 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I would suggest for the details that you speak to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

The Final Report of Task Force on Workmen’s Compensation 
 

Hon. G. Snyder: — (Minister of Labour) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

make a brief statement concerning the final report of the Task Force on Workmen’s Compensation 

which I will be tabling. 

 

This Task Force Report represents, I believe, the most comprehensive study of Workmen’s 

Compensation which I will be tabling. 

 

This Task Force represents, I believe, the most comprehensive study of Workmen’s Compensation that 

has been undertaken since the Workmen’s Compensation Plan was introduced. I am sure that all 

Members of the House are aware of the fact that the system of the Workmen’s Compensation is by no 

means a new idea. 

 

A system of Workmen’s Compensation, much as the one that we know today, with minor amendments 

has emerged over the years and has been in existence in this province for decades. To put it as simply as 

possible, Mr. Speaker, Workmen’s Compensation is the compulsory mutual employer insurance plan 

administered by the state under which injured workers suspend their right, or relinquish their right, for 

damages against the employer and in turn the employee receives the entitlement to compensation as a 

right without the necessity of proving negligence on the part of the employer. 

 

Before the introduction of our system of compensation many years ago, a worker who met with an 

accident on the job could only claim from his employer in accordance with the common law of England 

by bringing action against the employer in the courts of the land. Some type of negligence had to be 

established, either negligence in the sense of defective machinery or negligence on the part of some 

responsible person in the work place. And while an action was pending in a court, the workman who had 

been injured faced a delay in which he was without resources to meet his medical or hospital expenses, 

not to mention, of course, the normal cots of living. Even if the injured worker was successful at the 

trial, more than often he was faced with an appeal to a superior court. Employers were financially able, 

in many cases, to pursue this matter in a way that employees were not able. And accordingly, employees 

were inclined either to surrender or compromise. 

 

Under the system of common law, it was estimated that under 30 per cent of all employees that were 

injured at work actually received some compensation. 

 

I think that the advantages to both employers and employees are outlined, Mr. Speaker, by a statement 

which is contained in the report which points out the advantages to employers as well, in order that they 

may not run the risk of losing the wherewithal with which to run their business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity, today, to express my gratitude to the members of the Task 

Force who worked very diligently and submitted to us an interim report over a period of some 15 

months. The chairman of the Task Force 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1818 

Mr. Allistair Muir, who is now a judge of the Magistrate’s Court in Moose Jaw was one of the members 

of the Committee. Also serving on the Committee was Dr. C. Dennis who is now the director of 

Occupational Health and Safety in the Department of Labour. Mr. Edward Hlasny the personnel 

superintendent at the Potash Company of America and Mr. Nels Thibault the labor representative of the 

United Steel Workers of America, as well as Mr. Dick Fowler who is now chairman of the Workmen’s 

Compensation Board. 

 

Now, as I announced earlier this week, it is our intention, my deputy and I, to see to it that the report is 

given the fullest possible distribution and we shall be touring the province sometime in May, we trust, if 

the Legislature has adjourned by that time. I am sure that there will be a large number of people, 

individuals and organizations, who will want to make a considerable input. 

 

I want to make it clear that the Report of the Task Force is not a statement of Government policy. It is a 

report by an independent commission presented to the Government and our Government will be 

considering the report in detail and taking advantage of all the comments that will be offered during the 

intervening months. 

 

When we have had a chance to discuss the report with all of the people who wish to make any 

presentations, then we will decide on a course of action and the Government’s policy will be announced. 

 

It gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to table the Report on the Task Force on Workmen’s 

Compensation. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Major Legislation Still to Come Before the House 
 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like 

to direct a question to the House leader, or in his absence, the Hon. Premier. 

 

This is the 42nd sitting day of this House and there are some of us on this side of the House who believe 

that the business of the House is proceeding along like a herd of turtles. We are still awaiting much of 

the major legislation which has been promised in the Throne Speech. 

 

I wouldn’t want my question to be misinterpreted as request for this legislation, some of which we 

would prefer never to see, but if we are to see it, I wonder if the Hon. Premier would tell us how soon 

we might expect to get the legislation such as, The Labour Standards amendments, the legislation 

dealing with the Crown corporation for oil and gas, the rest of the Education legislation, Crown 

Corporation for Housing, the legislation which the Throne Speech refers to as pace-setting legislation 

with respect to elections, and so on. 

 

It seems unfair to the House that these should come so late if they expect us to give adequate attention to 

it. I wonder if he could tell us how quickly he could get this to us? 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1819 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, first, I don’t think anyone can make any judgments as 

to whether it is late or early in the Session without knowing when the Session is going to end. It may 

well be that we are less than half way through the Session, because there is still a great deal of business 

to be moved, and some of it is moving very slowly. 

 

I need only remind Hon. Members that I can think of some Bills which have been adjourned as many as 

eight times by Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — So it is then not, perhaps, only the responsibility of the Government to decide how 

quickly a Session goes. 

 

To respond to the particular question which the Member asks, it is anticipated that within the next three 

or four days much of the legislation which he has referred to, will appear on the Order Paper. 

Particularly, I would anticipate the The Elections Act and The Labour Standards Act will be down very 

quickly and most of the other major legislation — legislation relating to snowmobiles and that type of 

legislation. There will be some legislation in that regard. I am not sure that was in the Speech from the 

Throne, but there will be. There will be other major Bills which are now either at the printers or in the 

final stages at Legislative Counsel. 

 

I anticipate, therefore, that there will be on the Order Paper and for debate, much of this legislation long 

before we finish the Second Readings, Committee of the Whole and other items which are now on the 

Order Paper. I don’t anticipate any bare patches at all except those that may be caused by Members 

opposite in the tedium of their debate. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Premier is using the fact that 

he doesn’t know when the Session will end as an excuse for delaying the introduction of Bills, which we 

ought properly to have had by now? Surely to goodness, Mr. Speaker, it is reasonable to expect the 

Premier to have given it sooner and I invite the Premier to deny that he is using that as an excuse, when 

it is apparent that he is. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t deny part of the thrust of what the Member is saying. These Bills should be 

brought to the House as soon as we possibly can. We have run into a few unexpected delays but I 

anticipate that much of the legislation will be on the Order Paper very shortly. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 249 
 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald: — (Milestone) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 249 

showing: 

 

The total cost for all beds in Special Care Facilities as of July 1, 1971. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1820 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — (Minister of Social Services) Mr. Speaker, we are most anxious to provide the 

Hon. Members with the information which he has requested. 

 

Unfortunately in its present form the question does cause a little difficulty. I am sure, however, that the 

amendment which I will present in a few minutes, will provide all the information that he is asking for. 

 

May I explain concerning the total cost of all beds in special care facilities. There is no way in which we 

can tell what the total cost was in a commercial facility in 1971. We have no budget review and no way 

of telling what was profit or otherwise, and so I shall, as part of the amendment, ask that this be changed 

to, in non-profit homes. There are only, as the Member is aware, some 6 or 7 commercial homes in the 

province. 

 

I shall also, in order to supply him with additional information, ask for the total number of beds in 

operation so that he can have a comparison. This, what I am saying, will also apply in a later question 

and at the same time a third part will ask for the Government’s financial assistance on both dates. 

 

I would, therefore move, seconded by the Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) that: 

 

The Motion for Return No. 249 be amended so that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

For the operation of licensed non-profit Special Care Homes; (a) the number of beds in operation for 

the month of July 1971; (b) Total cost of guest care for the month of July 1971; (c) Total amount of 

Government financial assistance for care for the month of July 1971. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, just a comment. I think this amendment gives me most of 

the information. 

 

I am not sure, I can’t remember correctly whether or not commercial homes supplied us with a rate. 

Certainly I knew the rates and was very familiar with them. 

 

The Information that I am interested in is if this would be the total number of beds in operation for the 

month of July 1971. I am interested in the total number of beds in the Province of Saskatchewan, the 

total cost, so that your (c) part does make some sense in the question following. It would make more 

sense if we did know the total number of beds including commercial homes. I am not sure, I can’t recall, 

whether or not the Minister does, but I can talk that over with the Minister and maybe submit a 

secondary question. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 250 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — (Milestone) moved that an Order of the 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1821 

Assembly do issue for a Return No. 250 showing: 

 

The total cost for all beds in Special Care Facilities according to the approved rates as of April 1, 

1973. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, once again I merely reiterate what I said on the previous Motion. 

One or two additional comments. The question of the cost of operation is what has caused us part of the 

difficulty. We could tell the rates charged by a commercial facility, but not the cost of operating the 

facility. In order to answer the question accurately, we have suggested the change. It should also be 

noted that instead of saying on a particular date we are saying for a month. This, I think, provides the 

same information and is much easier for us to provide. With reference to the total number of beds, I 

would be happy to provide the information. 

 

So it is, therefore, moved by myself and seconded by the Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) that: 

 

The Motion for Return No. 250 be amended so that all the words after the word “show” be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

For the operation of licensed non-profit special care homes: (a) The estimated number of beds for 

operation for the month of April 1973. (b) The estimated total cost of guest care for the month of 

April, 1973. (c) The estimated total amount of government financial assistance for care for the month 

of April, 1973. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, I just want to ask one question and I hope that the total 

amount of Government financial assistance for care in the month of April, 1973 also includes the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 15 — Irrigation Project Near Outlook 
 

Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin) moved, seconded by Mr. Loken (Rosetown): 

 

That this Assembly express its regrets at the cancellation of the Irrigation Project on the west side of 

the South Saskatchewan River, near Outlook and further that this Assembly urges the Saskatchewan 

Government to reconsider its decision to cancel this project. 

 

he said: Mr. Speaker, I believe that very few people in Saskatchewan were prepared for the recent 

announcement by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) that he was cancelling the irrigation project 

on the west side of the South Saskatchewan River near Outlook. Who would have predicted that this 

potentially great project would be dealt a death blow by a Minister and a Department which are 

supposed to be dedicated to the promotion 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1822 

of diversified farming? It is obvious now that this NDP Government is not sincere when they speak of 

diversification. 

 

Water is a magic word to farmers and especially to farmers in that area of the province. Water is needed 

to grow grain crops, to grow feed for livestock and to water livestock. Water also brings the promise of 

new types of crops, such as sugar beets and vegetables. Farmers know that nature does not always 

provide sufficient water in the form of rain. For this reason, most rain-deficient areas of North America 

have developed some sort of an irrigation program. 

 

It is no answer for the Minister to say that getting started in irrigation is expensive. Of course it is 

expensive. It was expensive in Alberta, California, Arizona and in other places that have successful 

irrigation programs. It takes time, it takes money to develop the skills, the works and the equipment and 

the auxiliary industries and the markets. It takes research and it takes imagination. 

 

Alberta, many years ago, faced a situation that we face today. They, too, had their doubts about 

irrigation but they had men of vision and determination and they now have a prosperous irrigation 

economy. 

 

The Minister must surely be aware that in stopping the works on the west side is putting the kiss of death 

on the present development on the east side of the river. A successful irrigation project must be of 

sufficient total size to attract auxiliary enterprises, such as canneries, or sugar beet plants. 

 

Technical, advisory and research facilities cannot be economically maintained for the small east side 

project. If the east side farmers find themselves in difficulty in the future, and it is possible that they 

will, it will be largely due to the actions of Agriculture Minister Messer in shutting down the works on 

the west side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, a wave of pessimism and depression is sweeping over the irrigation 

community in our province and the Minister of Agriculture is responsible for it. 

 

This entire area has planned for many years in the development of an irrigation economy. People have 

changed their places of residence. They have changed their way of life, they have invested their money 

because they believed in the future of irrigation. They have faith in irrigation, but apparently this 

Government did not. They pulled the rug out from under the irrigation people by cancelling the project. 

 

I am sure that everyone knows that there is a vast difference between dry land farming and irrigation 

farming. Irrigation is intensive farming as opposed to the extensive type we are used to. Those who did 

not choose intensive farming have sold their land over the past ten years because irrigation is coming. 

Others who wanted to farm in this way moved into the area and acquired land. Both of these groups 

believed that all governments would honor commitments to go ahead with irrigation plans. No one ever 

dreamed that a government, or an Agricultural Minister would ever come along and scuttle a 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1823 

program that so many had worked so hard to initiate. 

 

The Minister’s order means that great canals and reservoirs will be abandoned, in many places only half 

finished. This cancellation means that towns and villages which have looked to this project for future 

water supplies will have to look elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a recent letter to the editor of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, dated February 27, expresses the 

sentiment of a good number of people and I should like to quote from this letter for the record. I will 

then table this so that the contents will be available to all Members. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Did you write it? 

 

Mr. Gardner: — You’ll see who wrote it in a minute. I am reading from a letter to the editor, 

Star-Phoenix, February 27. It is headed, “Almost Unbelievable.” 

 

The decision of the Saskatchewan Government to stop further extension of the Saskatchewan River 

Water Development and Irrigation Project is almost unbelievable. As a member of Public Works 

Minister John Brockelbank’s executive in the Mayfair constituency, I am shocked that our 

Government has been so short-sighted. At this time, when many people are leaving Saskatchewan to 

find work elsewhere and many others are on social aid or unemployment insurance both paid by the 

taxpayer, wouldn’t it be smarter to use some of these funds to complete this project? 

 

And she goes on to say: 

 

Our constituency executive has been asked for an emergency meeting on this issue. We will ask our 

Member of the Legislature to report and explain. 

 

And it goes further, the second last paragraph: 

 

It seems true democracy in the present New Democratic Party is somewhat lacking. Who does decide 

the policy and program of our moves? We, the membership, or some super braintrust in Regina? Are 

our own elected Members too afraid to tackle the real issues or are they merely ‘yes’ men for someone 

else? 

 

This is signed by Mrs. Eva Phelps, Executive Member, Mayfair constituency, New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — This, Mr. Speaker, may have led to the meeting that we had a few days ago in Mayfair 

constituency where the present Minister of Government Services got up and told about what they were 

doing and he said: 

 

You know, the Liberals are masters of misinformation. It is our responsibility, not only to inform 

people about what the Government is doing, but to correct false impressions. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1824 

So then he goes on to give a bit of a false impression of his own. He said: 

 

We decided that the best course was to proceed with farm programs that create the greatest good for 

the greatest number. In addition we did not abandon the South Saskatchewan Irrigation area, in fact, 

we are spending almost $750,000 on establishment of an alfalfa cubing plant there. 

 

Now if you look into the facts of this alfalfa cubing plant, you will see, that, true it does cost $750,000, 

that a group of local people out there have established a co-operative to build it — the Government is 

not going to build it. Loans were obtained from several sources, including The Co-op Loans Guarantee 

Act, $85,000 from the Department of Agriculture, and the members of the Co-op each put in $500 and 

also the Government has become a member of this Co-op and they have bought one share worth $500. 

So when Mr. Brockelbank says that ‘We are spending $750,000 on establishment of an alfalfa cubing 

plant’ the truth is that they are spending $500 and this is the total cash contribution of the NDP 

Government. They saw fit to announce it in the Budget Speech, they talked a great deal about how they 

are building this cubing plant and we find now that their contribution is $500. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you might note that the original agreement for this project, this irrigation project, was 

signed by an NDP Government in Saskatchewan and a Conservative Government n Ottawa. 

 

People from all political parties are greatly concerned about the cancellation of irrigation on the South 

Saskatchewan River. The Honorable John Diefenbaker, refers to it as a gross betrayal by the NDP 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Federal Environmental Minister Jack Davis says that all necessary action is being 

taken to see that the Saskatchewan Government upholds an agreement to irrigate southern parts of the 

province with water from Diefenbaker Lake. 

 

Now we are not too sure to what extent the contracts with the Federal Government are being broken. We 

do not know whether the NDP Government is living up to its legal responsibility or whether it is not. We 

do know that they are not living up to their moral responsibility to the people of that area or to the 

people of the province and I think the letter that I quoted from to the editor expresses a view of a good 

number of people. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Messer, sent a letter to all households in the area in an attempt to 

justify his decision to halt the irrigation program and I have a copy of his letter here from the Minister of 

Agriculture, to the householder. He talks first of all about the extreme cost involved. He says that 

priority must be placed on developing markets for irrigation products and securing processing facilities. 

 

Now surely, Mr. Speaker, he is not suggesting that markets will be available and processing facilities 

will be built when there is no land being irrigated. Surely no one is going to 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1825 

build a sugar beet plant or a cannery, or some other facility when no land is available to grow sugar 

beets or vegetables. The Minister also says in his letter that deferring the west side does not violate the 

1958 Federal-Provincial agreement. Now this is the statement that he makes in his letter, but it is 

certainly open to question. 

 

For example, on page 3 of his letter he says, “That the agreement calls for the province to develop works 

for 50,000 acres.” But on page 1 he said, “That the construction works are completed to serve 40,000 

and that only 17,000 are actually being irrigated at the present time.” I believe it would need a thorough 

study by legal experts to determine if the agreements have been broken and to what extent. I certainly 

don’t feel qualified to make a judgment on this, and I don’t think the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 

Messer, is qualified either. Although he seems to have made this judgment in spite of this in his letter. 

 

In his letter the Minister of Agriculture speculates on the cost of bringing land under irrigation and he 

does indicate that this is perhaps speculation. These costs are certainly open to questions. Costs can vary 

widely depending on the type of soil, drainage problems, distances, type of distribution systems, 

headworks, structures and so on. They can also vary widely from year to year. But most important, these 

costs can be vastly different depending on where the capital costs are charged and this is the key point. 

Water available from irrigation canals and reservoirs may also be used for municipal water supplies, 

industry, processing, recreation and many other uses. It is, therefore, obviously unrealistic to charge all 

capital costs to irrigating a certain number of acres of land. Proper allocation of these capital costs can 

only be done after extensive studies and surveys of a particular project. There is no indication that 

studies of this nature have been done, or are planned in the Outlook area. I have obtained copies of 

studies done in Alberta, and I appreciate that they are complicated. But they are also absolutely 

necessary. It is also very important that studies be made to show where the benefits of an irrigation 

program accrue. Alberta, again, has made extensive surveys in this regard and these independent surveys 

in Alberta indicate that the Federal Government, the Government of Canada, benefits by about 35 per 

cent of the total benefit derived from an irrigation community. The province benefits by about 30 per 

cent, the local community or municipality about 30 per cent and a small balance, perhaps 5 per cent to 

the person who is actually doing the farming. 

 

Negotiations are under way between Alberta and the Federal Government involving a very large federal 

grant to rehabilitate irrigation works in that province and you will recall that some of their irrigation 

works were started in 1919 and 1920 and some of the original works, the capital works, need 

rehabilitation and they are in the process of negotiating with the federal people. 

 

Because of the benefits accruing to the Government of Canada, such a grant is certainly justified and for 

the same reason, a grant of this nature would be also justified in Saskatchewan. Now we have no 

evidence to indicate that this Government has asked for substantial financial assistance to complete the 

irrigation works at Outlook and to sum up, Mr. Speaker, I should like to emphasize the following points: 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1826 

1. The Province of Saskatchewan has about 40 per cent of the total arable land in Canada, but essentially 

it has no irrigation and no canning industry. One of the few provinces with no canning industry of any 

nature. 

 

2. Alberta has about 600,000 acres irrigated — we at the moment have only 17,000 irrigated. Experts 

agree that the potential in Saskatchewan should about equal that of Alberta. The potential for irrigation 

here is certainly equal to that of Alberta. 

 

3. Cancelling our irrigation program would be a mistake at any time. It could become a major disaster, if 

we encounter dry years like we have had in the past. 

 

4. People of the immediate area, people of all political faiths throughout the province, are concerned and 

disappointed at the action of the Minister in cancelling this project. 

 

5. When money is spent on irrigation, no government should expect immediate returns. The main 

benefits could well be felt five, ten or twenty years from now, in both the provincial level and the federal 

level. Immediate benefits, of course, should be available to the local area as the irrigation community is 

being established. 

 

It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the cancellation decision was made by the Minister of Agriculture on the 

spur of the moment. It is not yet too late to correct the mistake that he has made. We call on the Minister 

even now to initiate long-range feasibility studies and evaluations to truly determine the benefits of our 

irrigation program. I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, move this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. P. Mostoway: — (Hanley) Mr. Speaker, I should like to speak briefly on the Resolution 

proposed by the Hon. Member form Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). 

 

First of all I think attention should be focused on his use of the word ‘cancellation’ which is misleading. 

In my books the word ‘cancellation’ implies striking out into oblivion, never to be recovered again. Now 

I ask the Hon. Member where he got the idea that such will be the case with the west side development 

or did he deliberately distort the wording? Did he wish deliberately to mislead? Well, I ask him these 

questions because I am of the opinion that this halting of the west side development is only temporary, 

not to be forever scrapped as suggested by the Member opposite. But then one has to realize that 

word-distortion is a forte of his when he can use it for cheap political gain. You know, I should like to 

tell you that it has really got out of hand lately, this distortion. It has been so bad that even capital “S” 

Sparrows have been shooting off their mouths lately. No, Mr. Speaker, the project is not cancelled, it is 

only being temporarily halted until all parties can have an opportunity to appraise the situation 

realistically and for the benefit of all. 

 

Another point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that if the Members opposite would only get 

their facts from the people most directly concerned, they would be in a better position further to bridge 

the vast credibility gap that they have created 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1827 

between themselves and the people of this province. Now to whom did they run when they heard of 

postponement plans? Did they go out and ask the west side farmers? Oh, no, they didn’t, and why didn’t 

they? Well, I’ll tell you, because the vast majority, Mr. Speaker, of west bank farmers agree that the 

project should be temporarily halted. I know this because I have talked to farmers from the Outlook area 

recently. Then why is it that this point was never brought to the attention of the public and the Media? 

Why have the Liberals neglected this most interesting point? Could it be that they never even bothered 

to survey the farmers directly concerned because deep down they knew these farmers back the 

Government almost 100 per cent? Then, Mr. Speaker, to whom did they go for guidance in coming up 

with their pronouncements? Well, I’ll tell you, they went to a few businessmen. 

 

Now, I or rather this Government, respects the business community of Saskatchewan. This has been 

proven time and time again even when some Members opposite have openly criticized certain 

Saskatchewan businessmen. If our businessmen do well, more power to them, but they should not be the 

judges used in determining policies which most affect primary producers. Mr. Speaker, I sympathize 

with those businessmen who may lose some business as Government respects the desires of west side 

farmers. But isn’t this synonymous to the gamble other businessmen participate in? Is it not comparable 

to the chance that was taken by the employees of Quaker Oats in Saskatoon? Or the chance taken by 

most citizens of this province at one time or another? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention something on the closure of a rather large grocery store in Outlook. 

It is a well known fact that this store has not done well for quite a long time prior to the announcement 

that the west bank development would be temporarily halted. In no way did this announcement affect 

the closure of this store although there are some who would suggest this. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . closing out, here it is right here. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — You’re closing out? Well it’s about time you closed out. One may wonder why the 

vast majority of west bank farmers breathed a sigh of relief at this postponement. Now let’s look at the 

situation these farmers may have found themselves in as east bank farmers did in the recent past. Here 

they were, east bank farmers, with very high costs for installation of irrigation equipment. If they 

planted cereal crops they found their expenses terrifically high, yields high but quotas very low, thanks 

to the lunacy of the Lang plan, which in the past forced the farmers of this province to have to knuckle 

under to the Federal Government’s inability to sell our farmers’ grain. It is with this in mind that I say to 

Opposition Members, if you are concerned with the situation, and I have no real reason to believe 

otherwise, ask the Federal Government for a realistic selling and production farm products policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certain Government employees find themselves in a position where they aren’t too sure 

about where they will be working in the future. I don’t like it, the public doesn’t like it, nor does this 

Government like it. However, it should be pointed out that this Government has indicated it will use 

every means possible to place these people in other areas of the 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1828 

province. Surely all Members will agree that no government, not even a Liberal or a New Democrat 

would not like to see these employees placed in other positions. I ask Members opposite, were you as 

vocal as you now are when giant corporations laid off employees in Saskatchewan recently and there 

was little effort spent in trying to find other jobs for these employees on the part of these giant 

corporations? Where were you then? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that this Government will spare no effort to place these people in other 

positions. At this point, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that when development resumes in this area I 

hope that Saskatchewan will make every effort to help see that markets are available to all irrigation 

farmers, west and east bank. It is my hope that should these markets not be there, the Government might 

consider actively promoting the establishment of such plants as sugar refinery, a vegetable processing 

plant and possibly a starch plant whereby potash companies would use the starch in conjunction with the 

potato industry in that area. When I refer to Government involvement, I mean involvement in the initial 

stages, involvement which will lead to eventual people control in these ventures through such things as 

possibly co-operative. 

 

Before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention a few points that the previous speaker had touched on. 

He read a letter by Mrs. Phelps. Well, I just want to point out to Members opposite that it is only in this 

Party where you will find dissent within the Party. You won’t find it in your Party because the 

opportunity is never there for dissent in your Party. I also want to mention something about the Alfalfa 

Cubing Plant at Broderick. Sly inference by the Members opposite lead me to believe that he thinks that 

there is something shady in that whole deal. Well, I will tell you one thing. I know most of the Members 

who are involved there, and I don’t think they are going to be too pleased when they hear that he has 

implied that there is something shady on the part of their actions in the past. I consider that a slap in the 

face to the farmers in that area who are involved in that cubing plant, and I am quite sure that they will 

be hearing about that. 

 

Mr. Lane: — You wouldn’t go and tell anybody, Paul. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Oh, certainly not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will vote against this Resolution which shows disrespect for the wishes of the Outlook 

west bank farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I am going to make a few brief 

remarks with respect to this particular Resolution. First of all, I think the Resolution is incorrectly 

worded. Quite frankly it should not say ‘cancellation’ and the word ‘cancel’ should not appear in the last 

line. It should read ‘deferment’ and ‘to defer the project’ in the last line. It is obvious that it is only 

businesslike and reasonable for the Government to take a hard look at the situation with respect to that 

irrigation project simply because the area which has been developed to date has been very, very 

expensive and it does not look, at the moment, as if it could even pay off its capital costs. There is a 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1829 

vast difference between cancellation and deferment and I know that there would be no reason to explain 

that to the Members opposite, they wouldn’t believe it in any event. Even the Members who introduced 

the Resolution talked about stopping the development and obviously if you stop something you may 

well start it again. There is an obvious sequence here of stopping and starting. If the Member for 

Lumsden (Mr. Lane) would put both feet in his mouth at the same time and keep quiet I would be able to 

get finished with this a little more quickly. 

 

The Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) who introduced the Resolution made some comments with 

regard to the cubing plant and he talked about misrepresentation with respect to the money that the 

Government was involved in. He also tried to imply that all the Government was involved in with 

respect to this cubing plant, Mr. Speaker, was some $500 in the form of shares. He later admitted that 

$85,000 was available with respect to the project from Government sources. He also neglected to 

mention that there is approximately $250,000 of working capital being advanced by the Department of 

Agriculture in relation to the cubing plant. 

 

He also made some reference about unfinished canals. Mr. Speaker, there are no unfinished canals in 

this irrigation project. I know that area well and there are no partially completed canals. They are 

completed in total. 

 

It is logical and reasonable for the Government to take a good hard look at this project. The whole 

project is not being cancelled. Obviously it creates some disruption, we are well aware of that fact, but it 

is in deferment. I obviously, therefore, will oppose the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Owens: — (Elrose) Mr. Speaker, I am not directly concerned with the end that the water comes out 

of the spout they are talking about but I am on the end where it starts. It happens to be in my 

constituency and I should like to have a few words to say on this at a later time and I beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition) moved third reading of Bill No. 04 — An Act to amend An 

Act to incorporate The Northern Saskatchewan Co-operative Stock Yards, Limited be now read a third 

time. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes: — (Touchwood) Mr. Speaker, I am only going to speak a minute or two on this Bill to 

say what I said in Committee of the Whole so that it may go on the records. I am going to support the 

Bill. 

 

When this Bill was before the Private Bills Committee, and the witnesses appeared, I asked the lawyer, 

Mr. Harradence whether the co-operative association, the word co-operative was in it, whether it was 

actually following the traditional rules of the co-operative philosophy. His answer was that it really was 

not. Most co-operatives in this province (except for four or five which are not registered under The 

Co-operatives 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1830 

Associations Act) as such must follow those rules and bylaws, the standard bylaws of co-operatives. If 

they are not, the Registrar has the power to cancel them off the books. With this Association which was 

formed under a Private Bill of 1919, there is no way that this can be enforced. 

 

Further, since the Bill was before the Private Bills Committee, I have had further discussion and further 

investigations and although I am still not happy doing it in this way but because there are many old 

shareholders who need these amendments so that they may be paid off, I am prepared to support the Bill. 

I would ask that the Department of Co-operation in the next 12 months might consult with the Northern 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Livestock Yards and either request them to start acting like a co-operative 

or that they might consider coming before the Private Bills Committee again and straightening out the 

word ‘co-operative’. 

 

With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I will support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I should like to make one or two 

comments with respect to this Bill as well. I have some objection to the use of the word ‘co-operative’ in 

the title. I realize that when the organization was set up back in 1919 it probably was fitting to have the 

word ‘co-operative’ there. It obviously is not operated as a co-operative now because the seller of 

livestock to the organization does not secure a proportion of the earnings in relation to his patronage. 

 

The earnings are distributed to shareholders. I could comment on the fact that one thing very much in its 

favor is the fact that it permits only one vote per shareholder. They do not vote in relation to the number 

of shares the individual holds. I, like the Member form Touchwood, have some objection to the word 

‘co-operative’ in the title. Although I will support the Bill, I should like to place a reservation on it as 

well. I think the Department of Co-operation definitely should have a look at the operation of this 

organization within the next 12 months and do one of two things. Make sure that the operation does 

become co-operative in nature or conversely that the word ‘co-operative’ is taken form the title. 

 

With that reservation I will support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, I think the comments of the Members 

opposite are well taken. I won’t repeat why these amendments are necessary to put that company in 

good order. They probably were a co-operative back when they started. It has been so long and the 

original stockholders, shareholders, have passed their shares on, in fact, it would be great difficulty 

finding many of the original shareholders right now. There probably are other companies or business 

enterprises in the province, there may be, I don’t know if there are any or not, but there may be some 

that have the title co-operative in their name or use the name co-operative in their title. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1831 

I think that a look into this might be quite appropriate by the Department of Co-operative Affairs. But I 

appreciate that the Members tend to support this and I ask the House to support it. So then this company 

can put its affairs in proper order and then if the Department of Co-operatives wants to sit down with 

them then that is another question. But I don’t disagree with the Members who spoke, that came out very 

clearly when we brought the Bill before the Committee. And I do appreciate the fact that I hope most 

Members will support this so that they can get on and then if they make any changes from now on it can 

be dealt with at a later date. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 237 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 237 showing: 

 

(a) The total amount of loans received from the Provincial Government or any of its agencies by 
Intercontinental Packers Limited to March 1, 1973 and the terms of any such loans. (b) The total 

amount of the loans and interest outstanding as of March 1, 1973. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — (Minister of Industry and Commerce) Mr. Speaker, the Assembly will recognize that 

this is a most unusual request that confidential information about one of the clients of the Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation should be made public by becoming the subject of an Order for 

Return in the Assembly. 

 

Members of the Assembly will be well aware that people who come to SEDCO must divulge all kinds of 

information about their business affaires in order to have their application for a loan properly evaluated. 

And it has been the practice of SEDCO ever since it was established away back in the early 1960s to 

deal with applicants and clients on the same basis as a customer in a chartered bank or a shareholder 

applying for a loan in a local credit union. There is therefore, confidentiality between the borrower and 

the lender in the operations of SEDCO. Now that is a good practice to follow if SEDCO is to carry out 

its obligations under its legislation. 

 

Because this notice of Motion for Return asks for something so unusual in the practice of SEDCO, I 

took the trouble to have some extensive discussion with the management of Intercontinental Packers 

Limited. And because the management of the company has agreed that this information should be made 

available, I wish to inform the Assembly that I have no objection to the Order passing in the wording 

which exists on the Order Paper. But in doing so, I want to make it abundantly clear, that this is not to be 

taken as precedent, that other information about this particular borrower of SEDCO will necessarily be 

made public. And I especially want to emphasize to all of the people who now have loans from SEDCO 

and all of the people who are applying for loans and who will apply for loans in the future, that they will 

continue to deal with SEDCO on the basis of confidentiality. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1832 

And that SEDCO, its officers, the members of the board, will treat as privileged any information which 

they receive from any such people in the course of carrying out their duties in the operation of SEDCO. 

 

So I want it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that while I have no objection to this Order passing in the 

wording that appears on the Order Paper (because I have the assurance that this particular client of 

SEDCO has no objection) it is not a precedent. But it is not to be taken that such information will in any 

way be made available or made public on any future occasion. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Hon. Member has informed the House that they 

intend to give us this information. I was somewhat startled and surprised that the Premier said stand on 

the first Order for Return on the adjourned debate which was to ask for the complete financial statement 

of Intercontinental Packers for the years 1970-71 and 1971-72. It has been now some three weeks since 

— or two weeks or a long time — since the announcement of the purchase of the Government of 45 per 

cent of the shares of Intercontinental Packers for $10.2 million was made. And there has been nothing, 

absolutely nothing, to hinder the Government without waiting for these to be debated in this House, to 

have made public in this House, or public in a statement, the conditions under which they bought this 

company, at least what they based their price on. 

 

I have here a copy of a Dun and Bradstreet report . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I should like to remind the Leader of the Opposition, No. 1 is standing, we are 

debating No. 2. I hope the Hon. Member will not get the two mixed up. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am not getting the two mixed up, Mr. Speaker. I am talking about information from 

SEDCO. I am talking about information generally. 

 

The Hon. Minister said this is normally privileged information and I agree it is. But as I say I have a 

statement here from Dun and Bradstreet that was for February 1972 concerning Intercontinental Packers 

Limited, Pacific Meat Company and Payway Feeds. Now I don’t know whether this is for the entire 

company that the Government of Saskatchewan paid $10.2 million for 45 per cent. But this shows that 

the net worth in that year of that company was $4.5 million to $5 million for the whole company. Now 

obviously when the Government paid what they did for less than half of the company, they valued this 

company at something better than $22 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Which motion is he on? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He is discussing the Motion for Return No. 236 where he is asking for the financial 

statement, not on the next one which is now before the House, asking for loans. I believe the Leader of 

the Opposition has got his motions mixed up. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I’ll discuss it under the next motion, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1833 

The next motion, unless the Government wants to stand it and avoid discussing this whole question, is 

on who conducted the audit, the financial statements and so on. 

 

But let me say this to the Minister of Industry. We recognize that this is a different deal and we are not 

suggesting that every loan SEDCO makes should be made public. On the contrary we recognize the 

confidentiality, the necessity of the confidentiality, of their dealings with individuals and with 

corporations. But, surely he is not suggesting that SEDCO on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan pay 

out over $10 million for 45 per cent for very many corporations because they don’t. I am aware that 

SEDCO has owned equity shares and has taken equity shares in several corporations and may still keep 

this practice up. A very minor position may be in a corporation so they can put people on the board of 

directors and keep their finger on the pulse of the company to which they have lent money. I have no 

objection to that, I think that in many cases it is a sound practice. But this is a totally different departure. 

So we recognize that this is not a precedent, all we say is that it should be a precedent any time you pay 

out this kind of money and become this large a shareholder. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I won’t continue with the line of debate I have in concerning this statement but I will 

on the next resolution which I think is broad enough to cover it. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 238 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 238 showing: 

 

(a) Whether the Government of Saskatchewan conducted an audit of the financial statements of 
Intercontinental Packers Limited prior to its purchase of shares of the company. (b) If so, who 

conducted the audit. (c) A copy of the audit. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by my seatmate the Minister of the 

Environment (Mr. Byers) that Order No. 238 be amended by deleting all the words after the word 

“showing” and substituting the following: 

 

(a) Whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan had available to it audited financial statements 
of Intercontinental Packers Limited prior to the Government’s purchase of 45 per cent of the shares of 

the company. (b) If so, who conducted the audit. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, of course this amendment absolutely denies the information that we want. 

All the Government would answer on there is yes, they had it done and they had it done by Clarkson and 

Gordon or somebody else and that would be all. We also asked for a copy of the audit. I think we can 

talk then — we wanted their financial statement, we wanted their audit. It is obvious now that the 

Government has no intention of giving to us, or to the public, the material, the background on which 

they based this deal. I don’t blame them. It is beginning to look like some of the information we have 

received 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1834 

may be true or closer to the truth than they will admit. As I said before, I have a copy here of a Dun and 

Bradstreet report, dated as of February 2, 1972, just a little over one year ago. It indicates the net worth 

of that entire operation is $4.5 million to $5 million. 

 

Now we paid $10.0 million for less than half. So when I made the statement that it would come out if 

the truth ever came out, if we can get the truth from this Government on this deal that they paid at least 

twice too much. It begins to look as if they may have paid four or four and a half times too much. When 

I said that this could be a public scandal, I think I am closer to the truth now than I was then. And if it is 

not a public scandal and if you did not pay too much, then why are you refusing to give to this House 

and to the public, the background of the deal and the financial statements? Don’t tell me that the 

financial statements are not in the best interest of the public. Don’t tell me that when we made deals 

involving Prince Albert Pulp Mill, Meadow Lake Pulp Mill, that we didn’t put the entire deal on the 

table because we did. You may be 45 per cent owners of bologna makers but we can recognize the kind 

of Government bologna, how thin you are slicing it. 

 

We laid every document on the table, except some correspondence between Parsons and Whittemore 

and ourselves. We laid the studies on the table, we laid the evaluation, we laid the entire deal and so we 

should have. 

 

The present Premier, at that time when we made the Prince Albert Pulp Mill deal public, was the 

financial critic. I think he was the Leader of the Opposition when we made the proposed deal with the 

Meadow Lake sawmill and the Meadow Lake Pulp. The Opposition had all the information that we had 

and they asked about their right and their responsibility. I didn’t agree with their criticism but we gave 

them the information as we should have done for their information and criticism. 

 

This report goes on to say that the sales of that company are about $100 million. That would be their 

sales probably for 1971. This information is what I remember about Intercontinental because I was 

Member of the Government when Intercontinental borrowed money from SEDCO. As a result SEDCO 

have their statement. And you have their statement. You have their last year’s statement, the year before 

statement, you probably have statements for the last three year or four years of Intercontinental Packers. 

And I say that you have a moral obligation, you have a moral obligation ever since you announced that 

deal to make those statements public, give to the public of this province the information on which you 

based that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now, I think last year they probably increased that by their sales about $30 million. But 

if my memory serves me right, when we were the Government and Intercontinental Packers borrowed 

money of SEDCO, they were doing less than $100 million a year. I expect that 1972 saw them do maybe 

as high as $120 or $130 million. 

 

I have a statement from Burns and Company which is their annual report for 1971. It is a public 

company and, of course, their statement is public as is that of Canada Packers. So to 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1835 

say that to make their statement public would interfere with their position or would do harm to 

Intercontinental Packers, of course, would just not stand up. 

 

But it is very interesting to note that in 1971, about the same year for which we have this Dun and 

Bradstreet report, Burns and Company which is a much more diversified company did $359 million 

worth of business. And they made a net profit of $3.133 million. They made a net profit of about .85 of 

sales. A little under one per cent. Now Burns and Company is a much more diversified corporation than 

is Intercontinental Packers. I think it is a well known fact that the profit of Burns and Company 

percentage wise would be probably somewhat higher than Intercontinental Packers. Based on figures 

that we have from the Dun and Bradstreet report and what we know has happened to Burns and 

Company and Canada Packers, I would estimate that Intercontinental would probably make somewhere 

between .5 and .6 per cent net income on their gross turnover. Which would give them a net profit of 

that year of anywhere from $500,000 to $600,000. Again, checking with people who are experts in the 

field of evaluation of the worth of corporations, I am informed that a multiple of 10 to 12 times net 

earnings is reasonable for a corporation engaged in the packing house business such as Intercontinental 

Packers. So taking that multiple of 10 to 12 times of their profit of anywhere from $500,000 to 

$700,000, we find that again the value of the corporation comes out anywhere from $5 million to $8 

million. That is for 1971. For 1972 it could be higher. It could be maybe as high as $10 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether this report is accurate or not. I don’t know if you can compare, very 

closely, the financial operations of Intercontinental Packers and Burns. I am confident of one thing, that 

Intercontinental Packers is about one-third the size of Burns, that I am confident of. Burns, in 1971, did 

$359 million worth of business and made about $3 million. I know that a multiple of 10 to 12 times 

earnings is fair and reasonable. And so if you work backwards from what you people obviously 

evaluated or placed on the total value of Intercontinental Packers you placed a value of about $23 

million. 

 

This means that they must have had a net profit in the last year of something over $2 million, probably 

approaching $2.5 million. I just can’t believe, in fact, no one can convince me that a company which is 

about a third the size of Burns and Company and not nearly as diversified could show a net profit within 

a third of what they did in Burns and Company. I say this to the Premier, and I say this to the 

Government, again, I don’t know whether this information is accurate, I don’t know if we can base a 

judgment on it, it is so far out and quite frankly there has to be more to it. I have to believe there is more 

to it. 

 

Maybe Dun and Bradstreet are giving a report on only one part of the company. Maybe when the 

Government of Saskatchewan, through SEDCO made a deal, they bought much more than appears in the 

report of Dun and Bradstreet. For example, did you buy their feedlots, they have one or maybe two 

feedlots in my understanding in the name of Mr. Mendel himself? I understand there is a considerable 

amount of property that surrounds the land at Saskatoon, property that would be very valuable. Now, at 

one time that was not in the name of Mr. Mendel, maybe it is now and maybe you bought it, or maybe 

you bought 45 per cent of it. I 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1836 

say this very sincerely and very seriously, that this report and the knowledge we have of Intercontinental 

Packers when we were the Government, that is only 19 or 20 months ago, indicates that the value of this 

company is nowhere near $22 or $23 million. In fact our information and our knowledge from what we 

have here indicates that the value of the company isn’t even $10 million. I say the Government has a 

most serious responsibility because when a person goes on the board of directors of SEDCO, and he is 

also on the board of directors, the senior financial officer of Intercontinental Packers, at the time when 

the deal was very obviously being made sometime between last January and March, when the deal was 

announced it would appear that that would very probably be a time when this deal was coming to a 

climax, coming to fruition, again I say the Government has a serious responsibility to explain. 

 

We have some evidence where we present seriously to this House to indicate that the value of this 

company appears to be far, far less than the Government paid for it, then I say to the Government very 

seriously, give us the facts. I don’t think you have the right, you may have the legal right, you can vote 

down the resolution, you can stall on the answers. But I say to you, I don’t think you have the moral 

right to deny to the people of Saskatchewan this information. So I ask the Members in this House, on 

both sides of the House, to defeat this amendment and force the Government, if they are not prepared to 

do it, and I am talking to Members on both sides, not just in the Government, to force the Government to 

give to us, and what is more important to the public, this information. I say to the Premier when this 

comes up again, I hope they won’t ask to stand the first resolution which asks for the complete financial 

statements for the years 1970, 1971, 1972. If they haven’t got them for 1971, they must have them for 

1972. The 1973 fiscal year isn’t completed. I understand their fiscal year used to end in June, maybe it is 

still in June so they wouldn’t have the statements for the 1973 fiscal year. Give us what you have, lay 

before this House and the public of Saskatchewan, the hard facts on which you committed $10.2 million 

of the public’s money and involved this province in a major way in Intercontinental Pork Packers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a word or two to what my colleague 

the Minister of Industry has said. He had made clear, I think, the information which we believe is in the 

best interest of the Government and the public. He has indicated the reasons why we are not able, as we 

see it, to accede to the request of the Opposition that all financial statements of Intercontinental Packers 

be made known. The Leader of the Opposition has referred to some information. I am sure I don’t know 

the details of the Dun and Bradstreet statement. I do know that Dun and Bradstreet statements are 

traditionally made up on the basis of the financial statements of the company. There is no real 

relationship between the book value of a company’s assets and their actual value, if the company has 

been in business for a good number of years. We all know that one can look at the book value of the 

assets of any number of companies and find them very, very much less than the actual value. I invite all 

Hon. Members to pick up the annual report of let’s say, Saskatchewan Government Printing Company, 

that has been around for a while, and look at the book value of those assets and ask 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1837 

whether any Government acting properly would sell that company for the book value or twice the book 

value. I invite you to look at, let’s say, the statements of the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service and 

ask whether any government sold that company for three times the book value, they would be selling it 

for too little . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — How about 12 times the net profit? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Or 12 times the net profit, and that’s not too bad a multiple. 

 

I do want to make this statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would ask the House that since this is a private company and this kind of information would be of 

great interest to the competitors of the company, I don’t think it is in the public interest, and I would 

ask the House to defeat this motion . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You are quoting me! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am quoting Mr. D. G. Steuart, in 1970 with respect to a request for the net profit of 

the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited for 1969, a company in which we had invested in 1965 and in 

which at that time we had a risk not less than $50 million. At that time in a request merely for the net 

profit of the Prince Albert Pulp Company in 1969, and for the part if any of the profit which was paid to 

the Government in 1969, we heard the then Provincial Treasurer say: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the House that since this is a private company and this kind of information 

would be of great interest to the competitors of the Prince Albert Pulp Mill, I don’t think that this is in 

the public interest and I would ask the House to defeat this motion. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — All right give us the other facts, keep . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — that is precisely what you said. I am quoting from Hansard, page 960 of the Debates 

and Proceedings. 

 

May I then go in this same debate and quote: 

 

We are not going to give our competitors information that will be useful to them and perhaps harmful 

to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. I suggest again, Mr. Speaker, that this motion should be rejected. 

 

I am now quoting, not the Member for Prince Albert, but rather the late Member for Morse, the Hon. 

Premier. That was his view of the matter. This is on page 961. 

 

May I make a couple of points. May I make it clear that Intercontinental Packers is a private company, it 

is not a public company and never has been a public company. May I make it clear also that for many 

years it had been, in effect, a family owned company and it would be to the interests of that 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1838 

family to minimize the profit which would be declared for tax purposes. They have no shareholders to 

satisfy, no need for profits to be generated for dividends. They have, in fact, every interest in minimizing 

their profits in their financial statements. 

 

They are competing with companies like Burns. The Leader of the Opposition suggested that since their 

competitors are public companies it couldn’t hurt to make this information known about 

Intercontinental. I wonder why he didn’t say that with respect to the Prince Albert Pulp Company 

Limited. “We are not going to give their competitors information which would be useful to them.” Who 

would be the competitors of Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited? You know and I know that it would 

be MacMillan Bloedel, Domtar and the others which are public companies. You can get the statements 

of those companies. Surely if it is logical as I think perhaps it was, not to give out this information about 

Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited, where the public had a risk of $50 to $60 million, because it 

might cause damage to that company, surely I would think that it ought equally to be logical to say that 

if we are advised by the management of Intercontinental that they believe this information would be 

damaging in a commercial sense that we ought to accede to that advice, ought to recognize it, ought to 

take it into account. Therefore, we feel it is logical to give this House as much information as we can, 

which will not jeopardize this company and our stake in it, but not to give this House and, therefore the 

public, information which will be prejudicial to the best operations of the company. This is the choice 

we have to make. No one suggests these are easy choices. 

 

We have already agreed that we will change the SEDCO rules and make that information available. We 

are now going to give the House the assurance that there were audited financial statements available. We 

are taking the position, because we believe it is the right position, that we ought not to make available 

the full financial statements of this company because it will not be in the economic and financial best 

interests of the company. That is the information they have given us, it is the information that the 

previous Government received from the management of Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited when 

they had a 30 per cent interest, and the information we received from the senior management of 

Intercontinental when we have a 45 per cent interest. There is no difference in principle whatever. I can 

only rely upon the position previously taken. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What were you quoting from? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The 1970 Debates, at pages 960 for the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the Member 

for Prince Albert on March 17, and at page 961 for the Hon. Member for Morse, Mr. Thatcher. I could 

give you equally well worded quotations, if you wish, in respect to other requests for information, for 

example, the request for financial statements of Woodland Enterprises. “A copy of the most recently 

audited financial statements of Woodland Enterprises.” That one was voted down in 1969. “A copy of 

the most recent audited financial statement of Saskatchewan Pulpwood Limited.” That was voted down 

on Division in 1969. This practice was very clearly established by the then Government opposite. I don’t 

want to go back over all of that ground. 

 

May I ask the Members opposite to be as consistent as they 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1839 

were when they recorded their votes on March 18, 1969. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — How about your position when you were here? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Be that as it may, we obviously have to make a judgment. Members opposite made 

their judgment on Woodland Enterprises, on Saskatchewan Pulpwood Limited. We have to make a 

judgment, we believe that to give the information requested would be prejudicial to the interests of 

Intercontinental. Again, using the words of Mr. Thatcher, we do not think this information should be 

given. In his words, and I quote: 

 

We are not going to give their competitors information that would be useful to them and perhaps 

harmful to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. 

 

So I suggest again, Mr. Speaker, that this motion should be rejected. If I may paraphrase and ask the 

House to adopt the logic of the former Premier, we do not think we should give the competitors of 

Intercon information which would be useful to them and perhaps harmful to Intercontinental Packers. So 

I am suggesting to this House, Mr. Speaker, that this motion should be rejected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald: — (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, using the logic of the Premier, may I also give a 

quotation taken from the Debates and Proceedings for March 17, 1970. 

 

I am just saying that under these circumstances I suggest that the profit and loss picture of the Prince 

Albert Pulp Company Limited is a matter of great public concern particularly if we may be faced with 

a $50 million contingent liability. 

 

Not an outright investment, only a contingent liability! 

 

I understand that the profit and loss statement of the company would be available to the Government. I 

can’t imagine a circumstance under which it would not be available to the Government nor could I 

imagine a circumstance under which it would not be in the interest of the company to make known its 

profit picture. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that that is the real issue. The NDP has changed its skirts, but the 

issue . . . That’s right, Mr. Speaker, this is a different situation than that request. When we made an 

investment of $1.5 million in the Prince Albert Pulp Mill we unveiled everything. This is a moment, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Government is investing $10.2 million of the public’s money, not the profit and loss 

statement next year or the year after, then I think their argument might be more justified. This is a 

moment when they are making the decision to go into the bologna business and investing $10.2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should also like to remind you that the Premier said, when he became the Leader of the 

Government, we are going to have an open and frank government. I should like 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1840 

to tell them why this is so important. This Government has all of a sudden announced its intention to go 

into business in a major way. Not only the bologna business, but they want to go into the timber 

business, they want to go into the oil business; they have already invested in the steel business; they 

have announced they are going into the mineral business. Mr. Speaker, they are going to announce their 

specific intention of investing perhaps millions and millions of the taxpayers’ money. Surely the people 

of Saskatchewan at this time have a right to ask the question. Have they the responsibility, have they the 

ability to enter into the business picture in the Province of Saskatchewan in a reasonable way and in a 

way that is not a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan? The indications of Dun and Bradstreet and all 

the information that we have been able to get, Mr. Speaker, indicate that it isn’t just a bad deal, but a 

very, very, very bad deal. If this is true, Mr. Speaker, if this is true, then surely the Premier would be the 

first to get on his feet because I say that this Intercontinental picture and the refusal of the Minister of 

Industry and the Premier to grant this information will put a cloud over every attempt they have to enter 

into any business venture in the Province of Saskatchewan in the future. It will put over a serious cloud, 

Mr. Speaker, to refuse to give us the audited statement. The amendment that the Minister of Industry 

made is just an outright denial to the people of Saskatchewan to give any information whatsoever. He 

has given us the name of the company and he has answered, Yes. Mr. Speaker, I say that if they are 

going to invest millions of dollars of the taxpayers’ money into every kind of business venture in a 

major socialist way then they have a very serious responsibility to stand on their feet and give the people 

of Saskatchewan complete assurance that they have the sense of responsibility, that they have the 

business judgment, that they have the business acumen, that they can run this kind of business and that 

this has not been a deliberate waste and going down the drain of $5 million, $6 million or $7 million. 

 

Do you remember, Mr. Speaker, a few years ago when we talked about Choiceland? They knew the ore 

was in the ground, they knew the quality of the ore, the only thing was they questioned was the payout. 

They questioned the payout period, when they could pay for the shaft and the investment, because of the 

investment in the shaft. And they said that the risk was so great. And now they are putting $10.1 million 

of the taxpayers’ money into an investment that looks to be a very bad investment. 

 

I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will demand that this — and I am not saying 

that it is corrupt, I am just saying that their judgment is poor — and that they have the responsibility of 

proving that that judgment is correct. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Members of the House, on both sides, 

will recognize their responsibility to the public and recognize that it will put a cloud over every venture 

that they have entered into, and every venture that they will enter into, because the people of 

Saskatchewan are already saying that Intercontinental is a bad deal. This is going to prove it, and unless 

they can disprove and are willing to put the facts upon the table, I suggest to you that there will be the 

same reaction to every other venture that they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the Members of the House, I plead with them, make known the information that is 

requested here. No harm can come to Intercontinental. Every public company in the Dominion of 

Canada publishes its financial statements. There is 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1841 

no way that it is going to be damaged by its competitors by giving this information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. B. Grant: — (Regina Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, having been a chairman of SEDCO I can 

appreciate the importance of confidentiality, the handling of loans, etc. And I think the suggestion made 

by the minister is practical in their case. I don’t know how helpful it is to us. I doubt the assistance that it 

is going to give us. 

 

I think what the Member for Milestone has said is so true that the business interests of Canada and the 

Province of Saskatchewan are pretty suspicious of the Government opposite, because actions speak 

louder than words. They keep saying, oh, we are friends of the businessman and people don’t have to 

worry. But we have seen so much evidence in the last 19 months that this is not really true, that their 

actions indicate that business people do have something to fear. 

 

The Government has no intention of stopping at the Intercontinental Meat Packers business, and I should 

like to quote from a publication called, “Saskatchewan Business Journal, winter and spring 1972.” And 

it is an interview, “Premier Blakeney Talks Business,” Saskatchewan business. The interviewer had 

asked the Premier if he had any more schemes up his sleeve such as Medicare, Hospitalization and Auto 

Insurance and his question was: What about the new programs? The Premier, and I am quoting from the 

article: 

 

Right. I think there are a fair number of other areas that one can experiment with. I have in mind really 

an idea for a sort of Government sponsored mutual fund, which would be an attempt to offer to people 

who wish to invest in mutual funds — and a very large number of people do — an opportunity both to 

invest in mutual funds so that they may have an inflation hedge and also an opportunity to participate 

in Saskatchewan investments, in Saskatchewan industry, and an opportunity to get some measure of 

guaranteed return by reason of the Government offering some guarantees both as to capital and 

interest. 

 

Now, that is a fairly elaborate package and if it will be done, it will be the first one that I know of 

anywhere in the world where you have an equity security essentially which has a government 

guarantee. I think that Canadians are looking for an investment vehicle which has some measure of 

security because many of them don’t have enough of an investment portfolio that they can gamble on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an investment by the people of Saskatchewan in an industry here in Saskatchewan, 

and I think they are entitled to know whether it as a good buy and whether the returns, the dividends that 

they hope to get in the future, are based on a sound purchase. I think the Premier is absolutely wrong 

when he said it was not in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan to know this information and I 

hope that he would make it available because as indicated previously, it casts just one more cloud over 

the respectability of the present Government in the eyes of the business people in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1842 

Mr. D. F. MacDonald: — (Moose Jaw North) Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition made some 

statements. He said that he really didn’t know how true they were and so on. I wonder how many of the 

caucus Members opposite know how true or how good a deal Intercontinental Packers is. I think the 

only thing that the Members opposite have to base their opinions on are what the Premier and the 

Minister of Industry has told them. Maybe the Leader of the Opposition had some doubts as to the 

validity of the information, but I think that none of us should have any doubts as to that validity right 

now. 

 

I have seen the Premier of the province, Mr. Blakeney, get up on many occasions and he always puts on 

a great show in a debate. He always does quite well when he knows that he has some leg to stand on and 

he really gets going. But, today, was the weakest performance that I have ever seen the Premier put on in 

this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — He knows the Leader of the Opposition is right. He didn’t deny one of the things 

that the Leader of the Opposition said. He weaseled around and then quietly sat down. That proves that 

all of the statements that the Leader of the Opposition has made are absolutely true. I think if the 

information was important before the Premier spoke, it is twice as important now. 

 

You know he referred to the logic of Mr. Thatcher and he said that the information would be prejudicial 

to the interest of Intercontinental Packers. The truth of the matter is that the information will be 

prejudicial, it will be prejudicial against the NDP, not Intercontinental Packers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — He knows that information is going to sink the NDP to the lowest level they have 

ever been. This information is vital to the public and it is also vital to the Members on this side of the 

House. The information that we have proves that the Government has paid two, three or four times too 

much for that. But what is even so much more important, is that this is such a terrible deal for the 

Province of Saskatchewan, but in one more respect it is terrible. 

 

Saskatchewan is capital poor. No one will deny the fact that we don’t have capital. Here we have paid 

two, three or four times too much for an industry that employs over half of the people in that industry, 

outside of the Province of Saskatchewan. We need to spend our capital a little more wisely than what we 

have done. 

 

I urge all Members opposite to defeat the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, I should like to echo some of the comments 

made by the Members on this side. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1843 

The Government is obviously playing silly games with us in connection with this Motion. They are quite 

prepared to provide any amount of information as long as it does not give the Opposition or the people 

of Saskatchewan any opportunity of any kind to judge the merits of this transaction at all. 

 

The book value, of course, is not a real measure of the worth of a company. If anyone over on the other 

side of the House had been listening to the Members on this side of the House, you would have observed 

that we recognized two or three very valid ways in which to judge the real value of a company. 

 

The company valuation, according to the reports that we have, and these reports are fairly reliable in the 

sense that very seldom has any person successfully challenged a Dun and Bradstreet report. These 

people know more about your business than you would care to believe. 

 

The fact that this business is probably worth somewhere between $4.5 million to $5 million for 100 per 

cent of the business. This probably means, this means in fact, that the Government has probably paid for 

half the business, or less than half, an amount which should have bought two businesses of that kind. 

That $10 million should not only have bought 100 per cent of the company, it may well have had $5 

million left over to invest into something else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — It is quite clear that the arguments are foolish and I have no intention of getting into 

this battle of quotations form one side of the House to the other. It is quite obvious that despite the 

information and the fear that we hear from across the way, inviting me to sit down — oh, yes you would 

be glad to have us all sit down and not raise this question — the Government is rather hopeful that the 

Opposition will assume that the Government knows what it is doing. Well I can assure them from the 

experience that we have had of this Government up to now, we are quite convinced that you don’t know 

what you are doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The situation with the Prince Albert Pulp Mill was entirely different. There is no 

question about it that at the time the investment was made, full and complete disclosure was made to the 

Members of this House. 

 

What could it matter two and three years later, that information be made available. The decision to 

invest had been made, the judgment and the vote had been taken in this House. The decision had been 

made to invest upon all the information provided through the Government at that time, and that 

information, the feasibility studies and everything else was made available to the Opposition at that time 

too. 

 

That is the big difference. The Government which prides itself on being open and above board, in fact, is 

dealing everything under the table. They will not make anything available to this Opposition. They will 

not make it available to the people of Saskatchewan and I concur with my worthy friend from Moose 

Jaw North, I doubt that the Members of the Government, 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1844 

the caucus, the backbenchers on that side of the House, have any clue about this, and they too, must take 

on faith the question of whether this was a good deal or bad deal. 

 

I suggest to the Members across the way, the private Members who sit so tamely in their seats, I suggest 

to them that when the truth is known you will be embarrassed in your own constituencies. 

 

I predict, that in due course when the truth come out, you will have a hard time to get re-elected, and 

predict that the Government will do everything it can to prevent this information from being made prior 

to the next provincial election. In fact, I suggest that the Government has made such a stupid deal that 

they will not have the courage to produce this information before election time 1975. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now, we have heard some dumb remarks form the Premier. He suggested that if this 

was made available the company would do something to minimize its net profits. 

 

It seems to me that if the company has made a certain amount of profit the auditors would ferret this out 

and if the profit is a certain profit, it would be the same whether the information is made public or is 

kept private. Surely to goodness this company does not have the right to keep secret from the income tax 

department the true state of its profits. I presume that it will pay the proper amount of tax and will not be 

able to hide the facts and that making this public or keeping it private will have no result whatsoever, on 

the amount of the real net profits. 

 

It is amazing to me that the Premier who is a lawyer and should know better should make that kind of 

ridiculous statement. 

 

Mr. Cody: — . . . true . . . 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The hon. filter queen doesn’t know anything at all except about how to move the 

liquor store from one side of the street to the other. That is the maximum amount of his contribution to 

this House up till now. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that these financial statements should be made public. It is quite obvious that the 

information is a reasonable request. The request for the information could not have been more simple 

and more reasonable. The request which we made was: Did the Government of Saskatchewan conduct 

an audit of the financial statements of Intercontinental Packers Limited before it purchased the shares? 

Not after it purchased it, before it purchased the shares. 

 

Well obviously they are amending that to say, well, an audit was made available to us. It is quite obvious 

then that they did not conduct an audit, but they are relying on somebody else’s audit. This is quite 

acceptable if the people are trustworthy and reliable, and I presume they are. 

 

Why is not a copy of this audit made available? Are they suggesting that the people of Saskatchewan are 

so stupid that 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1845 

they would not understand the audit that was produced? The fact is the Government is not trusting the 

people of Saskatchewan to judge them fairly. This Government which has used misrepresentation to the 

people, is now of the opinion that it can not make reasonable and audited information available to the 

public because the public would misunderstand. 

 

The fact is that the Government doesn’t trust the people and I can assure them that when the next 

election rolls around, the people will reciprocate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, there is something smelly about this deal, there is something 

exceedingly wrong in the state of Saskatchewan so long as this Government is in power. There is 

something wrong with the purchase of 45 per cent of Intercontinental Packers. I don’t know what that 

wrongness is, but I can assure you that the Government has done something very stupid or they would 

be very proud to show the basis of their decision and the reasons for making the decision. If they had 

made a good deal they would be very proud to demonstrate to the people that they had made a good 

deal. The fact that they are hiding everything indicates to me, probably indicates to everybody in 

Saskatchewan, that they have made one of the worst deals in the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now I should like to concur particularly with the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North 

(Mr. MacDonald) as to the decision to buy at all. 

 

This Government has spent now something like $20 million without producing one single new job. It 

was stated by a leader of Canada, three and four years ago, that our money would be better spent 

creating new jobs than to try to spend it all and throw it away by the purchase of companies already in 

existence, companies which are already producing employment. 

 

This Government did not get the message. It has frittered away now on the pulp mill, on the steel plant 

and on this particular business, something more than $20 million of the people’s money, without 

creating one single new job. Mr. Speaker, I don’t wonder that they are ashamed to produce this 

information for the Opposition. I don’t wonder that they are ashamed to produce this information for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, with great pride, will support the motion if we can get it to the floor, if the Government 

dares let it come to the floor, unamended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. G. Richards: — (Saskatoon University) Mr. Speaker, as the nature of governments change and 

as our economy grows progressively more complex the Legislature will become increasingly involved in 

economic matters, whether the government should be Liberal or NDP. The Government however is 

trying to translate the world of corporate secrecy into the world of public political debate. Rules that are 

applied 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1846 

automatically in the corporate world, the Government is applying as it becomes involved in commercial 

ventures. New principles are going to have to be established about the right of the public to know, in 

proportion, as the government becomes more involved in economic matters. 

 

In fact, our Party has long stood for the right of public knowledge and for increased public access to 

information about the private corporate world, independently of the increased public involvement which 

I, incidentally, approve is happening here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We passed in last year’s session, The Statistics Act. I understand revisions are going to be made with the 

view of updating The Companies Act in this province which is sorely needed. The Federal NDP caucus 

has long advocated increased reporting of corporate financial statistics. If we are to have intelligent 

public debate about issues, we are going to have to know the facts involved. 

 

I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that as a backbench MLA, I find that there is distressingly the same attitude 

being perpetrated by the Members opposite when they were in power. In many cases the same attitude is 

developing as this Government becomes involved in a whole range of different commercial activities. 

 

We have had this experience in Crown corporations committees in trying to get at facts and figures from 

Cabinet Ministers. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that even if the Liberals do twist and distort certain of the figures from our own 

interpretation, the public does have the right to know the maximum amount of financial statistics 

available and information on such a large venture as the Government’s purchase of shares in Intercon. I 

think that we need to realize this as we move forward and as governments become involved in economic 

activities and I hope there will be increasing involvement in the potash industry and the oil industry and 

the forest industry. We cannot maintain the corporate rules of secrecy. 

 

Therefore, in one sense I find myself in agreement with the Members opposite. The Opposition does 

have the right to know and the public has a right to know what are the financial details of this deal. In 

conclusion I shall oppose the amendment and support the original motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald: — (Cannington) Mr. Speaker, I think the point that the Member opposite has 

just made is a valid point but the point, I think, that he does not make simply is that the Government is 

applying far more secrecy than do most public corporations. For example, Burns makes public their 

financial statements as to what their net profit was. Canada Packers do as well. In fact all public 

companies disclose their net profit picture. And the Government in this case isn’t even following the 

minimum requirements of public companies because they have failed to give it to us in the Assembly 

and to people of the province, what the net income was in the past year. I think the point that the 

Member opposite does not recognize is that the Government’s 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1847 

secrecy is far worse and far more prevalent than even the poorest disclosure laws in this country. I think 

that is very obvious to anyone who wishes to look over the profit pictures of other public corporations. 

 

I want to deal with three arguments that the Premier made. One of the arguments the Members opposite 

love to give us is that they had a great program during the election and that is why they won 45 seats. 

Unfortunately they seem to have forgotten along the way, most of the reasons why they got them. They 

gave us very good reasons at various times of why we should have better public disclosure. But as soon 

as they become the Government, the very same man who was in the Opposition becomes Premier and 

completely and totally disregards everything he said before. I think that one of his arguments that the 

companies should not disclose their profit pictures was that the profits of Intercontinental may be 

understated, in order to be able to reduce income tax. Mr. Speaker. I think that, of course, the best and 

most charitable thing that could be said about this if it were true, that it would be nothing better than 

income tax evasion by the company and I think that the Premier’s argument that the company was doing 

that is a pretty weak one. 

 

I think his second reason, Mr. Speaker, that the company is a private company is also extremely weak. I 

want to deal at some length with what he said in that regard. 

 

He said that it is a private company. I believe the company as I understand it is owned by five different 

people, five shareholders are in it, a privately incorporated company. Now, the province owns part of it 

and I think, I am not certain but I believe there are still three private shareholders, in my understanding. 

The thing, Mr. Speaker, that I am surprised at is that when the Government negotiated with the private 

shareholders, I would have thought that one of the prime requirements that they would have laid down to 

those shareholders was that since they were investing $10.2 million, they would have served notice on 

these private shareholders that they would have discontinued negotiations unless the private 

shareholders were willing to disclose what the province had paid for the corporation. I would think that 

in negotiations this would have been one of the first things that the Government of Saskatchewan would 

have said to the private shareholders. If we pay you $10.2 million you must remember as private 

shareholders we will be forced to disclose this to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I think that the Government if they did not do this completely failed in their duty 

of conducting the negotiations. And to fall back on the argument that it is a private company and 

therefore the shareholders should be protected, I think is the weakest of all arguments that the Premier 

could possibly put forward. It is very obvious that that was one of the first things when the Government 

was carrying out negotiations that they should have said that since the province is putting this kind of 

money into the corporation, then we must disclose the details to the province and to the taxpayers. 

 

The Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) said that the business community was getting pretty tight 

about what the Government was doing in many areas. And that the business 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1848 

community were getting pretty suspicious. Well, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that the business community is 

getting pretty suspicious and I don’t doubt that the Member’s remarks from Whitmore Park were right in 

that regard. But in this regard I think the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should be getting pretty suspicious 

too. Because the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are putting in $10.2 million for a business where only half 

of the employees are employed in the province. And I think it should be noted that so far, this afternoon, 

the Government has not given one valid reason for really denying this type of information to all of the 

Members here. 

 

I think it should, therefore, further be noted that in all probability the only reason the Government has 

denied information is because it is going to make them look bad, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think with those three comments on the reasons that the Government has been presenting to us for 

denying information, none of which are in our view valid reasons, it is obvious that I will not be 

supporting the Government’s position but will be supporting the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G. Snyder: — (Minister of Labour) Mr. Speaker, I am more than a little appalled at the 

performance that goes on every time this Resolution comes before us. We have had expressions of 

opinions in this House before, I think honestly exchanged on matters that we were in complete 

disagreement with each other on, and I think we have learned to resolve those difficulties by the free 

flow of debate and all of the things that are traditional in this House. I think in this particular case sight 

has been lost of the commitment that has been given by the Government to provide information to 

Members opposite at an appropriate time. It is not a denial of information, the fact of the matter is that 

you’ll be provided with information in due course. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who made that statement? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — My understanding is that you will receive the information in due course when time 

permits. I think this is the expression that has been offered. All I am saying is that the situation has been 

one that has been used by Members opposite as a political football and not the least of these expressions 

was made by the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) who has succumbed to the teaching of 

his companions across the way in attempting to use political issues such as this. I was just thumbing 

through some of the clippings that I tend to keep from time to time and I recalled an extract from a 

Times Herald article of September 18, when the Member form Moose Jaw North was expounding after 

his first visit to the Legislature. Among other things he was saying that it was — I am quoting frrm the 

Times Herald: 

 

It was, said Dr. MacDonald, a most depressing scene for a new Member. Dr. MacDonald sees an 

immediate need for the removal of campaign politics from the floor of the Legislature. Some Members 

are campaigning for an election that won’t take place for four years, said Dr. MacDonald. I feel there 

should be an honest attempt made to debate issues without trying to take political 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1849 

advantage of every issue discussed. 

 

I just wonder what has happened to the Member in the intervening few months because he has learned 

his lesson very well, I think, from the companions with whom he is surrounded today. 

 

The inconsistency is seen from remarks by the member for Moose Jaw and more especially today as the 

result of the earlier comments made by the member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) when he was 

complaining about the length of the Session and asking of the Premier at what point in time he 

anticipated a speeding up of proceedings in this House. I think this points out rather directly the 

inconsistency of Members opposite. 

 

I think the points have been made very clearly, Mr. Speaker, and at this point in time I wonder what 

advantage is to be gained and it is apparent that Members opposite are attempting to extract some 

political advantage in indicating that in the words of the Member for Albert Park, that there is something 

smelly about the deal. 

 

Quite frankly the Member has nothing upon which to base his judgment. It is a supposition, it is one 

which is being used in a political way for an attempted political advantage by Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. Lane: — (Lumsden) Mr. Speaker, it’s very unfortunate that it took the Member from Saskatoon 

University (Mr. Richards) to bring out the hypocrisy of the stand of the party opposite. On one hand 

their Federal caucus stands up and demands corporate disclosure and full corporate disclosure. On the 

one side this Government stands up and says we are not going to give any details, any information, on 

this particular sale or purchase of $10.2 million of Intercontinental Packers. 

 

But the interesting thing was the Minister of non-disclosure himself standing up and saying that every 

time this debate comes up in the House, we have to go over the same thing. This is going to be a little bit 

of a surprise for the Minister of non-disclosure that is the first time this has come up. And we are 

interested in his comments about disclosure, the man who wouldn’t talk to the business community on 

the one side about The Occupational Health Act, The Trade Union Act and brings that in and rams it 

down the business community’s throat now thinks he is going to talk on behalf of the business of 

Intercon and protect the company. The hypocrisy is obvious and needs no further discussion. 

 

We have got a very interesting point in that the Premier has made it quite clear that it only took three 

weeks to negotiate the deal of Intercontinental Packers, for the Government to spend $10.2 million to 

purchase 45 per cent. From Press statements made, three weeks to negotiate. The Government says that 

they used audited financial statements. Well, I think for the edification of the Members opposite, 

because obviously aside from the Member for Saskatoon University, the Members from Saskatoon are 

being very, very quiet about this. The rumors around Saskatoon, the feeling around Saskatoon is that 

Fred Mendel didn’t seek out the Government, he saw them coming and that was all there was to it. And 

he sat back and waited for 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1850 

the money. We don’t hear any discussion from the Saskatoon Members, we wonder why they are so 

strangely quiet about the particular deal. 

 

But let us take a look at the full scope of Intercontinental Packers’ operations and go on to a three week 

negotiation period and an audit as stated by the Premier. 

 

First of all they process and wholesale a complete line of meat and meat products under registered brand 

Europa, Olympic, Pic and North Star. They also manufacture animal feeds. They maintain four modern 

plants at Saskatoon, Regina, Red Deer and Vancouver. Their sales are entirely in the Dominion of 

Canada of approximately $100 million. They maintain sales offices in Montreal, Winnipeg, Edmonton, 

Calgary and St. John, New Brunswick. They have a plant capacity in Saskatoon and Regina of 

approximately 10,000 hogs and slightly over 2,000 cattle per week. They employ anywhere from 1,500 

to 1,700 employees, 800 to 850 in Saskatchewan. They own plants in Saskatoon and Regina and other 

isolated property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government opposite went in and supposedly, according to statements from Cabinet 

Ministers opposite, spent three weeks negotiating on this. Supposedly did an audit. There is no way that 

a full audit of Intercontinental Packers could have been done in the three weeks that the Premier said it 

took to negotiate this deal. That indicates that the Government opposite fell over backward to try and get 

its hands and its clutches on Intercontinental Packers. It is a bad deal and it is a stupid deal from the way 

the Government acted and the way the Government handled the matter. 

 

The hypocrisy of the Members opposite is also indicated by the statements of the Premier. We have 

heard since June 23, 1971, at the special Session, about the reasons why the Liberals were defeated. 

Supposedly the main reason was, and the NDP opposite was going to change that, is that the Liberal 

Government became arrogant and out of touch with the people and didn’t listen to the people and didn’t 

give the people information. What has happened since they became the Government? They have become 

arrogant, they have become out of touch with the people, they don’t listen to the people and they are 

hiding information from the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Their hypocrisy has now shown up then on three counts. One, their own party program 

where they told across Canada that they were going to require these big welfare bums to disclose all the 

information. Burns has done it. Intercontinental doesn’t, owned by the Government. 

 

The Member opposite when he wants to hide information on Intercon and talk about the business 

community when, in fact, he doesn’t consult the business community, doesn’t listen to the business 

community and doesn’t care about the business community. But we have got a very, very shameful 

position of the Government opposite when the Premier of this province has accused the Mendel family 

of hiding income in order to avoid income taxes. And that is the level the debate has dropped to as the 

Government opposite tries to hide the very poor, the very bad and the very shameful deal that it has 

come up with. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1851 

In words of the Hon. Member for Albert Park, this deal is stupid. And the information should be given to 

the public, the information should be given to the people. Let them make up their own minds. You are 

supposed to be the open party. You are the party that was going to change everything. If it was bad then, 

if the Liberal stand was bad then, your stand is bad now. It is time the public had the information and it 

is time the public were able to make up their own minds. It matters not whether the Liberals are going to 

misinterpret or misinform, the people can read for themselves, if you give them the figures. And there 

won’t be any misinterpretations or misinformation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all the Members of this House and especially the Members from Saskatoon to stand 

up and vote for full disclosure, full information and vote for the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, since it was the amendment to my motion I feel that I 

should say a few words in this regard. 

 

This has been a rather sad day for the people of Saskatchewan. If we learned one thing this afternoon as 

a result of the attitude of the Government opposite, it is that the people of Saskatchewan have been taken 

to the slaughter house by the NDP. 

 

You know the Premier stood up here this afternoon, and I have never seen a sadder looking group of 

people in my life as I look across the floor there his afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — You know, yesterday afternoon when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) was 

speaking, the Speaker had to call order three or four times in order for the Leader of the Opposition to 

finish his debate. They were laughing, they were talking, they were quipping back and forth. But did you 

hear any of that this afternoon when the Leader of the Opposition was speaking? They sat there stone 

cold almost as if they were in death. Because I think you will find that the actions of the Government 

opposite in spending $10.2 million of the people’s money will bring death to the NDP in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — You know the Premier then finally had to get up on his feet. The only argument that he put 

forth, he had to read from the Debates and Proceedings from two years ago. And then he didn’t have any 

arguments of his own. He had to quote something that the present Leader of the Opposition said under 

entirely different circumstances. And that was the sole argument that Members opposite had. 

 

They are not even honest socialists. There is only one honest socialist on that side of the House and he 

got up and he spoke this afternoon and we are proud of him on this side of the House. We don’t agree 

with him always, in fact, we seldom agree with him. But at least he is an honest socialist and he 

practices what he preaches. The others on that side of the House do just the opposite. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1852 

Then the Member for Moose Jaw got up and he wasn’t sure what debate he was talking about. He said 

he was appalled but he didn’t say what he was appalled about. But I suspect if the truth is known he is 

appalled at the actions of his own Members. And he said we have always had the free flow of debate in 

this Legislature. That, Mr. Speaker, is the exact point that we are trying to get across to Members 

opposite. We want the free flow of debate on what happened in the purchasing of 45 per cent of 

Intercontinental Packers and we have been refused this free flow of debate. 

 

What have they tabled in regard to Intercontinental Packers? Nothing. Not one solitary document. They 

refused the information that we requested. They’ve refused to talk about it in three weeks that they’ve 

had. They have made nothing public. You know I would suspect the Member from Prince Albert East 

(Mr. Feschuk) would be concerned and I am surprised that he hasn’t been up here on his feet this 

afternoon speaking on behalf of our Motion. If there is one man on that side of the House who should be 

concerned it is the Member from Prince Albert East. After all, Burns is the biggest employer in his 

constituency and if the Government is going to go into the packing business in the underhanded method 

that’s been shown here, every packing house and every company in Saskatchewan will fold their tents 

like the arabs and silently steal away because they can’t trust that Government and there will be the 

unemployed walking the streets in Prince Albert East the same as they are walking the streets in every 

other city in this province. All because the Members opposite will not be honest with the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — You should talk! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The Member form Saskatoon is afraid to talk — he’s afraid to talk. Do you realize what 

we have seen this afternoon, Mr. Speaker? We have seen a government spend $10.24 million and tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that we don’t have to show any responsibility as to why we spent it and on what 

basis it was spent. Even a Crown corporation has to come before the Legislature and justify their 

actions. Can you imagine an attitude like that left to flourish and to grow. They can spend millions of the 

taxpayers’ money and never once have to be accountable to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — That’s what the Premier and the Minster of Industry (Mr. Thorson) have told us this 

afternoon by their silence. They are going to spend money but they are not gong to be accountable for 

spending it and it is no wonder that they sit there at this moment, grey around the ears and silent. They 

should be silent. They should be silent with shame by the way they are treating the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we have to stand here in this Legislature, day after day, asking for 

information which is the responsibility of the Government to provide the people of this province, and 

they deny this time after time after time. 

 

I ask all fair-minded people on that side of the House, and 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1853 

I recognize there are some who are not honest as far as providing the information that we are entitled to, 

to look at your conscience before you vote on this amendment and if you do it you will be like the 

Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards), you’ll do a service to the people of your province and 

you won’t do a disservice to the Mendel family, or to Intercontinental Packers or SEDCO or anybody 

else, you’ll be doing a service to the people of Saskatchewan and that, after all, was supposedly a New 

Deal for People. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following Recorded Division: 

 

YEAS 

Messieurs 

Blakeney Meakes Wood 

Smishek Snyder Bowerman 

Thibault Larson Kowalchuk 

Baker Brockelbank MacMurchy 

Pepper Byers Thorson 

Whelan Kwasnica Carlson 

Engel Owens Robbins 

Tchorzewski Cowley Taylor 

Matsalla Faris Cody 

Gross Comer Rolfes 

Lange Hanson Oliver 

Feschuk Kaeding Flasch 

— 36 

NAYS 

Messieurs 

Steuart Coupland Loken 

Guy Grant Boldt 

MacDonald (Milestone) Gardner Weatherald 

MacLeod McPherson Lane 

MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) Wiebe Richards 

— 15 

The debate continued on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, there isn’t much more to be added after what has been said here this 

afternoon. It has become obvious by the standing vote the Government has no intention of providing the 

information that we requested. 

 

We hear the statement made by Members opposite, from time to time, that it’s not in the interest of the 

Government or the public. Well, in this case the interest of the Government and the interest of the public 

are not complementary. In fact, they are diametrically opposed. The interest of the Government, as they 

see it today, is to deny the public the information which they have asked for and which they deserve and 

it’s on that basis I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the only reaction that the public can show and will show 

when the time comes and this is a statement that has been made by the Premier I think, on various 

occasions, that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must warn the Member about bringing in new material. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1854 

Mr. Guy: — I am not bringing in new material. This is material that was said . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He hasn’t got any new material. 

 

Mr. Guy: — They laugh now after they denied the public this information. I’ll tell you they didn’t have 

anything new this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. They have never given information to the public before and 

they are not prepared to give information to the public today, but it has been said, that the pitter patter of 

ballots will beat like drums and this is what we’ll see in the next few years. 

 

You know the record of the Government, when it comes to going into business, has always been a sordid 

one. Even their Crown corporations find difficulty in making a profit and that is when they have a 

monopoly, so when you get into a business like the packing business where you have perhaps one of the 

keenest competition of any industry in the world, it’s not surprising the people of Saskatchewan want to 

know on what basis this decision was made to take $10 million of their hard-earned money and put it 

into the packing business. Within three weeks, as has previously been mentioned, when the decision was 

made and it appears there was no audit done, there was no feasibility study done by the Government, it 

was the whim of our socialist friends opposite who woke up one morning and said, ‘today we should get 

into the meat packing business, because yesterday we announced the oil business and the day before that 

we announced the steel business.’ Heaven only knows what is going to happen tomorrow when they 

wake up, but whatever it is if it’s going into business it’s going to be a sorry day for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I think that the people of Saskatchewan will recognize, this afternoon, that the 

Cabinet who finally are beginning to crack a smile on the other side as it comes near closing time, that 

they have done a disservice to the people of this province and they will live to regret it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on Division. 

 

Return No. 239 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 239 showing: 

 

(a) Whether the Government of Saskatchewan had an appraisal done of the assets of Intercontinental 

Packers Limited prior to its purchase of shares in the company. 

(b) If so, the name of the one who made the appraisal. 

(c) A copy of any such appraisal. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Members will be pleased to know that I have an 

amendment to propose to this Motion. It will read as follows: 

 

That Order for Return No. 239 be amended by deleting all the words after the word ‘showing’ and 

substituting the following therefor: 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1855 

(a) Whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan had available to it any appraisals of the value of 

the physical assets of Intercontinental Packers Limited prior to the Government’s purchase of 45 per 

cent of the shares of the company; and 

(b) If so, the source of such appraisals; and 

(c) The value of such assets based on such appraisals. 

 

I move that, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers). 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, if I may just say a word or two. I think it will be well-known by all of the people 

of Saskatchewan that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and his cohorts in the Liberal Party do 

not wish us well in our economic ventures on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and that they would 

very much like to have any kind of information from whatever source and used in whatever way, to try 

to convince the people of the province that we will not be successful. I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that we are not in a position to accommodate them in their objective of casting doubts and discredit on 

the future of Intercontinental Packers operation in the province or outside of the province. 

 

I think, first of all, if I may say so, Mr. Speaker, it was unfortunate that the Leader of the Opposition 

should make a reference to a financial report from Dun and Bradstreet, which must surely have been 

made to some subscriber to Dun and Bradstreet on the basis that it would be used in confidential ways 

only. I am sure that the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t believe the statements he purports to quote 

from that. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. Is he allowed to refer to a previous debate? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That’s one of the problems I have on these motions. He is referring to a previous 

debate and we should be out of order and a lot of these things are out of order if we are going to start 

repetition. I would ask them not to refer to previous debates. I would ask all Members to abide by my 

wish, as Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I regret that if I have strayed in dealing with this subject beyond 

what is permitted by the rules, I would like not to offend in that regard. I only say that on the question of 

the Government’s dealings with Intercontinental Packers while the Leader of the Opposition and his 

friends were in the Government, is such that I am sure that he doesn’t believe for a moment that the 

value of the assets of Intercontinental Packers is anything like those which he tried to present to the 

House today based on an outside source of information. Hence, if he had believed that, SEDCO 

wouldn’t have made the loan while my hon. friends were in charge of SEDCO, they would not have 

made a loan to Intercontinental Packers Limited. 

 

I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that to disclose more information about Intercontinental Packers than is 

provided for in the Motion we have just passed, and the one we are now dealing 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1856 

with, will in my view, and in the view of the Government, jeopardize the commercial position of 

Intercontinental Packers Limited. 

 

I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that we have to make a judgment along with the management of the company 

about questions of that kind, but it is clear that there are many competitors in the field, it is clear that 

some of the information would be disclosed or misused, if we tabled all of the financial statements, 

would jeopardize the economic operations of the company and make it easier for our competitors to put 

Intercontinental Packers at a disadvantage in its commercial operations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing new or unusual about taking that position in respect of commercial 

operations, even when they are wholly owned by the Government. There is a great deal about Crown 

corporations which is not made public, even in the examination of annual reports of those Crown 

corporations, although it is the long-standing tradition (and one which I think is an excellent one and a 

good one) that full information should be made available to Members of the Legislature. But when it is 

information, which in the view of the Government and the management of the company, is made public 

and would jeopardize the commercial position of the company, then the Members of the Legislature will 

have to take that information on a confidential basis. For instance we often see that kind of thing happen 

in the case of salaries for people in some of the Crown corporations, or in the case of prices which the 

Crown corporations is paying for supplies or materials and that information is not made public because, 

as I say, in the view of the Government and the management, from time to time such information will 

not be in the public interest. It really means it will put that company at a commercial disadvantage in 

relation to its competitors. I think that’s an excellent tradition and that the Members of the Legislature 

should, as elected representatives of the people, be able to have full information but when it is 

information which is not to be made public, they will have to take it on their honor that they will not 

make it public. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that in Crown corporation committee when it comes to the activities of SEDCO or 

any other Crown corporations, that has always been the attitude I have taken and I think that’s one that 

ought to be followed in the future. There will, therefore, be a time and a place when full information can 

be made available to all Members of the Legislature on the activities of SEDCO and this particular 

instance of lending money to Intercontinental Packers Limited. But for the moment to give full 

disclosure of all financial statements of the company would be to the short and long-run disadvantage of 

the company. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I just say that we ought to have every confidence in the future of 

Intercontinental Packers Limited. First of all, because there is an excellent market available for meat 

products in North America and outside of North America. Our main purpose in Saskatchewan ought to 

be to take advantage of those enlarging markets. Therefore, we have to increase our livestock production 

in the province and that bodes well for our rural people in our rural communities, so we can diversity our 

agricultural base by increasing our livestock numbers and our livestock production. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1857 

But producing the primary products alone is not good enough. We shall also have to find ways to take 

advantage of the enlarging markets, not only in North America but beyond North American shores, by 

delivering processed products. And we ought to take every step available to us in the province to see to 

it that that processing occurs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, we have witnessed over several years the decline of the flour milling industry in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, the closure of flour mills and I say, frankly, Mr. Speaker, it would be less than 

responsible for the Government of Saskatchewan to stand by and see the same thing happen in the meat 

processing industry. We are not going to stand by. The facts are that there are good market prospects for 

meat before us and with the knowledge that the assets of Intercontinental Packers Limited, were 

available for purchase and indeed would almost certainly be sold within the next five years or so to 

someone, it seems to be wise and prudent on the part of the Government of Saskatchewan to take steps 

to see to it that those assets remain in Saskatchewan and are available for the processing of our primary 

products with our increasing livestock numbers. That is the essential justification for this investment in 

the successful meat packing industry located in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I appreciate that there are some plants outside of the province and owned by Intercontinental 

Packers Limited and there are also some other offices and sales offices outside of the province. All of 

that is essential, I think, for the profitable operation of the company and we should not be at all disturbed 

about that. But the main factor is that we want to keep the meat processing industry available in 

Saskatchewan for our livestock production and indeed we want to increase not only the numbers of 

livestock we are producing but the percentage of those numbers that we are processing in our meat 

packing industry in the province. 

 

What value can be put upon preserving the assets and the decision-making process of the meat packing 

industry within the borders of the Province? Undoubtedly, Mr. Speaker, that is worth something to us. If 

we were to set out to achieve those objectives by setting up another meat packing plant that surely would 

not be in the interest of the province since there are plants here already and we would only increase what 

is in some ways an overcapacity to produce in all of Western Canada in the meat packing industry 

already. But with the knowledge that there is going to be an increase in capacity in meat packing in 

Western Canada, that to some extent there is already unused capacity, there is a very real risk, Mr. 

Speaker, that our livestock can be taken out of this province and processed in packing plants in Alberta 

and Manitoba and even beyond the Prairie area. There is a very real risk, Mr. Speaker, that it would be 

in the interest of outside meat packers to acquire the assets of our meat packing industry in 

Saskatchewan and in particular the Intercontinental Meat Packing Plant at Saskatoon, to acquire it and 

restrict the activity in it and even, one dreads the thought, eventually close it down as we saw the Quaker 

Oats Plant close down a year ago in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is clearly in the interest of the province that the Government take an active role in 

preserving what we have here in the way of industrial jobs but it is especially important in the meat 

packing industry that we be in a position to take advantage of the excellent market in the 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1858 

future that lies before us. 

 

Now, I can appreciate that the people of the province will want as much information as possible about 

the financial position of the company, the assets it has. I should like to make that available to the extent 

that it is possible without jeopardizing the commercial position of the company. I say to the Members of 

the Opposition and I say to all of the Members of the House, that is exactly what we are going to do. 

 

I would not want any Members of the Assembly or anybody in Saskatchewan to lose sight of the key 

role which the packing plant of Intercontinental Packers of Saskatoon and the expansion to take place in 

Regina will play in the future economic development of the province both for agricultural people and for 

the industrial sector of our community and for all of the business people who will feel the benefit for the 

increase of economic activity in the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, in listening to the Minister of Industry it is 

obvious that the Government had no outside evaluation done before they appear to have rushed in to buy 

45 per cent of this packing plant and it is equally obvious that they intend to hand to this Legislative 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan some cooked up figures, some phony figures, a snow job, to 

try and justify the amount of money they overpaid for less than half of this packing plant. 

 

I want to talk on this regard about information. There are two things that make this deal different. The 

first is that it was announced by the Government as a fait accompli and three weeks have passed and 

absolutely no information has been given to the public of Saskatchewan, no information at all about 

what they based their purchase on. The very lame excuse of the Premier has been that, well, you people 

didn’t do it so why should we do it. I would point out that if you look in Friday, March 12, 1971 

Returns, Reports, and Papers by the Hon. Mr. Heald, Member of the Executive Council, Return No. 1: 

 

Copies of any agreements entered between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government 

Finance Office for Saskatchewan Forest Products and Parsons and Whittemore, or any company 

known to be a subsidiary of or a company associated with Parsons and Whittemore, respecting the 

establishment of a sawmill near Meadow Lake. 

 

That, in fact, was tabled and given to the then Opposition and given to the people of the province. On 

the same day Return No. 3 on the Motion of Mr. Blakeney, the following information was given: 

 

Copies of any agreement or amendments to agreements made since February 29th, 1968 between the 

Government of Saskatchewan or Saskatchewan Forest Products, Saskatchewan Pulpwood Limited, the 

Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited or Parsons and Whittemore or any company known to be a 

subsidiary of or company associated with Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated respecting Prince 

Albert Pulp Company Limited. 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1859 

It is a fact and a matter of record that before any of those deals were entered into all the information 

about the commitment of the people of Saskatchewan and on the facts on which that commitment was 

based were given to the Opposition and were given to the public through that Opposition, through this 

House and through the Press. 

 

The Minister got up and talked about Crown corporation and about holding back information that it is 

sometimes not in the best interest of those Crown corporations if information were to be made public. 

Let me point out there isn’t a Crown corporation in this province, even when the old CCF were in power 

and through the time we were in power and even since these people have come back to power, where we 

don’t know the assets, the liabilities and the profit and loss statement every year for every Crown 

corporation. The only departure from that was in the days of the old CCF when they opened up an 

insurance company or a form of an insurance company in Montana and they refused to give us the 

information for years and years about that corporation because it was losing money and they dumped it 

in with a general statement of the insurance company operated here in Saskatchewan. With that 

exception and we finally found our later why they covered up. They covered up because they were 

losing hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars of the taxpayers’ money in the State of Montana, 

but we eventually got that information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Dun and Bradstreet report is a fact. It is strange and interesting that they haven’t asked 

to have it tabled. They don’t want to look at it and I don’t blame them. The Minister says surely no one 

believes that this company is only worth $4.5 or $5 million. I don’t think I believe it myself. I think it 

must be worth more than that. I can’t believe that a Government would pay $10.2 million for less than 

half of something that is only worth $5 million. I say again, Mr. Speaker, there is something that makes 

this deal different. One, they have given us no information and two, Mr. A. Gedge who is a senior 

financial advisor, a member of the board of directors of Intercontinental Packers was put in January or 

February on the board of directors of SEDCO. So here we have a man on the buyers’ side, we have him 

on the sellers’ side and the Government then tells us they made this ‘sweetheart’ deal and I say it is a 

‘sweetheart’ deal, in something like three weeks. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege. I have made the statement, although it was not 

well reported in the Press, so it is clear if you want to take the trouble to look at the transcript, that Mr. 

Gedge had no influence whatever on the Government in the negotiations. That is the statement I have 

made and it should be accepted as such. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It’s not a Point of Privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — A Point of Privilege must refer to what a Member said but . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I never even mentioned . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, but you were mentioning the fact that Mr. Gedge was 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1860 

with SEDCO. The Minister had made it plainer but the Member should, by rights, rise at the end of the 

speech on the Point of Privilege and make the correction then unless it is considered to be of a personal 

nature. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — There is no correction, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe him. He has come into this House, 

he has refused to give us information. I cannot believe that Mr. Gedge, a senior comptroller and 

financial man at Intercontinental Pork Packers suddenly appears as the director of SEDCO and within a 

few weeks a deal is made that stinks to high heaven. I do not believe the Member. I say that if he wants 

to clear Mr. Gedge, if he wants to clear Mendel, if he wants to clear the smell that hangs over this 

Government, then let him or let the Premier table the facts upon which this deal was made and tell the 

people exactly what this company is worth. Don’t let him come in here and wave the flag of mother love 

and say surely no one would attack the meat packing industry, it has a great future. 

 

It might have a great future if you keep your cotton-picking hands out of the management. But if you 

move into the management, I would say its future is just down like this. I would ask you to check the 

history of this province and you will find there are more abattoirs, more meat packers who have gone 

broke in this province and in Western Canada than almost in any other business. It is a tough, 

competitive, business enterprise, a hard business enterprise and I say God help the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan having you people shepherding their money into this overpriced venture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is just not good enough. The Premier stood up and his only defence was to say, you 

didn’t tell us certain information three or four years ago. He then admitted as much and said, we really 

couldn’t use the net profit because they are a private company, the net profit probably was depressed and 

really wouldn’t show the true worth of the company. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Hon. Member is going back to the previous debate. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Fine, well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to sum up in saying this tonight, that once again . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I am glad you are summing up. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, well, you be glad we are summing up and I am amazed at those backbenchers who 

came in here so proud 19 months ago. So proud, Mr. Speaker, they had a new kind of government, an 

open kind of government, a New Deal for the People. A government that was going to do everything 

different. They stand up here and parrot and parrot, “Well you did it, Walter Tucker did it.” Someone 

else said, “It happened 20 years ago, they’re doing it in Ottawa.” Lame excuses for the fact that they 

have twice, seven, fifteen times, I don’t know how many times, refused to give the people of this 

province information about the Land Bank when they spent $20 million and the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Snyder) from Moose Jaw suddenly came to and jumped to his feet and said, “Every time we have this 

debate somebody on your side says we will give you the information.” Then he suddenly realized he was 

on the wrong side and he looked at the Premier 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1861 

and he said, “Didn’t you.” I noticed the Premier just looked straight ahead and never answered him. He 

was kind of wishing he had never heard of the old engineer from Moose Jaw just about that time. For 

your information Mr. Member from Moose Jaw South . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think we are getting on to a previous debate again. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, I will get on the debate. I am just trying to straighten out the 

Member from Moose Jaw. No one that I am aware of has said that they will give us this financial 

information now or at any time. In fact, I predict that they won’t. Mr. Speaker, because we want time to 

study this amendment that has just been put forward by the Minister of Industry I beg leave to adjourn 

this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 12 — Death of the Lakes in the Qu’Appelle Basin 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. MacLeod (Regina Albert 

Park): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government that emergency action be 

taken to prevent the death of the lakes in the Qu’Appelle Basin: (a) by implementing immediately, the 

recommendations which the Qu’Appelle Basin Study Board feels will have a major impact on the 

management of land and water in the Qu’Appelle Basin and which should be implemented without 

delay, and (b) by giving immediate assistance to cities and towns, particularly Moose Jaw and Regina, 

to provide for the treatment of waste. 

 

Mr. T. L. Hanson: — (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley) Mr. Speaker, before adjourning debate on Resolution 

No. 12 on March 6th, I discussed and argued the different viewpoints and attitudes in my constituency. I 

made mention of the progressive sewage disposal system used in Melbourne, Australia which has a 

population of over 2 million people and which converted their waste into wealth. 

 

The use of the flood irrigation system to utilize the sewage in intensive livestock grazing on the irrigated 

land reduced the disposal cost to the people of Melbourne, Australia, to 62½ cents per person per year. 

They utilized 42 square miles of land for this purpose. With similar climate and soil I consider this to be 

a system worthy of study to be used for the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. I think it is time that we 

reversed the politicians’ and engineers’ attitudes in North America which is, simply put, the solution to 

pollution is dilution. In order to maintain human life, Mr. Speaker, on this planet and indeed in this 

province at a decent health standard, I think we have to reverse this idiotic attitude. 

 

I made reference to the advantage the farmers of the 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1862 

Qu’Appelle Valley have enjoyed to contrast their hardships with flooding and possible zoning. I also 

suggested that the Provincial Government should not contribute more than 10 per cent as is now pledged 

to the cities until the negotiations with the Federal Government were clearly established with the 

percentage of cost sharing that each of the three forms of government should be responsible for. Strange 

as it may seem, Mr. Speaker, the incompetent reporting in the Leader-Post of March 7th failed to 

mention the positive ideas I presented with regard to the Melbourne system, and the arguments I 

submitted speaking for the people of the province as a whole. Instead the report said, and I quote some 

of the interesting misrepresentations: 

 

The Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley said the Government cannot be expected to bail out Regina 

and Moose Jaw more than 10 per cent of the financial payments for the sewage facilities. 

 

It also went on to say that I said: 

 

What would other people in the province think if the Government paid more in helping them clean up 

their sewage? 

 

I should just like to point out, in essence, what I actually did say if I can find the verbatim statements. 

After presenting some of the arguments I said: 

 

I am wondering just whether the rest of the people in Saskatchewan think that they should be 

contributing more than 10 per cent to rectify the situation. 

 

And I also said: 

 

I don’t think that you can expect the people of the province to bail the two cities in question 

completely out of the water. 

 

It is this type of reporting that disturbs me a little bit when they pick a few important words out of a 

Member’s statements and totally change the meaning of his address to the House. 

 

The reporting that is going on, and Mr. Messer made reference to it sometime ago, the misrepresentation 

of his regulations under the Land Bank is really a serious problem to the people of the Qu’Appelle 

system. I think if we can’t control this type of reporting under a press council, maybe we have to look at 

controlling it through the pollution of The Livestock Act, because in my opinion some of these people 

are simply political animals reporting to a political press. 

 

In order to conclude on a more positive note, Mr. Speaker, I should like to throw out some of my ideas if 

time permits. I think that if rezoning, indeed, is necessary in the Qu’Appelle system that the Government 

should purchase the land and then lease it back to the farmers if it is at all possible to be used for 

agricultural purposes. I find that Mr. Gardner may agree with this type of policy. In one case he stated 

that the Government should be purchasing land next to the provincial parks and yet he is solidly against 

the proposals of the Land Bank because that is assembling land for the Province of Saskatchewan. After 



 

March 23, 1973 

 

 

1863 

looking at the clean-up of the River Thanes in England and looking at the results of the Melbourne, 

Australia, system I think that it is in the interests of the people of the province to bring over consultants 

from Australia familiar with the Melbourne concept which I mentioned Tuesday, some two weeks ago. I 

think that it would be in the public interest to bring in consultants from Britain who designed the River 

Thames clean-up which we have all read about. I think it is far better to bring in a few of these people, 

Mr. Speaker, to investigate our problems, these people who have designed successful operations in their 

countries that we would bring them in rather than to send our own people over there for a crash course. I 

think that we can move ahead on the cleanup of the Qu’Appelle system by keeping politics out of the 

discussions and working towards the benefits for all the people of the province. As I said earlier, I don’t 

appreciate the type of misrepresentation which comes from the Press on some instances. I don’t blame 

them all, but I think it is truly in the interests of the province that we must have accurate reporting on 

some of the major discussion in the House when it concerns all the people in the province. I still cannot 

support the Resolution as introduced by Mr. MacLeod, because, in essence, the Government is doing 

half of the things that he says we should be doing. In the other half of the instances I just don’t think it is 

advantageous to the province at this time to rush in to unproven methods of treatment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o’clock p.m. 


