



















































Hansard: April 03, 1973


2168 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

49th day 

 

Tuesday, April 3, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. H. H. Rolfes: (Saskatoon Nutana South) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 80 

students from Prince Philip School in Saskatoon. These students are seated in the west gallery and I will 

be meeting with them later on today around 3:30. Mr. Speaker, the students are accompanied by their 

teachers, Mr. Nicol, Mrs. Erma Beatty, and their principal Mr. Epp. I would hope that their trip to 

Regina and to this House is a worthwhile experience and that when they go back to deliberate in their 

classroom that they will come to the conclusion that their stay in the House was worthwhile. I hope all 

members will join me and welcome them to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. G. Richards: (Saskatoon University) — Mr. Speaker, I join with my colleague from Saskatoon 

in welcoming these students — in this case from Greystone Heights School and the people 

accompanying them, Mr. Schmitz, Mr. Sherwood and Mr. Ralph. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 2:45 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor having entered the Chamber, took his seat 

upon the Throne and give Royal Assent to Bill No. 84: An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service of the Fiscal Year ending the Thirty-first day of March, 1974. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Rosetown Hockey Champions 
 

Mr. G. F. Loken: (Rosetown) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to make a 

hockey announcement. This year Rosetown has three provincial championships; our PeeWee team, our 

Bantams and also the Rosetown Redwings Intermediate A, winning the provincial championship for the 

fourth consecutive year, defeating Kindersley Clippers in three straight games in the best of five series. 

They now advance to the Western Canada semi-finals. I know the Assembly will join with me in 

extending congratulations to these three teams and wish the Redwings every success along the playoff 

trail. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2169 

QUESTIONS 
 

Control to University of Saskatchewan Regents 
 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct 

a question to the Minister of Education. I have in my hand yesterday’s copy of the Star-Phoenix with the 

headline, “Plan gives Regents U. of S. Control but no Introduction Date”. Once again everyone in 

Saskatchewan knows about this Government’s intention to take over education services before Members 

of the Legislature. Shock waves are still reverberating through both campuses, Mr. Speaker, concern and 

dismay by many people dedicated to this University. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the Member please put the question. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Could the Minister tell me and the Members of the House when 

he intends to table this Bill so that these concerns and the dismay of these people in the universities can 

be satisfied and at least they will have the opportunity of seeing the official Bill? 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy: (Minister of Education) — In reply to the question from the Member from 

Milestone, may I say that the legislation will be put forward in the House very, very shortly, certainly in 

time for ample debate during this Session. With respect to this commentary on the article that appeared 

in the Star-Phoenix, this legislation is the result of consultation with the senate and with the Board of 

Governors and with faculty members, and I think that we are pleased that we are able to have this kind 

of consultation in terms of legislation that we are putting forward on the University, which is an 

important area of this province. While the former government might not have done do, we feel we have 

provided the opportunity for consultation. We are prepared to provide it and are in fact doing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. That’s nice to know because nobody on 

the University campuses agrees that the Minister has consulted them. It’s a fact when this became public 

on Saturday. 

 

Is it the Minister’s intention to give the public of the Province of Saskatchewan an opportunity to 

consult on changes in the University which remove autonomy and independence and give them an 

opportunity for public representation before this Bill is introduced in the House? 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — There will be ample opportunity later and certainly there has been already with 

respect to the university people, as obviously appears, the proposals we put forward to the University are 

now open to the public for their input. I don’t think there is any suggestion from even these proposals 

that there can be a suggestion that we are doing away with 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2170 

autonomy for the University. That is certainly not the case. 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: (Wilkie) — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the Minister over the last year or 

two has set up a variety of committees to study many phases of education; I think of the Toombs 

Committee on Bargaining, the Faris Committee on Community Colleges, he even had a great committee 

touring the province on hearings on kindergartens, now surely he must be giving consideration to an 

establishment of a similar kind of committee to study and hear public representation on this very vital 

matter insofar as the future of the University is concerned. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, if the Member for Wilkie is suggesting that a committee should be 

established we will take that suggestion and then consider it. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I take it, Mr. Speaker, he has no plans for public study. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, surely the member for Wilkie has been following what’s been 

happening with the University itself. There has been concern in the University about organization and 

about structure and the University did establish a committee headed up by Dr. Riddell to look into this. 

A year ago I met with the senate in Saskatoon and we looked at the proposals coming forward from that 

committee and certainly part of their considerations are contained in the proposals that were put forward 

to the University bodies. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Mr. John Green General Manager of SGIO 
 

Hon. R. Romanow: (Attorney General) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 

make a brief announcement to the House. I should like to announce that the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Office has appointed Mr. John Green of Regina as the General Manager of SGIO. The 

appointment is to be effective on April 15th, 1973. 

 

Mr. Green has served as general counsel for SGIO and he replaced Mr. J. O. Dutton who, as Members 

know, resigned late last fall to become General Manager of the Manitoba Public Insurance Corporation. 

Mr. William Fox has served very well as Acting Manager of SGIO filling in until the new successor has 

been appointed. Mr. Fox will remain with SGIO as a senior executive officer. Mr. Green is certainly one 

of the most knowledgeable men in Canada if not North America, on the matter of the AAIA and the 

activities of SGIO. He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree with great distinction, majoring in economics and 

political science. He holds a Bachelor of Laws degree from the University of California at Berkeley. He 

is extremely active in community efforts and I am sure that all members will agree with me that this is 

indeed a very fortunate thing for SGIO to have a man of the calibre and ability of Mr. John Green as the 

new General Manager. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2171 

 

Mr. D. Boldt: (Rosthern) — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to hear that the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Office has finally appointed a man and that they did not have to go out of the province to get 

one. I have known Mr. Green for the years that I was responsible for the office and I, too, can say that 

Mr. Green is very highly respected. He is a very capable lawyer, he has written the Act, he knows all 

about Government Insurance, particularly automobile accident insurance. I certainly want to express my 

wish that Mr. Green will be very, very successful in the operation of SGIO. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Electric Limited 
 

Hon. K. Thorson: (Minister of Industry) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

draw the attention of the House to an announcement which is being made by Northern Electric Limited. 

Northern Electric is a large corporation which has sales offices all over the world manufacturing 

primarily telephone equipment. It also has a factory in Regina which started production of telephones in 

the summer of 1971. The company officials were to see me yesterday and they are announcing today 

that they are expanding their production so instead of employing about 17 people they will employ about 

45 people. They have further plans which they hope they will be able to announce in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 251 
 

Mr. D. G. Steuart: (Leader of the Opposition) — moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for 

Return No. 251 showing: 

 

A copy of any agreement or agreements entered into between the Government of Saskatchewan, 

SEDCO, or any other government agency, with Intercontinental Packers regarding the purchase of 

45 per cent of shares of the said company. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, before I move this motion which asks for certain information from the 

Government pertaining to the purchase by the Government, through SEDCO or directly, of 45 per cent 

of the shares of Intercontinental Packers, I should like to review for a few minutes some of the events 

that have happened, some of the statements that have been made regarding the Government’s purchase 

of these shares and our attempts to receive from the Government information in regard to this 

transaction. 

 

Members probably remember it was February 28th when Premier Blakeney announced in Saskatoon that 

the Government had become a major shareholder, not the major shareholder, but a major shareholder of 

Intercontinental Packers, with a plant in Saskatoon, a small one in Regina, plants in Red Deer and in 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2172 

British Columbia. I think it was a day or two later that another announcement was forthcoming, the 

Government had paid $10,237,500 for a 45 per cent share in the Intercontinental Packers. They would 

obtain three Directors out of a total of 10 Directors of that company. Today it is April 3rd, over a month 

later, and we have yet to receive any more information from the Government about this transaction. We 

have moved Order after Order, we have been promised some small bits of information but most of the 

information upon which anyone, the Opposition or the public, could judge the value and the worth of 

this deal has been denied to us and the public by the Government. 

 

As more information comes from other sources, it becomes apparent, Mr. Speaker, why the Government 

is hiding this information, why the Government is withholding this information from the public. Now 

from almost the day that this deal was announced I said that we didn’t agree with the philosophy of the 

deal. We didn’t agree with the Government investing $10 million in an on-going company in this 

province that wouldn’t in itself produce one new job, would not in itself produce one new cent of 

revenue for the people of this province and caused a serious twinge of suspicion and doubt throughout 

the agricultural industry as to what was the real meaning behind the Government’s move into the 

packing house business. I also said that I thought it was a bad financial deal and I based this on some 

knowledge. I was the treasurer of this province for a few years, during that time through the 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation we made a loan to Intercontinental Packers and as a 

result had some knowledge of their financial standing, or their profit and loss picture, and of their assets 

and liabilities. And from that memory I said I did not believe that 45 per cent of the assets of this 

company were worth anywhere near $10.2 million because what the Premier said when he made this 

deal was that he valued the company at something around $23 million. If you pay $10.2 million for 45 

per cent of something, then 100 per cent of it must be worth about $23 million. 

 

Subsequent to that I brought into this House a copy of a Dun and Bradstreet Report. Dun and Bradstreet 

are a well-known and respectable and reputable firm, their principal form of enterprise is the gauging, 

judging and measuring of the value and the worth of all kinds of businesses, large and small throughout 

this country. Upon their calculations of the worth of corporations millions of dollars are loaned or 

withheld. I pointed out that this report had been taken in February, 1972 and it showed the net worth of 

Intercontinental Packers as between $4, $5 possibly $5.5 million. What they indicate in this report is that 

100 per cent of that company was worth around $5 or $5.5 million, not just the 45 per cent that Mr. 

Blakeney bought on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and paid $10 million but 100 per of its worth 

about $5 or $5.5 million. The discrepancy here was unbelievable. I said at the time that there must be 

more to it, that the Government must have bought more than Dun and Bradstreet were reporting on in 

this report. Again we ask the Premier to give us the facts, to list exactly what they bought, to give us a 

list of the assets and their value, to give us a list of the liabilities, to give us a profit and loss statement so 

that this evaluation by Dun and Bradstreet could be proven or disproven. The government denied, as did 

members of the firm of Intercontinental Packers, that this report had any accuracy. They denied it and 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2173 

it was based on calculation and not on any examination of the company records. As a matter of fact, it 

was Mr. A. Gedge, the controller and vice-president of Intercontinental Packers who put forth the 

statement on behalf of this company. At the same time it was indicated publicly that Mr. Gedge, while 

serving as vice-president and as a member of the Board of Directors of Intercontinental Packers had for 

some reason been put on the Board of Directors of the Saskatchewan industrial bank, SEDCO. So we 

raised the question at that time: Was this more than a coincidence, what part did this man play, who was 

both on the side of the seller and the buyer? All we got for our trouble was to be told by Members 

opposite not to smear this man. I want to make it very clear, we have not then, and we are not now, 

smearing this man. We asked a question and we haven’t been given a satisfactory answer. 

 

Shortly after that, we received information through the Financial Post, Canada’s leading financial 

journal . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Don’t trust that writer. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, I remember him. I remember you people quoting from him. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You said you could trust him. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I said then, he didn’t have all the facts and didn’t. But I’ll tell you this, 90 per cent . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . all the facts. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, we’ll wait and see if he had all the facts. The big difference then, Mr. Romanow, 

and now is that we laid all the facts on the table for the public to look at and anybody could judge . . . 

including Mr. Phillip Mathias. Mr. Phillip Mathias had every agreement we had, every calculation we 

had about the pulp mill deal upon which to base his article. I said he made an error in fact and he did. 

 

Now he makes a statement concerning the Government’s purchase of Intercontinental Packers. What he 

says in effect is that you ‘boobed’, that you got taken. That by every yardstick anyone will recognize 

you paid far too much for 45 per cent of this company. He estimates that their net profit probably was in 

the range of $500,000 or $600,000 a year. He points out that it is well known and well recognized that if 

you want a fair return on your money one of the ways to judge the value of a business or a corporation is 

to use the multiplier 8 to 10 times annual earnings, especially for a packing house business such as 

Intercontinental. So if you multiply even by 10 times, if you are charitable, a net profit that he suggested 

they made based on information he had, you get a value of $6 million for the entire company. So we 

have Dun and Bradstreet, $5, $5.5 million, Financial Post $6 million. 

 

He went on to point out where some of the negotiations took place, who took part in those negotiations. 

He also dealt with the fact that Mr. Gedge came out publicly and said we have calculated the worth of 

our company in a different manner. We have taken a report regarding our insurance that estimates our 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2174 

assets are worth about $25 million. Then he adds on some other receivables and other assets he has, 

takes off some long term debt and comes up with a figure of about $23 million, obviously the figure that 

the Blakeney NDP Government accepted, the figure they used, the value they used to pay out $10.3 

million of the taxpayers’ money for 45 per cent. 

 

He pointed out in this article and again it is a fact that it is fine to say we will take the assessment of 

these buildings and say the land is worth so much money, the buildings — while some of them were 

built 40 years ago — they have increased in value. The sausage making machinery, the meat cutting 

machinery and the facilities are fairly modern, they are worth so much, replacement value. He calculated 

the replacement value of this company. I am sure also within that calculation was an amount of money 

for interruption insurance, but whatever he calculated on he didn’t give us any record. He just said, we 

have had our experts or some experts say that our assets are worth $25 million, he didn’t say who did the 

calculation, he didn’t make public what the assets were, he didn’t make public how much they owe 

against those assets, in other words the liabilities. We just have his unsubstantiated word that using this 

method of calculation the company was worth what the Government paid for it. That’s a little bit like 

saying somebody buys a truck for $10,0000, they use it for three or four years but they have got 

insurance on it; the truck by that time might only be worth $6,000 or $7,000, but they still have $10,000 

insurance on it. They say, or course, that this is what our truck is worth. You don’t have to be a business 

genius to say this is nonsense. So they say we’ll use another yardstick, we’ll take our replacement value. 

The truck we bought for $10,000 three years ago, if we bought the same truck tomorrow it would cost 

$12,000 so that’s another yardstick, None of these yardsticks mean absolutely anything. When you value 

a corporation you are buying it to do what? You are buying it for a great many reasons, but one of the 

yardsticks you have to look at is what kind of profit does it make. What kind of earnings will it make on 

our investment? You also have to look at when you buy half of somebody’s share how much is that 

share worth? Using these yardsticks the Financial Post said that you paid far too much. In fact, it pointed 

out that in their opinion based on information they received here and in Eastern Canada that the worth of 

the Company was probably $6, $7, maybe as high as $8 million but nowhere near $23 million. 

 

What happened next? Again Mr. Gedge said No, and the Government said No. Again we said give us 

the real facts, give us all the facts. You say Dun and Bradstreet don’t know what they are talking about. 

Our memory of what that company is worth you say is no good, we don’t know what we are talking 

about. If you people know what you are talking about, then tell the public the truth, it’s the public’s 

money. Your own Member, the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) reminded you that one 

of the reasons that you got elected according to him, and one of the promises you made to the people 

was that you would be an open government, you would not hide facts from them, that you had 

confidence in the public. You would say to the public, here are the facts, we have confidence in your 

common sense, you be the judge. But suddenly you are in Government now and we want to know what 

you paid for land through the Land Bank, can’t find out, not in the public interest, We want to know 

what you did with $10.2 million that many, many experts say is at least twice or three times too much. 

You 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2175 

have a man on your board and a man on their board, and I would say it looks like a conflict of interest. 

You don’t answer it, you just say, ‘don’t smear the man’. Again using your majority you absolutely 

refuse to give to the people of this province the facts or the truth behind this deal. 

 

I have said this deal begins to smell, and I will tell you, every week it smells worse, and worse and 

worse. 

 

We have another little piece of information, “Government Intercon price High,” says meat packing 

executive. This is another man, Mr. Fred Schneider, chairman of the Board of J. M. Schneider of 

Kitchener, Ontario, the chairman of the Board of the third largest packing plant in Canada. He looked at 

this, he looked at Intercontinental with the idea that he might buy it about a year ago. What does he say 

publicly? He said the Government paid too much, they paid too much for this plant. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He didn’t get it! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He didn’t want it at that price, don’t make any mistake. I’ll tell you Barnum said there 

was a sucker born every minute, but he didn’t have in mind the NDP because birds like you don’t come 

along every minute — about once in a century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What happened next? Now we have our memory — you say it is no good — Dun and 

Bradstreet, no good; Financial Post, no good; Mr. Schneider, respected businessman says publicly he 

looked at the assets of this company and says you paid too much. So we have said to you give us the 

truth, give the public the facts, everybody is out of step but my son John, everybody is wrong but the 

NDP. Those great business entrepreneurs are right, Mr. Schneider is wrong, Dun and Bradstreet are 

wrong, Financial Post is wrong, they are all wrong. Mr. Blakeney and his little bargainers are the only 

ones who know the facts but they are afraid to tell the facts. They won’t tell the facts, why? Well I’ll tell 

you in a minute why they won’t tell the facts. Oh, they said if you want to come and look at the books 

Mr. Steuart, come and look at them. Of course we’ll swear you to secrecy, you won’t be able to tell 

anybody what you saw. I said, that’s not very good, you’re supposed to be an open government, you’re 

supposed to tell the truth, you’re handling the taxpayers’ money but that’s better than nothing. At least 

I’ll go and said publicly if there is nothing wrong with the deal, they might have paid $2 million more 

than I would have, I am not talking about that, I am talking about whether they paid $5 million or $6 

million more than any normal person or any yardstick of business measuring that worth of a business 

enterprise. Then I would say it was a bad deal as I said then and I say now. But I wanted to take 

somebody else with me. I wanted to take someone who is a chartered accountant, someone who is 

recognized as a business expert and whose reputation and objectivity could be without question. They 

said, sure, have him come up and look over your shoulder. I want him to be able to stand up also and say 

this is a good deal or a bad deal. Mr. Gedge said No, Mr. Thorson said No. The fellow from SEDCO just 

about shook his head off saying No. He said we won’t accept this, we won’t accept one 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2176 

man coming up and saying this is a good deal or that is a good deal. We won’t accept that. Anyway we 

still haven’t decided, I haven’t decided whether we would go or not. I can tell you now I don’t need to 

go because I have here today and I’ll table it in this House, a statement of Intercontinental Packers. Here 

it is. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: (Milestone) — What does it say? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Intercontinental Packers Limited and subsidiary companies consolidated balance sheet 

June 26, 1971, with comparative figures for 1970. This statement came about as a result of 

Intercontinental requesting through SEDCO to the Government for a loan in 1971. Negotiations for this 

loan began when we were the Government, they were carried on after we were the Government and the 

loan was subsequently approved, I presume by SEDCO and the Blakeney Cabinet. 

 

When the Board of Directors of SEDCO were considering this loan, when the Cabinet was considering 

this loan the management of SEDCO prepared a series of recommendations, they put down their profit 

picture for Intercontinental Packers from 1966 to 1971. They made recommendations about the 

management, they made recommendations about the security and the collateral and they attached it to a 

balance sheet of their assets and their liabilities. I want to table a copy of this. I am going to read from it, 

because it is extremely interesting. I know, it is not hearsay by Dun and Bradstreet, it is not hearsay by 

the Financial Post, it is not hearsay by Mr. Schneider, or by Dave Steuart, it’s their actual statement. It’s 

the facts, I don’t have to look at the books, the books are here. This tells the story. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The first thing it says, the earnings. The company has shown a significant growth in 

sales and profits over the years as indicated below. June 30, the end to their fiscal year, 1966 the sales 

were $73 million; the net profit after taxes $479,000. In 1967 they made $739,000, almost doubled their 

profit. I wondered why that happened, I looked up their record . . . 

 

I wonder just as a point of privilege and a Point of Order. When I tabled that document, I understand 

that’s the Clerk’s, it belongs to the Clerk. I think that document should be taken back and put on the 

table, right now! Would you please pick that document up. The document belongs to the Clerk. When 

the Clerk makes a copy of it then it’s available. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I was the one who asked for the copy of the report and I have on the 

document listed by Mr. Steuart, Motion for Returns, Debatable and listed. If Mr. Steuart wants it 

photocopied then get a photocopy, that’s fine by me. I don’t know what he is so touchy about . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I’m not touchy about it at all. I don’t want you or the Premier or anyone else touching 

that until it has been photostated by the Clerk, and gone through the proper channels. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2177 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a Point of Order, I really get a little bit tired of this 

performance by the Leader of the Opposition. Ever since I have been in this House and I have been here 

longer that the Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Not much! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . Well, not much, but a little more, perhaps I learned fast in the early years, I don’t 

know. But at least we have made a practice of having an opportunity to look at documents that are 

tabled. If we are to change this rule, let’s change it now, and let’s not have Members opposite asking to 

look at documents that are tabled until the copies are made. This fair enough with me, I am just saying 

we followed the practice that has been the invariable practice in this House since I have been here and I 

resent the suggestion by the Leader of the Opposition that somehow this document was going to be 

purloined. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: (Athabasca) — On a Point of Order, I am sure the Premier recalls and I have been in 

this House as long as the Premier has, that he recalls that a statement was tabled by one of the Members 

of the Legislature when they were in Government. We did take that statement off the Clerk’s table, we 

asked for it and we were severely chastised by the Premier of the day who was the Hon. T. C. Douglas at 

that time. We were told to put that statement back which we did and we admitted we were at fault at that 

time for requesting the statement until it had been taken to the Clerk’s office, duly recorded and 

photostated and brought back. It is clear for those members that were in the House at that time and all 

we are asking today is that the identical practice be followed. If the Premier says let’s start today by 

following a practice; this practice has always been followed in this House. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on that Point of Order. I can’t believe that when the Leader of the 

Opposition tables a document in the full sight of 60 MLAs, in the full sight of the Press gallery, and in 

sight of yourself, and then he has the audacity to get up and to impugn the integrity of the Premier of the 

province and the Attorney General of this province, then I say the entire argument and statements and 

actions of the Leader of the Opposition ought to be condemned by the people of this House, the people 

of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe it has been (as far as I can recall) the custom in this House when a document 

is tabled, the Clerk initials and numbers it, but that document must not be removed from this Chamber. 

On one occasion a document was removed by a new Member and rightly so the Speaker of the day 

chastised the Member concerned. 

 

Members have had the right as far as I can recall there’s no rule governing it one way or the other, There 

are no written 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2178 

rules on it. The Members have had the right to look at documents but they cannot remove them. The 

Clerk will make a copy for them for their use if they wish a copy. But it has been the custom the same as 

questions, motions for return, or so on, when they are laid on the Clerk’s table they can be looked at here 

but they can’t be removed until the Clerk has processed them. 

 

I think that has been the usual practice as far as I’ve any knowledge of and there are no written rules on 

it. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure of the rule in this particular issue, but it seems to me it 

would make sense if the rule went something as follows: Any document tabled should be noted or 

notarized as being received by the clerk, filed somewhere and a duplicate thereof back here to avoid any 

question or concern as the Attorney General raised that the Leader of the Opposition was criticizing or 

impugning the Premier. He wasn’t criticizing him at all. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He sure as heck was. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — He certainly wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. He certainly wasn’t. But it would remove any 

possibility of any charge such as we heard from the Attorney General if the report was noted and then a 

duplicate copy filed here, then there would be no question. There would be no question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think we want to debate this point any further. As I understand — I haven’t 

seen the document, but our lady Clerk has initialled this document tabled and made notation of it and it 

wasn’t removed from the Chamber. If the House wishes a different rule on this than that they can be 

used within the Chamber, I would be pleased if the House would lay down a distinct ruling on it so that 

we would know. But it has been the custom in my experience that Members have looked at it from both 

sides of the House but it must not be removed. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, let me make it very clear. What I’m criticizing the Premier and the 

Attorney General, but mostly the Premier and that Government is that they have absolutely refused to 

give us that information. He says, ‘do I trust them’, and I say, “No, I don’t trust them.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I don’t trust them that far because they made a rotten deal. They have dished out $5 or 

$6 million of the taxpayer’s money into the pockets of Mr. Fred Mendel. They have hidden the facts; 

they refused to give it to us and that’s why I don’t trust them. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You don’t know what you are talking about. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I know what I’m talking about, it’s you that doesn’t know. Let’s carry on. Let’s take a 

look at this statement. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2179 

And I suggest that some of the Members opposite maybe take a look at this statement and then take a 

look at those front benchers with a little different look in their eyeballs. 

 

Okay, 1968 they made $478,000; in 1970 — $458,00; in 1971 — $632,000 (the second best year in their 

history). Taking the multiplier of ten times that makes the value of the corporation about $6.3 million. 

Why should you take ten times the corporation’s value? You want to invest your money, get 7 or 8 per 

cent, you can invest it in Canada Savings Bonds or something very, very safe, you don’t have to risk it 

in any business. Don’t tell me there’s no risk in a packing house business. 

 

What have they done? If you take the second best year on record for this company, we are entitled, as a 

people, to 45 per cent of those profits, which is a little less than $300,000. So we invest $10 million on 

the one hand to earn $300,000 on the other hand, less than 3 per cent on our money. Less than 3 per cent 

return. So that’s one yardstick. That yardstick says this corporation in total is only worth $6.3 million. 

 

Now take a look at the assets and liabilities, the assets come to a little over $20 million. There are some 

interesting things in those assets and I’ll deal with them later. The liabilities come to something like $14 

million. The last line of the consolidated balance sheet says the following: 

 

 Total shareholders’ equity — $6,358,792. 

 

Total shareholders’ equity, the total amount of value that belongs to the Mendel family, the only 

shareholders by their own statement. They value their shareholders by their own statement. 1971 by 

their own statement — $6,358,000. Again, it’s in line with what Dun and Bradstreet says. It’s in line 

with what the Financial Post says. It’s in line with what Mr. Schneider says. It’s in line with what we’ve 

been saying and that is a fact, it’s a fact of life, that’s the proof. 

 

Now there are some other things in this statement of liabilities and I’m going to seek some answers. For 

example, the assets — it indicated the Intercontinental Packers owes the F. Mendel Holdings Limited 

$288,000; the F. Mendel Ranch — $113,000; The Western Livestock — $442,000; and they’ve lent 

them that money. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Intercontinental loaned that money? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, it’s the other way round. Intercontinental loaned the money. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That’s not what you’re saying. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — There is some difference. They owe the money. Intercontinental lent the money. 

 

Mr. Engel: — You wouldn’t know the difference. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, I know the difference. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2180 

I’m not sure you people do after the deal you made. 

 

They also loaned to a shareholder to purchase a house. Intercontinental lent one of their shareholders 

$50,000 to purchase a house. Now this doesn’t matter when the Mendel family owned Intercontinental 

outright and they owned the Mendel Ranch outright (which they still do); the Western Livestock (which 

they still do) and they have Mendel Holdings. We want to see the deal. We want to see the contract; we 

want to know what kind of interest, because this money is now owing, not just to Intercontinental 

Packers, but part of it is owing to the people of Saskatchewan, since our Premier decided to buy 45 per 

cent of the Mendel interests. 

 

But let’s not miss the point. The total shareholders’ equity — the value of the Mendel family holdings as 

of June, 1971 in this company is $6,358,000 and Mr. Blakeney takes $10 million of the taxpayers’ 

money to buy 45 per cent of those holdings. In other words, we got $3 million worth of assets, $3 

million worth of valued shares for $10.2 million. 

 

Now, some can stand up and say those assets are underestimated. There’s land in there taken in at value 

a long time ago. The buildings have increased in value and that’s true. If we were buying dirt, buildings, 

some of them 40 years old, sausage making machines, meat cutting machines, but we’re not. We are 

buying a business. You could say goodwill is worth something. Some of those assets are underestimated. 

I don’t think they would be underestimated when you go to get a loan. I never heard of a businessman 

going to get a loan to a bank, whether it’s owned by the government or owned by a private interest, and 

underestimating their assets. But even saying the assets are exactly what they appear here, $6,300,000 

the shareholders’ equity and the shareholders are the Mendels. The cheque, whenever you pay the full 

amount, whatever you paid now and whenever you pay the balance, will not go to the company, it will 

go to the Mendel family. So they got $10 million plus for what it says on their own records is valued at 

$6 million plus. Now give them a million or two million dollars for goodwill. Give them a million or 

two million for underestimating their assets. You’re still up to what? Seven million, eight million, nine 

million, in fact, you can double their assets which brings them to $12 million and what did we do? We 

estimated the value at $23 million. We gave them over $10 million and we didn’t even get half of their 

assets. 

 

Now I heard that the statement for the year ending June of 1972 shows profits were down. They would 

be lucky if they made $400,000. I don’t know. I’ve also heard they are having a good year this year. 

When the year ends this June, June, 1973 it could show a profit of around a million dollars and I hope 

this is true. But again, when you average out the net profit if they did make a million this year and made 

$400,000 last year, their average net profit for the last seven or eight or nine years and it still comes to 

under $600,000. That’s a fact and you can’t get away from that. You can’t get away from the fact that 

you paid $10.2 million for 45 per cent. So our share of the profit is 45 per cent and you’ve got an 

average of less than $300,000. In other words, over the last ten years on the same investment, we would 

have shown the great return to the people of Saskatchewan of under 3 per cent. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2181 

It’s a bad deal from that point of view. It’s a bad deal for the amount of money you paid. You got taken 

— you got taken. No question about that. 

 

Now the question has to come — why? 

 

Why did they buy it; why did they pay that kind of money; why did they go off the deep end, and they 

boasted ‘three weeks’? Well, no wonder. Three weeks (it didn’t take long) and they obviously didn’t 

look into it very closely. Why did they buy it? Can Mr. Blakeney read a balance sheet? Well, of course, 

he can read a balance sheet. 

 

Mr. Owens: — You can’t. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I can, Mr. Smart Alec. You come over and take a look at it. Maybe they should have 

used you. You may be the only one over there that can read the statement. Why did they do this to you? 

Well I say they did it because Mr. Blakeney was too anxious. He wanted to get into the meat packing 

business. He wanted to get into business some way. He didn’t want to go through the old Crown 

corporations — that was a mess. He knew what happened when the NDP went into business for 

themselves. They usually ended up (unless they had a protected position) of going broke and losing 

hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars. He wanted to please the Wafflers, he wanted to please 

the people in his Party who believe in government enterprises, so he decided to buy into IPSCO (and I 

notice IPSCO shares are down — I don’t know whether that’s the delicate touch of the Government just 

being in the background or what) but at least they paid the going price. Not so in this case. They made 

the deal in three weeks. 

 

I think one of the reasons they were in so much of a hurry, they wanted to get into the business. I think 

they sent some boys on a man’s job; they sent Mr. Messer; they sent Mr. Thorson and I understand they 

sent Mr. Messer’s deputy — young Mr. McArthur; (if he handled this business deal and it looks as if he 

did, with the same touch that he’s handling the Land Bank and The Hog Marketing Commission and the 

rest of it then God help us). I hope they keep him — they don’t need him in agriculture. They had better 

not have him there long and they had better quit listening to him. What was he doing down in California 

doing some of the negotiating for the Government? I don’t know what his background is. I don’t know 

what kind of experience he has to make him an expert in buying this, but make no mistake — you sent 

the wrong horses, you sent the wrong people. 

 

But there must be another reason, I’m sure there is, why they were in such a hurry. Three weeks they say 

they made this deal. Oh! they might come up and say ‘somebody else is going to buy it’. Mr. Schneider 

was going to buy it and take it all over to Ontario. Nonsense — Mr. Schneider had no intention of 

buying it. There are going to be some Americans maybe come up and buy it and rush it out of the 

province. Again nonsense. Is there a danger that we will only have one packing house in this province? 

Well Burns are here, they are here to stay. They have an excellent plant making money in Prince Albert. 

I’m positive with the DREE grant they are going to rebuild their plant in Regina. Canada Packers are 

still negotiating for a DREE grant and I’m sure they are going to move to Moose Jaw. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2182 

So they say that maybe we had to do this to protect the farmer and it just doesn’t hold water and if there 

was a buyer in the wings in the States, why haven’t they named him? The reason they haven’t named 

him, he doesn’t exist. 

 

There’s another reason why they bought into this plant, I think. Mr. Messer said it, “Hog Commission 

— Packers seen in close co-operation”. Speaking on this: 

 

Intercontinental Packers Limited can operate in close co-operation with the Saskatchewan Hog 

Marketing Commission (a compulsory Hog Marketing Commission I might add) in pursuing the 

Commission’s marketing objectives. 

 

Agriculture Minister Messer said that in the Legislature on Thursday. That’s another reason there was 

such a mad, mad rush. The great plan was to have the compulsory Hog Marketing Commission on April 

1st. They haven’t told us the details or anything yet; they would have the packing plant and the two 

would dove-tail nicely together. They could tell the farmers where to take their hogs. What next? Then 

they can tell them where to take the sheep. 

 

Here is a letter from Mr. Messer to the Saskatchewan Sheep Producers, telling them that he has been 

asked to put in a compulsory Sheep Marketing and Wool Producers Market Commission. Well I got this 

letter and then some of the sheep over there are applauding. Well they had better go back and bleat a 

little bit to the real sheep producers and they are going to find out they are not all happy. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Read it out loud. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes I’ll read it all. What it says is — the opening line: 

 

As you may know I have recently been asked to establish a sheep and wool producers market 

commission. 

 

Now these people wrote and said they are members of the South county lamb producers, attended the 

meetings and they have not had a vote on the above mentioned commission and they are definitely not in 

favour of it. 

 

I don’t know whether the sheep people are in favour of a commission or not. If they are, that’s their 

business. Give them a vote if they want it, more power to them. But I say this we’ve got the compulsory 

Hog Marketing as soon as you people ramroad that deal through, sheep are next and then cattlemen are 

next and this Intercontinental ties in with the whole deal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I say in the face of this evidence, in the face of the mounting evidence, not just from 

here but from sources in this province and outside of this province, that it is time that Mr. Blakeney told 

the truth, It’s time he told the public of Saskatchewan exactly what he bought; it’s time he told them 

who, in fact, did the negotiations; it’s time he told them, where the negotiations took place, when they 

took place, who was advising the Government and laid before the public all the agreements and the price 

and the background material. This statement doesn’t leave in doubt any more that the Government paid 

far too much. What is in doubt is exactly 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2183 

who did the negotiations and why they paid this much. I say it’s either bad business dealing, stupidity, 

too much eagerness, the wrong people doing the negotiations and I say it is a scandal. Either one or the 

other. When the Government, by their own admission, goes out and within three weeks makes a deal for 

over $10 million of the taxpayers’ dollars and then refuses adamantly in the face of mounting opposition 

and mounting criticism inthe Press, from their own party, across this province, refuses to give the facts, 

then I say you have to begin to believe that they’ve got something to hide. Let them quit hiding behind 

that majority, answer our questions. They don’t need to wait, they have all this at their fingertips. They 

could table it today. 

 

Now they said, “We don’t want to give them this information because it will help the competition”. 

What nonsense. To begin with, it’s there, there’s the net profit. All right, who are their competition? Mr. 

Schneider, Board Chairman, third largest meat packing plant. He already knows the situation. He 

negotiated to buy this company. He knows their statement, he saw their balance sheet, their profit and 

loss. It’s not going to Mr. Schneider. What about Burns and Company? What about Mr. Art Child? He 

was the General Manager of this plant for years. Do you think he doesn’t have an excellent idea of 

exactly what they do, where they do business, how much money they make? Don’t kid yourself. So, that 

little excuse they hand out that they are not going to give this information now because it will harm the 

competitive position of Intercontinental Packers, is just absolute nonsense, hypocrisy and it’s a lie. 

Every one of their competitors — Canada Packers, Burns and Company and Schneider’s make their 

entire profit and loss statement public every year — they have to by the law of the land. This company 

you bought into is fourth, so their top three competitors already lay the facts in front of the public and 

Mr. Blakeney stands up and says, ‘we don’t want to harm the competitive position of this company’ and 

already two of the competitors obviously know more about it than he knows or any of his Ministers. 

 

You know, there is a very interesting picture in The Commonwealth. The Commonwealth is that sturdy 

little rag, that wretched little publication that stands up for socialism and the Wafflers and any radical 

movement and the one thing that comes through loud and clear is that The Commonwealth can’t stand 

those big businessmen. If there is anything the Commonwealth can’t stand it’s a dirty capitalist. 

Especially the one that comes from the States or even goes to the States, I sometimes suspect. So we 

have a great picture in here, March 28th. There is the Premier and he is smiling and there is Mr. Thorson 

and he is smiling and Mr. Messer, he is smiling and there is Rolfes from the backbench over there, he is 

smiling; and Mr. Gedge is smiling; and Mr. Brockelbank is smiling. And there is another guy in the back 

who is smiling, I can’t make out who he is. There is one little old gentleman in the front. He has got his 

hands folded — he’s not smiling, he’s laughing, laughing all the way to the bank and his name is Mr. 

Mendel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I tell you take a look at it Mr. Premier, I am sure you have a copy of The 

Commonwealth. And he is standing there like this — he looks like the cat that swallowed a canary. Then 

I 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2184 

said, no, he swallowed a whole cage full of NDP cuckoo birds; that was what they were when they 

bought this thing for $10.2 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now we’ve got another deal out there. It is an invitation to tour the people’s piggery. 

Invitation to tour Intercontinental Packers. Who? The general pubic, that’s who. What? An opportunity 

to see Canada’s most modern meat packer in operation. I just don’t think I will take advantage of this 

opportunity. I could end up in the sausages. Where? Intercontinental Packers. We are proud it says, ‘we 

are proud’. They should be proud and nobody is prouder than Mr. Mendel. The last I heard Mr. Mendel 

had disappeared, he had been in California and he hadn’t been back since and I don’t blame him. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, I want to tell you this seriously. You can hide behind your majority and I have no 

doubt you will. I am sure your 

Members — one of them was honest enough to feel a twinge of conscience. You can sweep this bad 

rotten deal under the rug. But I will tell you one thing, you won’t get away with it. And I say to you 

today, have the courage and stand up and come clean. They might forgive your stupidity but they will 

never forgive this kind of a deal. Stand up and tell the people the facts. 

 

What did you pay $10.2 million for? What’s the statement? Who did your negotiations? Why did you 

pay that much? What was behind it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few words I would move the Motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A. E. Mr. Blakeney: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, after those few words of the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) it seems to me that I should say a few words in answer. 
 

One is hard pressed to know where to commence to answer a statement such as that. Since it ranged over 

such a wide area, raised so many questions which have already been answered, as if they hadn’t been 

answered. 

 

Now the Financial Post, on which he heaped scorn a year or two ago, has become the veritable gospel of 

financial truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But let me take a few moments to try to answer one by one by one, painfully, some of 

the questions which he has asked. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2185 

Mr. Steuart: — I am sure you are going to table them after. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That is right. It is so difficult to lay the truth on the table with the Leader of the 

Opposition. Because when he asks one question and that is answered then he moves to the next question 

and when that is answered he goes back to the first one and asserts that it wasn’t answered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now let’s take the first question that I think he asked. 

 

What part did Mr. Gedge play? Now I have heard the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson), the 

Minister of Industry, answer that twice but for the third time I will say with respect to the Government 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Gedge played no part — absolutely none. And with respect to Intercontinental 

Packers, Mr. Gedge played an active part. Now I hope that that disposes of the question. 

 

If the Leader of the Opposition wishes to ask just how active a part Mr. Gedge played on behalf of 

Intercontinental Packers I suggest he direct that question to the management of Intercontinental. 
 

I say to him that so far as the Government is concerned or SEDCO is concerned or any agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan is concerned, Mr. Gedge played no part whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — With respect to the next question, about the Financial Post and Mr. Mathias, I recall 

very well that when I was using statements by Mr. Mathias in asking questions about the Prince Albert 

Pulp Company Limited, I was told by the now Member for Prince Albert West, the now Leader of the 

Opposition, that those facts stated by Mr. Mathias were all wrong. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I didn’t say they were all wrong. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — All right, they weren’t all wrong but he didn’t have all the facts and he was giving the 

wrong picture. And yet today I hear the Leader of the Opposition say, we gave all the facts about Prince 

Albert Pulp Company Limited. 

 

Mr. Mathias was making some of his statements in 1969 and 1970 and in this House in 1970 when we 

asked for, not the financial statements, but merely a statement of the profits of the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company Limited for the calendar year 1969, that was voted down by the Government in which the 

Member for Prince Albert West was a Minister. The Member for Prince Albert West said at that time: 

 

I would ask the House that since this is a private company that this kind of information would be of 

great interest to the competitors of Prince Albert 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2186 

Pulp Mill and I don’t think that this is in the public interest and I would ask the House to defeat this 

Motion. 

 

That is what he said. And this was not a question of even asking for the financial statement but merely 

for the profits. 

 

And the Member for Morse, the then Premier, went on to say the same thing. He also said we should not 

give to this House the financial statements or even a statement of the net profit of the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company Limited. This was in 1970, five years after the company was established, and on the grounds 

that this information would help its competitors. 

 

This was the position taken by the Members opposite and I hope that they consider it was a proper 

position. So it is pretty clear that in their judgement it was inappropriate to give the financial statements 

of a private company. 

 

All I can say is that Mr. Mathias is entitled to his view, Members opposite are entitled to their view, but 

I think all of us know that the key question on the value of a company is its future earning potential. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Anybody who buys a company on any other basis, if he is thinking only on business 

terms of anything — but future earning potential, he is making a wrong judgement. And all I can say is 

that you go down and look at any analysis of what shares are worth, you ask any broker and the analysis 

will be, what are the future prospects of this company? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That will be the question. Let’s move on to a couple of the other points raised. I have 

heard all manner of hogwash expressed on this subject by Members opposite and I have heard talk about 

the Dun and Bradstreet value. I have heard talk about the equity. All that the equity, so-called, tells you 

is what that company is historically worth — what the assets cost and what they are now worth in their 

depreciated value. Let me tell you this, this company has been in business since 1940. I want you to find 

any farmer or any businessman who has been in business since 1940 and who has added to his assets 

over more than 30 years who would sell at his depreciated book value or who would sell at twice his 

depreciated book value. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I would ask, let us say the Member for Lakeview (Mr. McPherson), I would ask him 

whether he would give me the financial statement of any one of his companies, of his farming company 

or of his merchandizing company and tell me whether he would sell at his financial statement book 

value or whether he would sell at twice that value? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2187 

Mr. Blakeney: — I would ask the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant). He has been in business for 

years, he has been in business for 30 or 35 years, I would ask him to put his financial statement on the 

table and ask him quite bluntly whether he would sell at his book value or at twice your book value? 

 

My family was in business. We were in business for a long time and we bought assets over the years and 

we depreciated them. In a year like 1973, if we were still in that business, I can tell you that we wouldn’t 

sell for the book value and we wouldn’t sell for twice the book value. 

 

The Member for Morse, I am told, has a farm. I don’t know when he got it but I would invite him to 

offer to me his depreciated book value. I suspect he would want twice the book value. They are busy 

quoting this financial statement which says clearly that the buildings and equipment are valued at cost 

less depreciation — at cost less depreciation. Some of that stuff was bought in the late 1940s and has 

been depreciated down to nothing and therefore, it stands on their books at next to nothing, as almost 

any asset bought in the late 1940s and depreciated over 20 years would. And the suggestion that they 

should sell that at depreciated book value is just too thick. I don’t think people will believe it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, it may well be that the appraised value is only one way to determine the 

value of a company. Only one way to assess it. But I think in trying to assess the value of a company 

you can certainly look at the value of the asset, the replacement value of the assets, not the reproduction 

value but the replacement value. What would it cost to put into place assets which would produce the 

same amount? They don’t have to be a replica of the assets which are there but having the same 

productive capacity. That is one way to judge but not the only way. Obviously the earnings trend and the 

future earnings is another. All of these you put together. About the last thing you look at is the historical 

financial statement. It is useful but that is about all. It is useful as a list of what the assets may be. But a 

historical financial statement of a company which has been in business for 30 or 35 years is a very 

limited value in assessing what the company is worth. I think everybody knows that. Certainly the 

Member for Prince Albert West knows it. Certainly the Member for Lakeview knows it. Certainly the 

Member for Whitmore Park knows it. And not one of them when they were in business would have sold 

at their depreciated book value. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It just came up first time today. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That is right because you made it a debatable motion. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2188 

If you had made it a non-debatable one it would have been up more than a week ago. It would have been 

up the day after you put it on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that his whole debate reveals a little something else. It reveals a little something 

about where the Opposition stand and where we stand on some pretty fundamental questions in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It tells us just what their concept of developing the agricultural industry in this 

province is and what our concept of a development strategy is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the previous Government took the steps to increase the number of cattle 

and increase the number of hogs and we agreed with those steps. And we are going to expand those 

programs. We want to see the number of cattle and the number of hogs produced in this province 

continue to expand. The effect of a major expansion in cattle and hogs could be very dramatic. An 

increase in annual hog production from something over a million head to over 3 million and an increase 

in the number of breeding cattle from the present 1.2 million to 1.9 million, would add $280 million 

annually to farm cash receipts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that we can look for those objectives. Hog production in 

Alberta stands at 2 million, I don’t see why we can’t get up to 2 million and then up to 3 million. 

 

In breeding cows all we need is an average increase of 75,000 head a year and we’ll be up to the 1.9 

million by 1980. 

 

As I say if we think that these levels can be achieved we will add $280 million a year to farm cash 

receipts. And that’s double the value of all potash sales in 1971. It is 50 per cent more than the value of 

petroleum sales in 1971. And it is two-thirds the value of all minerals — potash, petroleum and all the 

others. And that, Mr. Speaker, is only primary production of cattle and hogs. If we can achieve a like 

growth in processing and that is what I am coming to, the effect will be doubled or tripled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The previous Government recognized a need to increase cattle and hog production. 

What they didn’t realize and what they steadfastly stood against is any large-scale processing in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2189 

Mr. Blakeney: — Year after year this province fell behind in processing. Year after year this province 

fell behind compared with Manitoba and Alberta. Let me just tell you how bad we are doing. 

 

In terms of livestock, for every 100 head of cattle there are in Saskatchewan there are only 140 in 

Alberta and there are only 42 in Manitoba. 

 

With hogs for every hundred we have in Saskatchewan there are about 93 in Manitoba and 176 in 

Alberta. 

 

Saskatchewan, with more than twice the cattle that Manitoba has and just about the same number of 

hogs, but has only half the processing. Under the previous government processing withered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And compared with Saskatchewan, Alberta has 40 per cent more cattle and 70 per 

cent more hogs, but it has nearly 285 per cent more processors. 

 

Let me repeat — in terms of cattle Saskatchewan has more than twice the cattle that Manitoba has, yet 

Manitoba processes more than twice as much meat as Saskatchewan does. For every four head of cattle 

in Alberta there are three in Saskatchewan and yet Alberta processors process four times as much as 

Saskatchewan processes. 

 

Only slightly more than one in three slaughter cattle are processed in this province. The other two-thirds 

are shipped out live, and with them we are shipping jobs out of this province. And for my part this trend 

has got to stop. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now turning to hogs. We are determined to see that hogs produced in this province 

are processed in this province. And we are taking steps to bring that about. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Just a short two or three years ago, one hog in four that was produced in this province 

was shipped out live. 25 per cent of the hogs were shipped out live and we say that is not good enough. 

We propose a two-prong strategy, a strategy based upon the Hog Marketing Commission and a strategy 

based upon processing facilities here in Saskatchewan . 
 

We propose, Mr. Speaker, that this 75 per of Saskatchewan hogs processed here can be 85 per cent, can 

be 90 per cent, can be 95 per cent in a very few years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind this House that the meat packing industry is the largest 

single manufacturing employer in this province. The effect of increasing the total number of 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2190 

hogs processed in this province, the effect of increasing, firstly the number of hogs that we produce and 

secondly the proportion of hogs that we process in this province, is going to mean jobs and many, many 

more jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The effect of this policy will mean that meat packing companies in order to 

participate in processing in Saskatchewan are going to have to put their facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They will need to employ more people, rather than as in the past, shipping the cattle 

out to Winnipeg and Calgary. 

 

Now this overall strategy is one which will be judged by the long-term effect on the livestock industry. 

You can laugh at the strategy and say, oh, it is short-run and you shouldn’t have a Hog Marketing 

Commission, and you shouldn’t get into the packing business, and you are being dictatorial and you are 

paying too much, but I tell you that the people of Saskatchewan will judge you by your performance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know what their strategy was. Their 

strategy was to ship live hogs out of this province; they attacked orderly marketing; they fought the hog 

marketing commission tooth and nail so that the hogs would continue to go out to Calgary and 

Winnipeg. And let’s not kid the troops about this, all that chatter by the Members opposite about . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . all that chatter by the previous Government. They used to talk about their 

Government being a strong government insofar as freedom was concerned. That was the farthest thing 

from their minds. They have a legacy of Bill 2 and all the other restrictions. Now they have taken upon 

themselves the role of defending the farmers against orderly marketing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, all I can say is this: We all know that it has nothing to do with the farmers; we 

all know that it is a device so that hogs can keep going to Calgary and to Winnipeg where their friends 

are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now I know that they will attack the Intercon purchase. They will demand the 

financial details of Intercon and all the rest of it. They will want all these facts and figures to be 

available to these same packers in Calgary and Winnipeg where 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2191 

they want to continue to sell Saskatchewan hogs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That was the Liberal strategy and that continues to be the Liberal strategy. It was 

their strategy when they were in Government since they took no steps to see that these hogs and cattle 

were processed here, and it is their strategy now that they are in Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our strategy is a different strategy. Our strategy is one of keeping hogs in Saskatchewan. 

Our strategy is one that we can make sure that these hogs produce jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

We propose to support Intercon. We are proposing to make sure that Intercon continues to operate and 

continues to operate as the largest packing plant in Saskatchewan. And we propose to keep Intercon 

operating as the largest packing plant in Saskatchewan for the benefit of Saskatchewan working people. 

 

Those, Mr. Speaker, are the people that we are working for, just as the Liberal strategy helps the big 

packing companies in Calgary and Winnipeg, and now they are trying to get financial facts for those 

packing plants in Calgary and Winnipeg. Our strategy helps farmers and working people in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Let me say a little bit more about jobs. This province has all too often seen industrial 

plants limit their operations and even close, when these companies were purchased by big companies 

outside this province. The record is long and dismal. And some of the latest examples are the bread and 

baking industry, which slipped out of this province when those Members opposite were in Government. 

And another example is the oil industry where we have seen the closing of refineries at Moose Jaw and 

Saskatoon and threatened closure at Regina. 

 

The Members opposite laugh. What is a few hundred jobs? What is a few hundred jobs to the lawyer 

from Lumsden? What is a few hundred jobs to the school teacher from Milestone? But all I can say is 

this that for the people who live in my constituency, jobs in packing plants are good jobs and we intend 

to keep them. 

 

With much larger packing operations in Manitoba and Alberta we are under constant threat of our 

packing operations just fading away. I tell you that up to now we have not got firm commitments — as 

of a few months ago at least — not got firm commitments from any packing company to come in here 

and spend millions except Intercon. 

 

If Members opposite think that during their seven years in office all the packing plants wanted to flock 

in, where are they? Why is the Burns plant in Regina an old plant? Why is Canada Packers in Moose 

Jaw an old plant? I will tell you, because there was nothing to suggest to them that they had to get into 

this province and put their bucks up if they wanted our cattle and hogs. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2192 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I tell you this, we are now part of Intercon and I predict to this House that Canada 

Packers is going to come in here, and I predict that they are going to put up bucks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have no grounds for saying so, but I suspect that other packing companies are going 

to come in here and they are going to put up their bucks and they are going to anchor themselves to this 

province and they are going to create jobs which will stay here decade after decade. 

 

The Members opposite may suggest that all this could have happened otherwise, but I don’t know why 

they didn’t’ make it happen in their seven years if they think it could have happened. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Speaker, and this House that our packing industry which was one-half the size of 

Manitoba and one-quarter the size of Alberta, is in constant danger of being bought up and just seeped 

away like so many other industries in this province. I say that as long as we are the Government, we are 

not willing to let that happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we are faced with a situation where Intercon was controlled by Mr. 

Mendel, 84 years old and undoubtedly going to sell out his interests in the very near future. Mr. Mendel, 

at 84, was thinking of retirement. I think that situation was an absolutely classic case of buy out and 

close unless someone acted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we acted. The Members opposite can chuckle and laugh all they like but I tell you that 

industry is here and it is going to stay here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Intercon employs many hundreds of employees in Saskatoon. It is already announced 

that Intercon is going to build a plant in Regina. Our Government decided to act and save those jobs and 

to keep that industry, and to keep it not only for the jobs but also for the livestock producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that judged in the years ahead that it will be shown to be a wise decision and, 

Mr. Speaker, I am ready to stand on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, I have been here for eight years and never have I 

seen the Premier perform as he performed this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, never in my life have I seen the Premier as weak, never have I seen the Premier show his 

true colours. Never have I seen the Premier really give an outline of exactly what 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2193 

he means, and I am going to tell you why. Because up until now, Mr. Speaker, there were two or three 

principles involved. 

 

One was intrusion in private business and we objected to that. Most members of the business community 

object to the intrusion into the private business because we don’t believe that they can do a good job in 

running it. We believe that private enterprise can do a better job. 

 

The second principle was accountability. Are they accountable to the taxpayers of this province and to 

the electorate of this province for spending $10 million? That is the question of the secrecy, the question 

of the value of the money. That was the second principle. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a third one has come in and it is the competence of Premier Allan Blakeney that is in 

question. The competence and the competence of that whole front row benches of the Government. It is 

no longer a question of the fact that they are not going to provide any information, it is not a question of 

the fact any longer of whether or not they are going to put the facts on the table. With the release of 

these figures, Mr. Speaker, it shall question and challenge the very competence of Allan Blakeney and 

that entire Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — And that is the issue right now in the House and that is the issue in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. And that is why the Premier got up and never talked about Intercon. He never talked 

about the financial picture, he never talked about the good deal or the bad deal, what he talked about is 

agriculture. And it is just like mother love. The Minister of Agriculture could have gotten up and made 

that speech, talking about The Hog Marketing Commission or anything else. In fact, he is the man who 

probably wrote the speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn to a few of the arguments of the Premier to show it. He said, what part did Mr. 

Gedge play? Mr. Gedge played a great part on the part of Intercon. Let me tell you this. He said that the 

Financial Post, Mr. Gedge said, “Why I couldn’t have had a conflict of interest, because it was the 

Cabinet that made the decision.” But who, who was in California? The Chairman or the Executive 

Director of SEDCO, Mr. Gedge and the Deputy Minister of Agriculture. It wasn’t the Cabinet that made 

the decision. They were sitting around a table together. 

 

He talks about the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. Why didn’t we give him that information? Because there was 

a bit of a basic difference. Here was a company already in operation that the people of Saskatchewan 

had gotten all the facts on the financial deal. It was not the moment of inception. But maybe we were 

wrong, but you people pointed out to us the importance of credibility, the importance of openness, the 

importance of being honest with the people of Saskatchewan, the importance of accountability. And yet, 

today, you have denied every word that you spoke at that time and on that occasion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the funniest thing that the Premier said was, ‘You know you evaluate it on future 

potential.’ And if there was ever a moment when the farmers of Saskatchewan will 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2194 

know what the Hog Marketing Commission means, it is when the Premier said that. 

 

That is the end of it. Now we don’t know, first of all, if it is a monopoly for Intercon — is the Hog 

Marketing Commission going to send all the farmers’ hogs to Intercon? How can he look ahead and 

determine the future potential of that company? 

 

You and I know, and every farmer now knows that every cow and every sheep and every hog that will 

be for the export market in this province will be forced to go to Intercon. That’s where the future market 

availability comes. 

 

Then he says, “A state abattoir.” And then he talks about the historical value of a financial statement. It 

is only one of the things that you can use to evaluate a company. I want to ask the NDP if they can point 

to one company in Canada, in the last 20 years, that has ever purchased a company for 40 times its net 

earnings? Forty time its net earnings! That is exactly what they purchased Intercon for. 

 

Well if you can point out one company, because I say if you look at the 1972 financial statement of net 

earnings in this House you will find that they have earned in 1972 about $400,000 or less and 40 times 

the net earnings of that company is what you paid for. You try to find one company that has ever been 

purchased for that. 

 

The best company might be 12 times, 10 times, 13 times, but don’t suggest that there isn’t a yardstick. 

That is without question the worst, the poorest financial deal ever made by this Government or any other 

government in Canada. 

 

The Premier talks about replacement value. What are you buying? A bunch of buildings? Some of those 

buildings aren’t worth 10 or 15 per cent of their value. Some of them are worth 75 and 80 per cent. 

Some of them are 30 and 40 years of age. Whoever heard of replacement value? 

 

He talked about the increase in cattle and hogs and then he got into his agriculture speech. You know I 

think that if anybody attempted to increase the number of the cattle population or the hog population in 

Saskatchewan, it was the Liberal Government when they sat on that side of the House. All I can say is 

that of course, that is mother love. Everybody wants to increase production but that has nothing to do 

with the value of Intercontinental or the real objective as to why you bought it. 

 

He said, you know you didn’t increase processing by one single iota when you were the Government. 

Would somebody over there stand up and tell me how they have increased the processing capacity in the 

Province of Saskatchewan with the purchase of Intercon? That is the problem of the fallacies of 

socialism. They can never create anything of their own. When the Labour Government took over in 

England what did they do? They bought out the coal mines, they bought out the steel plants. You 

haven’t increased processing in the Province of Saskatchewan, not by one iota. All you did was give 

Fred Mendel $10 million for something that is worth about $2½ million. That is all that you did. 

 

That’s all you did and this is why, Mr. Speaker, that this 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2195 

has really changed the whole complexion of this debate. It is no longer a question of accountability or 

secrecy. The question right now is the competency of Premier Allan Blakeney and the competency of 

that Government. That’s why I think if they want to save face — I should say the incompetence — if 

they want to demonstrate to the people of Saskatchewan that this was not a monstrous deal as the Leader 

of the Opposition has indicated and as this financial statement indicates. They have thrown away about 

$6 million or $7 million of the taxpayers’ money in Saskatchewan. It is the most incompetent deal made 

by a bunch of rank amateurs, without any good business advice. It is incompetent and they admitted 

themselves that it wasn’t SEDCO, SEDCO gave the technical advice, but the decision was made by 

Cabinet with Premier Allan Blakeney sitting in the chair. It shows incompetence, it shows the absolute 

incompetence of the whole Government and that is why they should put every ounce of information on 

the table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. K. Thorson: (Minister of Industry) — I thought it was significant, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader 

of the Opposition was speaking, he indicated that he wouldn’t trust the personal integrity of anybody in 

the Government. He wouldn’t even trust them to examine the document that he had tabled during the 

course of debate, while the examination was to take place in full view of all the Members of the House. 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my experience when people are so mistrustful it must arise out of their own 

experience. Otherwise, there is no need to impute such bad motives to your opponents. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition has his point of view and he has made that very clear. He says that no 

matter what the Government paid to secure the meat packing industry in Saskatchewan they shouldn’t 

have done it. That’s his position plain and simple. There is nothing else that really counts as far as the 

Opposition is concerned. The Government shouldn’t have done that. All of the talk about figures no 

matter from what source they are quoted really has nothing to do with the position of the Opposition in 

this debate. They just say simply the Government should stand by and do nothing about the meat 

packing industry in Saskatchewan, shouldn’t spend a nickel on it, shouldn’t do anything about it, except 

to increase the numbers of livestock produced in the province no matter where they are processed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — That’s the issue with respect to the Government’s investment in Intercontinental 

Packers Limited. There is no other issue of any significance whatever. I can see immediately if you take 

this sort of narrow-minded, private enterprise approach of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, then, of 

course, you couldn’t expect the Government of Saskatchewan with that kind of advice to go out and 

invest in the meat packing industry in our own province. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, if you take this test 

that the Leader of the Opposition talks about, you should be able to be assured that you are going to get 

a return annually of eight to ten times your investment, then, Mr. Speaker, on 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2196 

that advice there isn’t any investor who would ever put a nickel into a packing plant in Saskatchewan 

and it wouldn’t matter whether it was the Government or another company. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I said that? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Eight to ten times, he said. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, I did not, I said the packing company should be eight to ten times the net earnings, 

the net earnings should be one-tenth . . . 

 

Mr. Thorson: — What he is saying is that every eight to ten years you should recover what you put in, 

that you should get enough back so that you recovered over that period of time all that you have 

invested. Mr. Speaker, on that basis no one would invest in meat packing in Saskatchewan — not Burns, 

not Schneiders, not Canada Packers, nobody would invest in meat packing facilities in Saskatchewan. I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that it is just a very good thing that nobody is listening to the Liberal Party when 

they are giving this kind of advice on economic development in Saskatchewan. On that sort of advice 

they would tell other meat packers not to come to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is not our position. 

That’s the narrow, private enterprise Liberal position. Only a question of what you can get in terms of 

return on the dollar. That is all they care about, that is all they are concerned about. They are not 

concerned about the livestock industry in the province and they are not concerned about the meat 

processing industry in the province. 
 

Now the Leader of the Opposition tries to leave the impression somehow that the money we have 

invested in Intercontinental Packers Limited is taxpayers’ money thrown away. Now, Mr. Speaker, it is 

money which we have invested in a going enterprise which is paying a return. We are not asking the 

taxpayers to dig out anything from their pockets so that this investment can be made in this going 

concern. We will not have to take any money away from any of our programs in the Government in 

order to make this investment. We can clearly afford to make this investment on money which we 

borrow and put in and we can confidently expect to have it returned to us, Mr. Speaker. 
 

An Hon. Member: — It’s taxpayers’ money. 
 

Mr. Thorson: — It’s not. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says that somehow it is 

inappropriate to look, when deciding what we should invest in this kind of operation, to look at 

replacement values which are determined on the basis of insurance or an insurance policy. I appreciate 

his example that if you buy a truck for $10,000 and you insure it for $10,000 you are not likely to get 

five years later if you have a claim under insurance, you are not likely to get $10,000. You are going to 

get the depreciated value. But I think that analogy is hardly appropriate to this situation. We are not 

talking about something that is readily replaceable by another item, we are talking about one meat 

packing operation in the province. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2197 

Now surely no one can argue that we should not try to secure meat packing and processing in the 

province, that we should not try to increase the employment in that industry in our province. Surely no 

one can doubt on the basis of our experience in the milling industry or the oil refining industry that if we 

simply leave that to private companies we are not going to have that employment in the province. So we 

have to take a look at how we can provide those facilities and that kind of industry here in 

Saskatchewan. We could, Mr. Speaker, as a Government, if we chose, set out to develop those facilities 

ourselves. But as I said the other day that would only further increase the meat processing capacity in all 

of Western Canada and in Saskatchewan. When we discovered that there was a company like 

Intercontinental Packers Limited which has operated in a way, Mr. Speaker, which is very 

commendable, that is it has since 1940 when it began, put its major emphasis on expansion rather than 

on simply making an annual profit each year. That kind of operation we could agree with because we 

want to see that expansion take place for the benefit of the livestock industry and secondary 

manufacturing in the province. And so, Mr. Speaker, we look to assets here in a going concern and we 

know that we have to pay a price to secure those assets here as a going concern in the meat packing 

industry. Essentially, because these assets were available for purchase, because they have a certain 

value, in terms of what we would have to invest to secure meat packing and processing and employment 

in Saskatchewan, we were prepared to pay the price we did because we think that is a good investment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Resolution before us calls for a tabling of the agreement entered into between the 

Government and the shareholders of Intercontinental Packers Limited. I want to assure the House that if 

this Order passes that the agreement will be tabled. I want to just give the House a little information 

about what will be shown in that agreement. Mr. Speaker, it is already well known that we have paid a 

little more than $10.2 million for 45 per cent of all the outstanding shares of Intercontinental Packers 

Limited. The agreement will show that there are 100, 0000 such shares and that, therefore, the value of 

the shares on that price for all the shares is $22.75 million. The agreement will show that in addition to 

this payment which we have made in March of 1973 for 45 per cent interest that we have an option to 

purchase five years from the date of the agreement, another 20 per cent of the shares of Intercontinental 

Packers Limited, and that we will pay according to the option agreement contained in the overall 

agreement for the 20 per cent of those shares, a price of $250 per share or we will value the whole of the 

100,000 outstanding shares five years from now at $25 million and that is the price we will pay for 

another 20 per cent five years from now. There is one small escalator: that we will pay something of an 

increase based on any increase in the cost of living index in Canada. 

 

Now just let me take the House through that so they will understand what that means. We have now paid 

$10.237 million for 45 per cent. Five years from now for $5 million we can get another 20 per cent, plus 

perhaps if the cost of living index goes up I would say three per cent per annum, perhaps another 

$750,000 which will mean that within the five year period we will pay $15.98 million for 65 per cent of 

the shares of Intercontinental Packers Limited. 

 

Mr. Grant: — You can buy my business any time. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2198 

Mr. Thorson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Member for Whitmore Park has a business which is so 

important to the economy of the province as Intercontinental Packers Limited, I would like to talk to 

him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may be that if we are setting out to just place money to get a return on it there would be 

many other industries in which an investor would look rather than the meat packing industry. The 

Leader of the Opposition suggests that all we will get is about three per cent. That is not our view of the 

current situation of Intercontinental Packers Limited and we certainly think that it is not the future 

prospects for the earnings of the company. We think it will be much better than that but I want to 

emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that even if that were not true that the return on the money would be much 

higher than that, we would still think this was a good investment in a key industry for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If we had not made it at this time then the results would have been: One, that no other packing company 

would be interested in placing additional packing facilities in Saskatchewan because I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that it may well be, in the future, as in the oil refining industry, that the meat packing industry, 

looked on as a whole unit in Western Canada, would want, if it was left in the hands of one or two 

private companies, would want to locate one large plant somewhere in the prairies and it might very well 

not be in Saskatchewan. Our hogs and our cattle would be taken out of the province for processing and 

when they go out the jobs go out with them also. So we think it is timely to make the investment 

because, first of all, if we hadn’t done it now there is no assurance that any other packing companies 

would put their processing facilities in the province so that we could have the employment from 

secondary industry based on our livestock production. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we think it is important to 

secure the jobs that are already here, make sure that we don’t see a closure of a plant such as we saw in 

the milling industry over the years at Moose Jaw and last year in Saskatoon. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, we are quite prepared to give full information, we are quite prepared to 

enter into a debate with the Members of the Opposition or anyone else about the wisdom of our strategy 

and our desire to see economic development take place in the province. We are quite prepared to 

concede to the members of the Opposition that it is altogether too easy to just put the argument on the 

basis of the return on the dollar. On that basis, Mr. Speaker, there are other investments to be made and 

could be made. That is not the justification for what we have done, that is not the real value that we will 

get in the Province of Saskatchewan with this investment that we have made. We think that on the basis 

of the expectation for the markets for meat packing products, the value, when we have an opportunity to 

exercise our option within five years, will be much higher than it is today and much higher than the 

value stated of $25 million, the basis on which we will pay for the additional 20 per cent of the shares 

five years from today. Mr. Speaker, I am confident that on this basis the people of Saskatchewan will 

give us their support, would say that it would be less than responsible on our part to stand by, as the 

Leader of the Opposition would have us do, and do nothing about securing a meat packing industry in 

the province. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that in the next five and ten years and beyond that 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2199 

people will be able to look back in the early 1970s and recognize what a wise decision was made by so 

many voters in Saskatchewan in June, 1971 when they kicked the Liberals out and put the Blakeney 

Government in, which is really prepared to use the resources of Saskatchewan for the benefit of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: (Athabasca) — I am not sure whether I should participate in the debate at this time or 

not but I think perhaps I should like to hear another speaker or two from the other side. Everyone who 

gets up makes the deal a worse one. However, I think I will speak now because I don’t think as a citizen 

of the province that I could stand the shock of hearing about another 20 per cent option that was taken 

ten years from now if it is proportionately worse than the 20 per cent option that they have five years 

from now. 

 

Well I think, Mr. Speaker, we have never heard of a weaker, more incompetent two speakers in the 

history of this Legislature. I wish my friend from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) would get up and talk 

about the hogs, I am sure he is well qualified. But I think that my friend from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) has cleared the issue up for the people of Saskatchewan. The Members from Estevan, the 

Ministry of Industry (Mr. Thorson), verified it further when he said that the main issue in this debate is 

that of jobs. So it now becomes the competence of the Government versus the provision of jobs and the 

competence of the Government has been shown to be seriously lacking and we have not seen one new 

job. 

 

The Premier started out and he said he didn’t know where to start. You know it’s understandable 

because if he doesn’t know any more about business than he was trying to tell us today I am 

surprised . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — How about Athabasca? 

 

Mr. Guy: — And he didn’t know very much about that either or he never would have called the 

election. He proved that too. It is understandable because when it comes to business the socialists don’t 

know anything about business and it is more obvious when they try to justify the purchase of 45 per cent 

of the Intercon shares. You know the Premier tried to tell us today that future earnings was the most 

important yardstick in the purchase of a company. Well, of course, this was complete nonsense. I think 

we had the most obvious example of that about four years ago in the computer industry, when computer 

companies sold shares that skyrocketed on one basis alone and that was what they thought were future 

earnings. You all know what happened to the shares of the computer companies in about a year and a 

half, two years. Many of them went bankrupt, fortunes were lost because they were based on future 

earnings alone. You know the then Premier said equity doesn’t really count, but I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that when you are in a market that fluctuates as much as the agricultural market fluctuates that 

equity is the only thing that the shareholders have left when the market goes down. In a case where you 

are dealing with this type of an industry, a cyclical industry, dependent upon climate, dependent upon 

markets overseas, one of 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2200 

the most important yardsticks is the equity in the company in which you are purchasing the shares. 

 

Then the Premier stopped there, he didn’t have any other financial arguments. Then he said, “We are 

justifying this purchase on the basis of agriculture.” He brought in the red herring of agriculture but in 

doing so he made some interesting comments. He said there was going to be, he hoped and we hope too, 

a tremendous increase in the number of hogs and of cattle in this province. We all know that there are at 

least three plants in Saskatchewan today that are prepared to process hogs, including Intercon, without 

Government interference. But I thought it was interesting when he said, “But we are determined to see 

the hogs processed in Saskatchewan.” Well now I hope the Minister of Agriculture will stand up and say 

if this is the intent of the Hog Marketing Commission to force every hog in this province to be sold 

through Intercon. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if that is the case you won’t provide very many new jobs. 

You might increase the jobs for Intercontinental Packers but you will decrease the jobs for every other 

packing house in this province, if you are going to use Government force to force the farmers regardless 

of transportation costs, regardless of distance, regardless of price, to ship to Intercon just because the 

Government has got their finger in the pie. Both the Premier and Mr. Thorson come back to the point 

that we bought into Intercon to save jobs, to provide jobs. Well I ask you, Mr. Minister of Culture and 

Youth, you might as well have been Finance Minister, you couldn’t have done any worse job than the 

Minister who was negotiating this deal. Can you tell me for that $10.24 million one new job that has 

been provided in this province? Just tell me one new job. 

 

Mr. Lane: — You lost one, Fred Mendel left. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Yes, I think you’ve even lost a job if anything. So that is not the issue, the number of jobs 

that have been created, because you haven’t created a job. Not one job for $10.24 million. So we come 

back then to the fact that the issue here is that of the competence of the Government. 

 

The question of agriculture does not concern this particular deal with Intercon. If this increase in hogs 

develops as we hope it will, certainly the other companies were prepared to put in increased packing 

facilities. The Minister of Industry says that there were no signs on the horizon that there would be any 

increase in the packing industry. Well that is not our information. We understand that both Burns and 

Canada Packers were in the process of negotiating for grants to increase their plants and it was long 

before the Intercon deal was started up in a three week period. We already had a viable meat processing 

industry in this province and our fear is that this once viable industry will not be viable once the 

Government gets through putting their sticky fingers into the industry. 

 

Then the Minister of Industry, the great financier, the big financier from Estevan, from the oil country, 

spoke in the debate. He should have stayed down there selling oil and stayed away from the meat 

processing plants. He said, “We’re not going to take any money from the taxpayers. We’re going to 

borrow the money”. What do you borrow the money for today? You’re lucky if you get it for seven per 

cent or 7½. What’s your return on 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2201 

the money? Three per cent. Pretty good socialist arithmetic, you borrow money at seven per cent and 

return it to the people at three per cent. Great business! Well I hope the Member from Saskatoon, 

because it is going to be the people in his constituency that are going to be taken to the cleaners, along 

with every other person in Saskatchewan, I hope that the people in Mr. Rolfes’ constituency in Nutana 

South or Nutana whatever it is, would go out and invest their money and be satisfied for a three per cent 

return when it cost them 7½ per cent to borrow their money. You know sometimes I wonder what they 

do think up there when they return a fellow like that to the Legislature. However, I think that will be 

corrected next time. 

 

Then the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) concluded by saying that there was another company 

interested in the packing industry. Well, as I said, we have shown that this is wrong and he knows it. He, 

more than anyone else, knows it yet he tried to bring a red herring into this Legislature to cover up his 

weakness as the Minister of Industry and certainly in the financial field. Then he says it is important to 

secure jobs already here. We see no closing of plants. Intercontinental would have expanded without 

your help. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What about Gulf Oil? 

 

Mr. Guy: — Oh, the Attorney General all of a sudden has wakened up and he says now that Gulf and 

Imperial Oil are processing meat. That’s our Attorney General! Well, I don’t know, Mr. Attorney 

General, where have you been for the last few years. We know you haven’t been in the House and when 

you have been here you haven’t been doing a very good job of leading the House business. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — How could anybody lead a bunch like you guys. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Well, you could try, you could try a lot harder than you have been. 

 

Then the Minister concluded and he said, “We have used wisdom and strategy in order to conclude this 

deal for the people of Saskatchewan. We are doing it on the basis of expectation.” Well I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan that have to dig into their pockets for $10.24 million today, 

and heard the unbelievable announcement today by the Minister that they have taken another 20 per cent 

option at an even higher price than that paid for these shares, will say that their wisdom is nil and their 

strategy is even worse. So under those circumstances the sooner we see these documents tabled to find 

out whether there are additional options, find out what the absolute and complete holdings that have 

become part of 45 per cent interest are the better. All we can say is that the Government has not today 

through their two speakers, given any justification for the deal. In fact, if anything, it has become clearer 

this afternoon that both the Premier and the Minister of Industry are the two most incompetent Ministers 

who have ever sat on the Government side of the House. Not only are they incompetent but they haven’t 

even got the competence to see that they are incompetent. They said that they are prepared to stand or 

fall on this issue. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they will be falling on it as soon as they get the courage 

to call an election. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2202 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J. R. Messer: (Minister of Agriculture) — Mr. Speaker, as usual the Opposition once again has 

shown their inability to grasp and to understand the significance of the Government’s actions. The two 

Members, I think in a row, the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and the Member from 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy) brought up the subject of red herrings. Mr. Speaker, if there have been any red 

herrings in this House we have certainly seen them brought forward by the Opposition today. They have 

attempted to bring in irrelevant subjects, irrelevant matters in relation to this Intercontinental purchase 

for a number of days now. We have gone through the question as to what Mr. Gedge was doing and 

what his role was in regard to this whole undertaking. The Minister of Industry and Commerce has 

answered that twice, the Premier again today answered it. Yet they still continued to pursue that as if 

there was some sort of under-desk dealing in regard to Mr. Gedge and they know full well that there was 

not. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition he relates to some hypothetical figures and he comes out with the 

Intercontinental Plant showing some kind of three per cent profit in the future. In fact he says the profit, 

if you take the worth of the company as he relates to them and using the past performances of the 

company that he related to earlier this afternoon, the net profit would only be three per cent of that total 

investment or our investment would only earn three per cent with that kind of a record. But he doesn’t 

want to, Mr. Speaker, go into any kind of details to relate to what the economic conditions and who the 

Government of Saskatchewan was when he refers to the profits that Intercontinental were making during 

that period of time. That has been pointed out by a number of speakers in the Legislature today, Mr. 

Speaker, they, when they were the Government, Intercontinental even though it had the capacity of one 

of the better plants in Western Canada to process twice its capacity at that time, they allowed those 

livestock products to be shipped out of the province, to be moved out to be processed in Manitoba or 

Alberta where other packing facilities who had not situated in Saskatchewan had established processing 

operations. 

 

The Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) he says that all the hogs are in fact going to be processed 

by Intercontinental Packers now because of the Government’s involvement not only in Intercontinental 

but because of the Government announcing a Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission. If that, in fact, 

is the case, Mr. Speaker, I ask them why they say, apparently they have some information that we don’t 

know now at this time have, why is it they feel so certain that Burns is going to establish a plant in 

Regina, a new plant? Or, as the Leader of the Opposition has said, Canada Packers is going to be 

establishing a new plant in Moose Jaw. If this in fact was the case I am certain that these processors 

would not be so anxious to now build in Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, they 

realize that there is going to be considerable expansion of livestock in the Province of Saskatchewan, 

there is going to be an orderly marketing system and that they will have for the first time in 

Saskatchewan an opportunity to take advantage of that processing industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2203 

Mr. Messer: — Now the Member from Milestone also said, how does our purchase increase in any way 

processing in Saskatchewan. I think that that is obvious when we have shown that we are willing to 

invest as a Government in a processing industry in Saskatchewan, that we have shown to producers in 

Saskatchewan that there will continue to be a processing industry here. And taking that into 

consideration along with the Hog Marketing Commission and the benefit of that Commission to hog 

producers in the province, they will realize that there is merit in expanding livestock in Saskatchewan 

because there will in fact be a commitment to process that livestock here which will return greater 

dollars to them than they have had the opportunity to have returned to them in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, acquisition of shares in Intercontinental Packers is part of a commitment of this 

Government, a commitment to not only maximize income but to maximize and expand employment and 

employment development for the largest number of people in this province. Our Government, Mr. 

Speaker, has a vision along with farmers and especially livestock producers in this province, which sees 

Saskatchewan as having a great opportunity of being not only the breadbasket of the world but in fact 

the food basket of the world. Our future in this province, as I think all thinking people will agree, is 

primarily agriculture and food production. During the last ten years world demand for food products has 

skyrocketed. Saskatchewan, I think, must be in a position to take advantage of this explosion in food 

markets. We must have the capability to market these products. This means that we must be smart and 

sophisticated and update businessmen in the marketing sense. We must take advantage of every world 

market opportunity that arises and we must ensure the producers get the best possible prices for those 

markets. And that’s why we formed a hog marketing commission, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it isn’t only farmers that will be part of this great development in the future. Our urban centres and 

the working people who constitute the basic foundation of these centres will also benefit tremendously 

through increased employment and better wages and salaries. This will be true only if we have the 

courage to ensure that there are strong and growing processing companies in this province, companies 

which are interested in growing and development in the province, in the province and for the benefit of 

the total provincial economy. It’s absolute madness for a province with our potential in agriculture to 

permit the centralization of so much processing activity outside of the province. We can only cease 

being hewers of wood and drawers of water in Saskatchewan if we are prepared to take some of the risk 

and make some of the investment that’s needed to see that his processing stays here where it legitimately 

belongs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — The Liberals, Mr. Speaker, want to encourage development in Eastern Canada, in 

Alberta and in Manitoba because that’s what the big international corporations want. They say, in fact, 

the Leader of the Opposition has as much as said this, sell our 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2204 

industry to the big corporation, let them move to processing of our products to these other parts of North 

America because that’s how the big corporations can make the most and the best profit. And the Liberals 

want them to have an unrivalled right on those profits no matter what the cost is to Saskatchewan 

residents. I’ll let the Members of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan make up their own 

minds as to why the Liberals are so concerned about corporate profits. 

 

As has been pointed out Imperial Oil intends to move its Regina operations to Edmonton, not because 

the Regina operations are so unprofitable but because there will be even greater profits in Edmonton. 

The Liberals support this. Why, Mr. Speaker? The reasons are obvious. If they have their way 

Saskatchewan will be sold out lock, stock and barrel to these corporations. Who would then pick up 

their processing marbles and move out of the province? The only thing left for a Government to do after 

another ten years of this Liberal sellout would be to shut out the lights after the last person had left. 

 

Our Government isn’t going to let this happen, Mr. Speaker. The food industry is our future in 

Saskatchewan and it’s going to have a great future, Mr. Speaker. If only we have the willingness to keep 

the ownership and thus the operations in this province. 

 

The Opposition demands the past financial information of this company. Most of that information, if not 

all of it, has already been released and the Leader of the Opposition referred to it in his speech earlier 

this afternoon. Physical assets, inventories and investments are worth $16 million, and they’ve been told 

that on a number of occasions. They’ve been told what the debt, long and short term, were. Now they 

want to know about the profits and they make some estimate as to what those profits are. But what 

profits is it that they are really interested in? 

 

Mr. Lane: — The net profits. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Ah, ‘net profit’, one person says, but generally it’s outdated past profits based on 

economic conditions generated by Liberal bungling and mismanagement in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lane: — How was California? 

 

Mr. Messer: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the Member from Lumsden he always wants to talk from his 

seat and he’s talking now about how was California. And that’s just further evidence of what they talk 

about when they’re in the country. They’re trying to tell people in Saskatchewan that the Minister of 

Industry and the Minister of Commerce and the Minister of Agriculture were down in California 

negotiating this deal. It’s obvious from the kind of remarks they’re making. Yet it’s been made very 

plain to this Legislature that there were no Ministers in California negotiating the Intercontinental deal. 

There were competent and qualified civil servants carrying out the job who carried back their 

recommendations to Cabinet and Cabinet gave the consideration to those recommendations and I think 

made one of the best deals that this province has made in a long time, Mr. Speaker. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2205 

Mr. Speaker, anyone with a touch of intelligence in buying earned assets knows it is the future that 

counts. It’s the future that counts, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal Opposition wants the facts and they want 

the figure. They want facts and figures to justify the Government’s purchase of an interest in 

Intercontinental Packers. Well that’s fine, Mr. Speaker. They should have the facts and figures and so 

should the public. But let’s have the meaningful facts and figures, the ones that really count. I’m going 

to give the Members of the Opposition some of those facts and figures right now so I’d suggest that they 

listen carefully and listen well. Your corporate friends, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, will want these 

figures and I’m certain that when they rush out this evening to feed them that information they’ll want to 

feed you some questions back so that you can again come forward in the Legislative Assembly 

tomorrow and ask some other ridiculous questions. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, these corporate friends 

are in a much more serious business than the Members of the Opposition. They’re out to, if at all 

possible, kill companies like Intercontinental Packers if they can’t take them over by one means or 

another. In order to play that deadly serious game they need a front man and they need accurate and 

dependable information and obviously the Liberal Party is the front man. So, get the figures down 

accurately, do your best for those non-Saskatchewan corporate friends of yours because they’re going to 

need all the help they can get until they decide to become part of Saskatchewan and develop right along 

with Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Messer: — Let me just indicate to you where we were in the meat packing industry prior to the 

Government’s purchase of Intercontinental Packers. We had, Mr. Speaker, two major non-Saskatchewan 

meat packing companies operating in the province. Neither had undertaken any substantial new 

development in the province for years and one had publicly announced intentions to close down a major 

part of its operations in Saskatchewan and thus process even more Saskatchewan livestock out of this 

province. Our third major packing plant, Intercontinental Packers Limited, was controlled by Mr. 

Mendel, as had been pointed out, having made his contribution, was showing interest in selling that 

company. But he wanted it to continue operating in Saskatchewan but he could not be sure what 

non-Saskatchewan buyers might do with it. And obviously a major packer with great investments in 

Winnipeg, Calgary or Edmonton could do well to purchase the company in order to corner the 

Saskatchewan supply of livestock, only to end up shipping that livestock out for processing and 

eventually closing down the Saskatchewan operations. It’s happened before and it could well happen 

again. And we have evidence of it happening in other industries, Imperial Oil, Gulf in Moose Jaw and 

Gulf in Saskatoon, Quaker Oats in Saskatoon and one could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Naturally, our first and greatest interest as a province is to keep Intercontinental as an independent 

Saskatchewan-based company. With well over 50 per cent of Saskatchewan livestock now being 

handled by Intercontinental this will assure that practically all livestock produced in Saskatchewan will 

also be packed here in the future. And the reasons for this are simple, Mr. Speaker. As long as there is 

one major packing company committed to Saskatchewan, the others must 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2206 

remain also. If they do not, they will of necessity lose most of their supply of Saskatchewan livestock to 

the Saskatchewan-based competitor. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, it’s highly probable that there will be 

a new plant built by Burns in Regina, that there will, in fact, be an announcement by Canada Packers to 

build a new plant in Moose Jaw. It’s also, Mr. Speaker, why Intercontinental has announced to build a 

new plant in Saskatchewan which will contribute to more jobs in this province. 

 

Now the Members opposite ask what has this done in regard to increasing the job potential in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. The announcement that was made by Mr. Mendel some weeks ago already 

indicated that plant would provide 150 or 160 jobs to Regina which are not now here. Thus with one 

major stroke, Mr. Speaker, the purchase of Intercontinental, we have guaranteed the future of the meat 

packing industry in Saskatchewan, a future that looked bleak, bleak indeed until the change in 

Government in 1971, followed by a clear statement by this Government that there is no alternative for 

industry but to do its processing here. 

 

And what will this retention of our meat packing industry mean to the people, the working people and 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in the future? In order to answer these questions we must recognize the 

totality of the Government’s plans for agriculture. First of all, Mr. Speaker, through our total complex of 

new farm development programs, we’re looking to an unparalleled era of growth and expansion in the 

livestock industry, and the Premier certainly went through that scenario this afternoon for the Members 

opposite. But again, I think we should refresh the Members opposite as to what it is that we attempt to 

do. A tripling of hog production by the mid 1980s from $1 million to $3 million, a more than doubling 

of finishing of beef cattle in the province from $500,000 to $1.2 million. Through our new 

comprehensive farm development program including FarmStart and Land Bank I’m entirely confident of 

meeting these objective. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Against it, Jack? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Oh, we were never against the expansion of livestock, Mr. Speaker. The Member 

opposite is trying to say that we were. Our objectives and our objections to the livestock industry 

expansion program of the Members opposite when they were the Government was that it only 

encouraged expansion and gave absolutely no guarantee to livestock producers, that they were going to 

be able to have some fair return for that livestock after they expanded. And if there’s anybody that 

should hang their heads in shame, Mr. Speaker, it should be the Members opposite when they encourage 

the expansion of the hog industry in Saskatchewan and have farmers confronted with 18 cent per pound 

hogs after doing so and gave no recognition to that problem farmers were confronted with in selling 

pork at prices that were far below the cost of production. They did nothing to help correct that situation. 

We say that we generate expansion in the livestock industry and we also implement a number of other 

programs that will give producers not only assurance of finding market places for that product but at fair 

returns in relation to cost of production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from current levels of employment in the meat 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2207 

packing sector in Saskatchewan we find that we have approximately 3,000 people employed. We can 

expect to reach a level of ten or ten and a half thousand employed in the meat packing industry in 

Saskatchewan. What a change, Mr. Speaker, that will be from those seven dismal years when industrial 

development declined continuously in this province under the former Liberal Government. What will 

that mean to the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker? Of the growth that I mentioned we would expect sales of 

livestock to reach $700 million by the mid 1980s or a $280 million increase that the Premier referred to 

earlier this day. 

 

Meat packing companies have come to expect before tax, profits of over three and a half per cent of the 

value of livestock purchased meaning that profits in meat packing could reach as high as $25 million per 

year by the mid 1980s. Corporate taxes will hopefully recover about one-half of this or about $12 

million per year. About one-third of this will accrue to the province as its share of taxes meaning that $4 

million per year would be picked up by the Saskatchewan taxpayer through taxes. But there’s more, Mr. 

Speaker. Between $2 million and $3 million of this profit will belong to Intercontinental and thus about 

50 per cent or between one and one half million dollars per year after taxes have been collected will go 

to the provincial taxpayer. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a bad deal for a $10 million investment. 

 

None of this can come about without every clock in the total structure being put in place. One single 

mistake such as letting our meat packing industry fall under the control of non-Saskatchewan companies 

would mean the loss of it all, the jobs, the taxes, the profits and we simply cannot afford this. And I 

think probably, Mr. Speaker, it could even be worse than that. A loss of our meat packing industry 

would mean our farmers and our hog marketing commission would not have a company to relate to, to 

help find and take advantage of the new markets. And without that capability we can’t undertake the 

expansion in farm production we need so badly to stabilize farm numbers and improve farm incomes, 

That is what we’re saying. 

 

We say let’s look at the total picture when we talk about the wisdom of buying Intercontinental Packers. 

We say let’s look to the future and have development for the people of this province by the people of 

this province. Let’s not get lost in the nit picking over past figures only. No great economic enterprise 

was ever built on that and neither will a great and booming provincial economy. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

obvious from the actions and the speeches of the Members opposite that they’re trying to, in fact, 

promote something that was never really there. They don’t have any faith. By their own admission and 

by the stand they have taken in regard to Intercontinental Packers, they don’t have any faith in the 

production ability of the livestock sector in Saskatchewan. Because they say, let come what may in 

regard to packing companies, and processing companies. There’s no guarantee that should be given to 

farmers in Saskatchewan that we can sell the produce that they have the opportunity to produce in this 

province. Don’t give them any guarantee in regard to price stability. Let them continue to be as they 

were under the seven years of government under the thumb of the processing companies that have 

situated outside of the province. If they don’t feel like purchasing or if they don’t feel like paying a fair 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2208 

price that’s just too bad for the livestock producer but it should be no concern of the Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me get it perfectly clear to the Members opposite and to the people of Saskatchewan 

that this Government says that it is a concern of theirs and that we will continue to involve ourselves in 

these kinds of enterprises in order to give stability and assurance to our farmers in this province. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is what this is all about. And that’s why I ask the Members opposite to quit playing 

politics with this purchase and to get on with providing to the processors and to the farmers in 

Saskatchewan the kind of opportunity we need in order to make this, in fact, not only a breadbasket of 

the world but a food basket of the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — What figure is it that you use for the cost of producing a market hog? What’s the 

break even point in feeding a hog and marketing it? 

 

Mr. Messer: — I don’t think I was referring to any cost. I said that we were selling hogs for $18 per 100 

which was far below the cost of production and you could ask any hog producer in Saskatchewan if that 

fact is not correct. 

 

Mr. Coupland: — But the cost of production, you should know. 

 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald: (Cannington) — There is one thing, Mr. Speaker, that comes through loud and 

clear this afternoon and that is the total and complete financial incompetence of the Government 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speakers, we have had the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, we had the 

Ministry of Industry stand up today. And never do they tell us why you should pay 15 cents for a carrot 

that you should have bought for 3 cents. Never do they tell us why you should go and pay $10 million 

for a packing house that at the most they should have paid $3 or $4 million for the interest that they got. 

Not once did they explain that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to illustrate to them what the Leader of the Opposition has already dwelt on and it’s open to their 

scrutiny and interest, The Survey of Industrials, published 1972. It comes from the Library. 

 

It has very interesting information regarding packing houses. Because it very clearly illustrates to 

anybody who wants to sit down and take a little time what they should have paid for this packing house 

operation, if they wanted to buy, which we would have opposed, but at least they would have saved the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan $6 million had they paid approximately the right price. 

 

Let’s take a look at 1971 the most recent information in The Survey of Industrials, what these packing 

house companies 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2209 

made. In 1971, J. M. Schneider and Company had sales, Mr. Speaker, that illustrate that based on their 

net earnings per share were 12 times earnings. What I have done is taken the average price of the stock 

paid by the purchasers during that year, the high and low of the stock price, which is a reflection of what 

the value the stockmarket puts on the company, which the would-be shareholders were paying for shares 

in the company. 

 

The public, at that time based on the earnings of the company 1971 placed on the average for the whole 

year on the stockmarket, an average value of 12 times earnings. 

 

On Canada Packers, Mr. Speaker, based on their earnings in 1971, the public through the stockmarket 

would place a value of the shares they might purchase at 12 times earnings on the average. It only 

fluctuated at somewhere between 10 and 13 at the highest. Burns, Mr. Speaker, in 1971 the public 

through buying on the stockmarket, paid about 11 times earnings on the average. 

 

But do you know, Mr. Speaker, what the Government opposite paid for earnings in 1971? 39 or 40 times 

earnings, Mr. Speaker. 39 or 40 times earnings the Government paid when they bought the stock 

ownership of 45 per cent interest in Intercontinental Packers. They paid 39 to 40 times earnings, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Yet, for that particular year of 1971, and I don’t have the figures for 1972, but the Leader of the 

Opposition has illustrated that sales for most packing house companies total at about the range of 10 to 

12 time profits. It can be looked up and read by anybody who wishes to. Go back over the ten years 

previous and they will find the same consistency in stockmarket values. This is what the public thought 

that shares in packing house companies were worth and yet the Government of Saskatchewan through 

some crazy financial understanding have decided that they were worth 39 or 40 times the value. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is how the Government opposite arrived at the $10.2 million. And that is exactly 

what the Leader of the Opposition has pointed out. That the Government of Saskatchewan paid just 

about $6 or $7 million more than they should have for the interest that they got in the company. 

 

I don’t need to have anybody give me the figures. You can have them yourself. They are public figures. 

The public figures audited by the Income Tax Department, right there in the book. You can look it up. 

Go down and ask any stockbroker he will give them to you. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Easterners, not Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Well, if the Attorney General really thinks that the company was worth 39 to 40 

times earnings there is certainly no other person buying on the stockmarket into the packing house 

industry in the past few years. This must have been a bigger and much better packing house industry by 

their calculations. 

 

Now let’s take a look, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture stands up and he says, we are going to 

have a great packing house industry in Saskatchewan. If we keep this company 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2210 

here we will force everybody else to come into Saskatchewan and we will process all the meat right 

here. I want to make it clear, this is the very thing that so many producers are scared of in Saskatchewan, 

that the Government opposite is going to force the producer of livestock to sell his livestock within the 

borders of Saskatchewan and he wants to have no part of it. He wants to have no part of it because that 

is the only way you can build 15 packing houses in the Province of Saskatchewan. But those packing 

houses will not last for one day unless the producer sells his livestock to that packing house. In other 

words if everybody east of Regina keeps selling in Brandon they won’t get any business. And those 

packing houses won’t be here. And there is only one thing the Government of Saskatchewan can do to 

ensure that those packing houses operate here, is to force the producer to sell his livestock within the 

borders of Saskatchewan. And that is the crux why every farmer in Saskatchewan today is sending in 

coupons worried about the Hog Marketing Commission. That is the very crux of the issue. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I have one hog producer in my area who raises some 3,000 hogs. He is 

concerned that he will be forced to send those hogs for processing here in Regina. I would think after the 

speech he heard today, he would have even greater concern, because every producer currently can sell 

produce outside the Province of Saskatchewan if he wishes. 

 

Now let the Attorney General or the Minister of Agriculture tell us if that current situation continues to 

exist how they can guarantee a packing house industry will operate in our province. They can’t. And do 

you know why farmers are going outside the province, Mr. Speaker? Because the farmer is getting more 

money outside the province. That is why he is selling it outside Saskatchewan. That is why you sell your 

hogs in Brandon instead of Regina because you get more. You get more right there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what is of great concern to all livestock producers in Saskatchewan. The 

Government stands up and talks about the meat packing industry. 

 

I invite the Members opposite to take a little bit of a look at the meat packing industry. 

 

When I was in Chicago about 15 years ago and I went down . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You should have stayed there. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . and looked at the abattoirs there which covered over 100 acres. It was the 

capital of the meat packing industry of the world. I was down again in four yours. I stayed there for a 

week, Mr. Speaker. And there isn’t one packing house there, not one. Previously they covered 100 acres. 

Do you know why they are not there, Mr. Speaker? The meat packing industry is moving to where the 

livestock are. They are moving to where the livestock are because it is cheaper to ship processed meat 

than it is to ship live animals. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you don’t need the Government to force them to do it, they will do it on their own. 

You don’t have to have the Government force them to do it. The meat packing industry will move where 

the livestock are. If they are moving to Regina that is because the hogs are here. Not for any other 

particular reason. The Government doesn’t have to force them to 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2211 

do it, they will do it on their own. It is good economics, it is cheaper to ship processed meat than it is to 

ship live animals. And that is precisely why if there is any meat packing industry which is an efficient 

one locates here not because the Government forces them to do so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest also that the Government is on pretty shaky grounds when I look over there at 

what they have bought. 

 

They haven’t bought the feed lots of the Mendel operation. And this, of course, leaves them right in the 

middle to be whip-sawed by the person who controls the livestock. There isn’t one single guarantee 

unless the Minister of Industry stands up and tells us there is. There is not one single guarantee that the 

Intercontinental Packers will get one head of livestock from the Mendel feedlots. Not one guarantee that 

they will get one head of hogs or cattle. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because the Mendel company still owns 

them all. Intercontinental still owns all those feedlots. I presume that operating in a good business 

fashion they are going to sell the livestock wherever they get the best price. And that may not be to a 

Government operated plant, certainly in the future and particularly once the Government gets to be a 

majority shareholder. That may well be anywhere else. For example, the Lanigan operation is very large 

in hogs, they are shipping many of them outside the province. They are shipping much of their livestock 

currently outside the province, presumably because they are getting a better price. I don’t doubt but what 

that is the reason for it. They are getting a better price and that is the same reason why a lot of other 

people are shipping livestock outside Saskatchewan. This is more efficient and they are giving a better 

price to the producer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by all the usual financial rules that one can find about companies of this type, the 

information is available which seems to be contradictory to this Government’s point of view, all this 

information, the sales of their companies, depreciation of the companies, after tax profits of the 

companies, is contained in this publication previously referred to. All the information is there on Canada 

Packers, Burns, all public companies, it’s all available to anyone who wishes to read. But for some 

peculiar manner known only to themselves, Mr. Speaker, the Government is not willing to give this out 

about Intercon, because as the Government says, for reasons of competition. 

 

There is only one reason they are not willing to give it, Mr. Speaker, because this is a lousy financial 

deal. It is a lousy financial deal any way you look at it. The people of Saskatchewan have not had their 

tax money looked after. And no amount of talking as to what the Government hopes to do will prove 

that you should pay 230 cents for a bag of carrots when you should have paid 5 cents. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Government should make clear as to what manner they intend their 

operations to follow as it affects the producer himself. All of our worries and concerns about the 

Marketing Commission not being controlled by producers now, take on a renewed light from the 

Premier’s remarks this afternoon. 

 

Many of us were suspicious for some time about the close connection of Intercontinental Packers and 

the Government’s talk 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2212 

of a processing industry. Regardless of whether it was financially advantageous for the producer or not, 

this to me is more important — how the Government is prepared to operate — Balkanize Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, at the expense of the farmers so we can claim that we have got more jobs here. That seems 

to be the Government’s intention. They want to keep the hogs here even if it costs the farmer an extra 

dollar to keep it here. Which I am sure is an answer that the farmer will not be happy about. He is really 

not worried whether it is slaughtered in Brandon, Manitoba or whether it is slaughtered in Regina. He 

probably would like it in Regina since he lives in Saskatchewan. But he is not really worried about that. 

He wants to get the most amount of money possible. He wants an efficient industry. But the Government 

seems to have taken the attitude that this type of employment should be in Saskatchewan regardless of 

whom it hurts or whom it is good for. And they have hung their hat on this as the only way to 

industrialize the province. 

 

I think they have totally and completely disregarded the necessary efficiency in the industry and as I said 

before, the Premier’s remarks for most livestock producers, I think, take on a great deal more 

importance this afternoon, than at previous times. 

 

I hope that in the very near future at the earliest opportunity that the Government will make it very clear 

as to what and how they intend the Hog Marketing Commission to operate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks it is very obvious that I hope the Government gives the 

information. It is disappointing that we should witness the Premier once making a very eloquent plea 

when he was in Opposition completely changing direction so rapidly after the election. Many of our 

Members opposite have told us on many occasions the reason they got the 45 seats was apparently the 

fact that they argued for more openness of Government when they were in Opposition, then changed 

their minds since, now that is completely and totally forgotten. 

 

I would suspect that probably one of the reasons they did get the 45 seats was that they convinced 

enough people they would provide the information, but apparently they now have completely and totally 

disregarded their past remarks when they were the Opposition in this Legislature. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have already said how disappointing is the Government’s attitude, disappointing in 

the respect of how they are using the finances of Saskatchewan. I would oppose the intervention in 

Intercontinental Packers under any conditions. I certainly do now more emphatically when you consider 

what we rare getting for the money invested. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. B. Grant: (Whitmore Park) — Mr. Speaker, it is not very often that I feel sorry for the people 

opposite but I must admit after their display this afternoon, I really feel sorry for them. Because instead 

of giving the people of Saskatchewan a New Deal, it is quite evident that once again they have given us 

a Bad Deal. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2213 

The Minister of Agriculture says we can’t grasp the reasoning of the government. Well I think we have 

grasped the reasoning. It is quite evident that the Government opposite are hell bent for election to 

socialize this province. They are hell bent for election to get a larger and larger portion of the business 

life of this province. This is just another evidence in that direction. 
 

Actually, they suggested that we might think there is some underhanded dealing. And I don’t think that 

anybody on this side of the House has ever considered that. I think that the only consideration that we 

have is that it is just plain ordinary bad reasoning on the part of the Government opposite. It is a Bad 

Deal for people and in five years from now when their option expires, they also will be convinced of 

that. 

 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, the socialists are great buyers. They very, very seldom start a business but they 

do seem so anxious to get into business that in this case, they are ready and willing to pay an exorbitant 

price for a business in order to get into it. 

 

The Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Thorson) says, “You know we could have started a 

business from scratch but that would have meant the expansion of the industry and it would have been 

an oversupply of facilities” and, therefore, they thought it was better to buy an existing business. But on 

the other hand, the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture have been telling us how much the hog 

industry is going to grow here in the next few years. They pointed out that Burns and Canada Packers 

are coming in here. So if this is the case it is quite evident that additional facilities are required and I 

think they are required for the reason given by the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) that 

these facilities gravitate to where the supplies are, and Saskatchewan over the last 10 or 15 years has 

rapidly become a raiser of livestock. 

 

Actually, I think, it is just so much window dressing when they say that the reason for the acquisition of 

this operation was to protect it from outside interests taking it over. Actually, I don’t think this was the 

reasoning at all. They were anxious to get in to the overall package, their program for agriculture in this 

province, which every day and every way looks more and more like the Premier’s mutual fund plan. 

 

I think the hog marketing legislation, the Intercon, the Ipsco and all the other operations they expect to 

get in are going finally to result in a nice little mutual fund that the people of Saskatchewan can 

participate in with a guarantee by the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) says that the Liberals are 

guilty again of continuing with their narrow private enterprise approach. 

 

Well, I am sure the private enterprise industry that they are attempting to attract to this province will be 

glad to hear once again his critical remarks. That is what this is. By inference he is criticizing the 

attitude that we take about the importance of private enterprise in business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Industry and Commerce also said that the agreement will show total 

outstanding shares of 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2214 

100,000. Well, we should like to see that agreement. Because it is evident that he is going to table. 

Because otherwise there is no point in him saying that it will show this. He indicates that as of March 

the operation was valued at $22.75 million with a five-year option to buy up to 20 per cent additional 

shares at $250 plus an increase based on the cost of living. Well in about five years this should be up to 

$300 a share. I don’t think there is going to be much competition by outside interests. I really think that 

they can sit on that option because I don’t think there is going to be much demand for those shares. 

 

I should be very happy, indeed, if I had a business to sell. And to put the Members’ minds at ease that 

they might have to buy my business, I don’t have a business now, but I certainly would love to sell a 

business at 40 times the earnings. 

 

The financial statement shows earnings at about $600,000 that was one of the better years. They valued 

the operation at $25 million. On that basis they paid about 40 times the earnings. I don’t know of any 

company listed on the Stock Exchange that is valued at 40 times the earnings. 

 

In the Land Bank they suggest five per cent return. This would mean that for a piece of land, they figure 

that it is worth about 20 times the annual rent. This is only half of what they are suggesting for Intercon, 

namely, 40 times. It is interesting to note — and I will get back into a business that I used to be in — the 

Duckett’s Insurance, which is one of the largest insurance businesses outside the provincial Government 

in the province and it was recently listed in the Leader-Post as being sold. It was sold for about $600,000 

in cash plus 41,000 shares and as near as I can figure it it was about $1 million. On the basis of the 

Government’s reasoning, Mr. Duckett should have got about $3.2 million. I am sure that he will be 

interested to learn this. It is a little late now but he possibly would have been better off to have sold to 

the Provincial Government. 

 

Let us look at the gross earnings of Intercon. They are really not that exciting — $74 million, $90 

million, $85 million, $91 million, $95 million, about one-third of the amount of Burns and Company. 

 

So actually this company has not grown as rapidly as the others. If the Premier is right that the purchase 

price was based on the potential earnings, I question this very seriously because the earnings at the 

present time are not as good, by a narrow margin, as compared to Burns and Company. Burns earned 

about $.83 on their sales and this company is earning about $.6 and $.7 so if Burns and Company is 

considered a successful operation and I think it is recognized in North America as a pretty successful 

operation, it doesn’t leave much scope for expanded earnings as far as Intercon is concerned. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2215 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister also said that they are determined to increase the per cent of processing in 

Saskatchewan. I feel that this will only be done by controlling the supply of hogs and this is a very 

difficult thing to control. If they control it to the advantage of Intercon it is certainly not going to be to 

the advantage of Burns and Canada Packers. They must allow these people a fair shake in the acquisition 

of the supply of hogs and if they are going to do that they are going to run into some pretty keen 

competition for this is a very competitive business and I really can’t see that this is going to be any great 

earning potential of this corporation over the years. 

 

Actually when one looks at what has happened in the last few weeks, $6 million a year ago to eliminate 

a pulp mill. $10.2 million to get into Intercon; $4.5 million for Ipsco. We are well on our way to 

spending $30 million in the acquisition of land. A total of $50 million all of which has to be borrowed at 

a rate of 7 per cent. The Land Bank is going to pay about five or five and a half per cent. Intercon is 

going to return about 2½ per cent based on its valuation of $25 million. To me, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan and I can hardly wait five years down the road to look back and 

just see how bad it is, because that will be the proof of the pudding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 to 7:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: (Attorney General) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words with respect 

to this motion by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I suppose nothing more characterizes the irresponsibility of the Leader of the Opposition and the Liberal 

Party opposite, than this particular motion. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the front 

bench, that was part of the Government, and the two or three new backbenchers who came, still cannot 

accept the basic fact that they were overwhelmingly defeated in June 1971. The bitterness of the Leader 

of the Opposition and the Liberals opposite characterizes each and every step, politically, that the 

Liberals make in this province. 

 

I get, frankly, a bit of a humorous charge out of the Leader of the Opposition, out of the remnants of the 

front bench sitting opposite me, Mr. Speaker. I laugh when they try to lecture the Government and the 

people in the Province of Saskatchewan about financial responsibility. I laugh when I think of 1964 to 

1971 when the Leader of the Opposition was then the Provincial Treasurer for the Liberal 

administration. And the Province of Saskatchewan saw a financial fiasco in terms of administration of 

the government’s finances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The financial records of the province are laced, Mr. Speaker, by financial — and I 

can’t say give-aways — I would say mismanagements, such as the Athabasca Pulp Mill where we were 

to put up mostly all of the money and only get 30 per cent of the control; such as the Choiceland Iron 

Ore operation where if the Liberals had been re-elected, Mr. Speaker, they would have committed us to 

something like $10 million based on the 1959 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2216 

feasibility study — 1959 mind you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I recall when I was in Opposition the famous Primrose Forest products that the Liberal Government was 

going to get. What did they do? They threw $2 million down the drain on a Primrose Path, for a 

non-existent industry. I think, Mr. Speaker, of the Big River sawmill; I think of a sawmill estimate of 

$600,000 and it is now coming up to $1 million and there is still no completed sawmill, thanks to the 

financial wizardry of the Leader of the Opposition and the Liberals opposite. 

 

Now, today, the Leader of the Opposition and the Members of the Liberal Party opposite, in a way 

which I think can only be characterized as laughable, come to this Legislature and pretend that the 

people of Saskatchewan ought to believe anything that they tell us about finances, when they couldn’t 

run the ship for seven years when they were in power in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan probably had no worse financial administration than during 

the period of 1964 to 1971 when the Liberals were in power, and make no mistake about that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Their activities, Mr. Speaker, are laced with humorous and tragic episodes such as I 

have mentioned, Athabasca, Choiceland, Primrose, Big River sawmill, government involvements, and I 

could go on. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Go on! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, the Leader of the Opposition says to go on. I will and will tell them one about 

the Water Supply Board. The Leader of the Opposition like all Liberals ever since I could remember 

about politics, Mr. Speaker, would have the people of Saskatchewan believe that the NDP or the CCF 

knows nothing about running a business; that they are the people who know everything about running a 

business. They are the people who can run a corporation, they can set it up, they know how to operate it. 

They criticize us about Crown corporations. 

 

They have a Crown corporation called The Water Supply Board and I don’t know how many millions of 

dollars it has lost for the people of Saskatchewan, thanks to the mismanagement of the Liberals opposite. 

 

This business of the Liberals having managerial skill and knowledge of finances is a total myth only 

believed in by the Leader of the Opposition and 13 or 14 of others sitting behind him. And perhaps not 

even them. In fact I don’t think that all of them do, because I think there are many of them who have 

already questioned the Leader of the Opposition’s financial judgements in the financial problems of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One takes a look at the backbenchers and one sees many young and eager and ambitious people eyeing 

that position and the seat that the Leader of the Opposition is sitting in now. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You lost the horse race. 

 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2217 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I lost the horse race, that is right. But I can tell you one thing that the people in 

the Province of Saskatchewan are certainly the winners in that horse race, with Premier Blakeney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I can tell you Mr. Leader of the Opposition I am pleased to have lost that horse race, 

and as it turned out, to have won the big horse race on June 23, 1971. 

 

All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that everywhere throughout the Province of Saskatchewan one message is 

coming through and that is this: the people of this province simply can’t believe anything that the Leader 

of the Opposition tells them about any major issue. He is unbelievable. He has no credibility. The 

Liberal Party flip flops all over the place on issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are so power hungry, they are so greedy in the search for power, that as I have said 

they will try to bring down anything that this Province of Saskatchewan has. 

 

Well, the Member for Meadow Lake laughs, because it was in his seat that this famous Athabasca deal 

with New York promoters was going to take place. Oh, these people didn’t know how to wheel and deal 

with Saskatchewan people, oh no, that wasn’t their style. They wouldn’t wheel and deal with the Fred 

Mendels of this world. Oh no, the Leader of the Opposition when he was treasurer had big things on his 

mind. His wheeling and dealing was with the promoters of New York. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yours are in California. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — His wheeling and dealing was with the promoters in Toronto. His wheeling and 

dealing of $6 million was for the Parsons and Whittemore Corporation in New York. His wheeling and 

dealing in Choiceland was for the people of Toronto. His wheeling and dealing was for everybody and 

anybody except that no one benefitted in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr, Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s arguments in this area are a total joke. 

A total joke just like those who are sitting around him and behind him, the remnants of the Liberal Party 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. They are laughable. They are unbelievable in their criticisms with 

respect to this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to belabour at length the reasons which have been stated already by this 

Premier, by the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Industry about the reasons for the purchase 

of Intercon and the price value paid for Intercon. I am not going to repeat the arguments of the danger of 

a sellout of that business by a man 84 years of age, to an out-of-province company. 

 

To my way of thinking, Mr. Speaker, that danger was real. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2218 

The Government of Saskatchewan had to act. The Intercontinental Packers is one of three or four major 

industries based and owned by the people in the Province of Saskatchewan. We couldn’t sit by and wait 

for the collapse and the removal of other industries as we have seen in the last seven years during the 

Liberals. We couldn’t stand by and do nothing about the closing of things like Gulf Oil and Imperial, 

Quaker Oats. All of which I remind the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) and the Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy) took place during the Liberal times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t mind when they yell because they only reveal their ignorance, 

that’s all, their total and absolute ignorance about this deal. We aren’t prepared to sit by, Mr. Speaker, 

and to allow jobs to go by the board in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another reason about the purchase of the Intercon, the business of guaranteeing a meat processing 

industry for the Province of Saskatchewan. That argument is a strong reason for the purchase. 

 

The third argument raised by the Premier — the long range developmental strategy of the Province of 

Saskatchewan is the need to diversify, more cattle, more hogs. They need to provide a meat processing 

industry in the Province of Saskatchewan. There is the need and the ability of attracting other people and 

competitors to come to the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am not going to spend any time wallowing in the very low depths of political debate that some of the 

Liberals opposite have, about conflict of interest with Mr. Gedge, about this matter of the fair price. 

 

You know the old adage, Mr. Speaker, that figures don’t lie, but I ought not to say the balance for fear 

that someone might call me to order — but I can simply say this, Mr. Speaker. That this whole business 

of fair price, the business of conflict of interest, all of that is nothing short of a smokescreen by the 

Liberal Party opposite in an attempt again at their desperate grab for power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reasons for this purchase are the key things to be considered by this House. The 

reasons for the purchase are to be considered. I don’t think that anybody here, not even the Leader of the 

Opposition or the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) anybody really here can say with absolute 

precision whether $10.2 million is the 100 per cent accurate price. I think that $10.2 million is a fair and 

good price. I don’t think that anybody could say that it isn’t a good and fair price, certainly nothing in 

the evidence that has come forward by the Leader of the Opposition shows that one bit at all. But even if 

the $10.2 million is the issue, Mr. Speaker, I say what is even more at issue are the reasons for the 

purchase, the reasons behind the Government of Saskatchewan moving into this area, and those are the 

danger of a sellout, the guarantee of the meat processing industry and the long-range development 

strategy in terms of agriculture and industry for the Province of Saskatchewan. Those justify every 

penny spent for Intercontinental Packers. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2219 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, every penny spent of the $10.2 million. For those reasons, in my 

judgement, and in the judgement of the people of this province, it is money well spent and nothing that 

the Leader of the Opposition or the Liberals can say can destroy that. If we are going to get industries 

and if we are going to get jobs and if we are going to expand and diversify our economy, now is the time 

for people to move ahead, boldly with imagination. Something the Liberals don’t have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that this Government should make these decisions under these circumstances is quite 

clearly beyond dispute in my judgement. But you know I came from the city of Saskatoon. I know 

Intercontinental Packers very well. All of the people in Saskatchewan are absolutely amazed at the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) was on a hot-line program a week ago and Intercontinental 

Packers was the subject of the discussion. I listened to that hot-line show. I don’t think there was one 

person who condemned the Government approach to the Intercontinental purchase and I stand to be 

corrected by the Member from Rosthern, but there were others on this side who heard it and verified 

that. Not one. In fact of the three phone calls that were made, or four phone calls that were made, 

everyone in the city of Saskatoon supported the Government’s decision and supported the price of $10.2 

million to get into Intercontinental Packers. The Member from Rosthern knows that full well. 

 

When the Leader of the Opposition goes around this province saying that Intercontinental Packers isn’t 

worth $10.2 million, he doesn’t know what he is talking about. When he goes around saying that the 

buildings are, as I heard him say from his seat (so perhaps I ought not to quote him), but I heard him say 

it, that the building are shacks, he doesn’t know what he is talking about. When he implies on the 

hustings and in this House that the physical facility isn’t the finest in all of Canada, then he is talking 

pure nonsense, Mr. Speaker. Everybody in Saskatoon who sees that building, anybody in Saskatoon who 

has had any dealing with that firm, know it to be one of the finest and most modern plants that exists 

anywhere. Make no mistake about that. Mr. Speaker, Liberals cannot deceive the several hundred 

workers and families who know Intercontinental. Liberals can’t deceive the former mayor of the city of 

Saskatoon and the other business leaders and the other civic leaders about Fred Mendel and 

Intercontinental Packers. The Leader of the Opposition can’t deceive the people of Saskatoon and 

Saskatchewan about the contribution that the Mendel family has made to the meat packing industry in 

providing jobs and the contribution that he has made to the social and economic life in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, no matter how much he tries to sully the reputation of the Mendel family and those 

involved. He can’t deceive them. Mr. Speaker, no matter what the Leader of the Opposition and the 

junior Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) says about NDP baloney and the people’s piggery, 

and all of these other derogatory and innuendo-filled terms about this deal, I want to tell the Member 

from Cannington he won’t fool one person in Saskatoon and district because they know Intercontinental 

and they know every penny of $10.2 million is worth the price paid. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2220 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — But I want to tell him one thing that he does do with respect to his statements about 

his innuendos and his attacks by innuendo on Mr. Gedge, his attacks by innuendo on the Mendel family, 

his attacks by innuendo on the Intercontinental operation itself as somehow not being worth the money 

and not being worth the enterprise, I’ll tell you what he is doing, Mr. Speaker. He is jeopardizing those 

several hundred jobs in Saskatoon. He’s jeopardizing one of the very few major industries that this 

Province of Saskatchewan is struggling to maintain and keep in this Province of Saskatchewan. That’s 

what the Leader of the Opposition is doing. The Leader of the Opposition is attacking Intercontinental 

with all that he has got in him. He has mounted this Intercontinental attack as one of the major attacks of 

this Session. He is attacking Mr. Speaker, an industry and I can say this without any contradiction, an 

industry which is Saskatchewan through and through. It is a Saskatchewan owned, Saskatchewan 

operated industry. It is a Saskatchewan plant that provides jobs for our people. Yet the Leader of the 

Opposition attacks it full on. This is not the first time. This is the sixth or seventh time since this House 

has been in session that he attacks Intercontinental Packers, that jeopardizes a Saskatchewan industry, 

that jeopardizes the workers who are involved in this Saskatchewan industry. It is ours, Mr. Speaker. 

Why do the Liberals want to bring Intercontinental down? I want to ask the Leader of the Opposition 

when he wraps up the debate, who is it that is making the bullets for him to shoot at Intercontinental 

Packers? I want to know who it is that the Leader of the Opposition is talking to when he gets his 

information to make the bullets to shoot at Intercontinental Packers. I want to know why it is and who it 

is that motivates the Leader of the Opposition to try and bring down to its knees the Saskatchewan 

industry of Intercontinental Packers to jeopardize jobs. I want to know, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of 

the Opposition gets up to wrap up this debate, I want him to tell the people of the province why he is out 

to destroy Intercontinental because that is what he is doing, Mr. Speaker, when he insists that the 

financial statements be tabled. When he says that Intercontinental is fourth ranking or whatever, that 

Intercontinental doesn’t have the adequate plant capacity and by innuendo and implication when he says 

that, what he is doing in effect is helping all the competitors of Intercontinental destroy Intercontinental. 

Do you think Burns or Canada Packers or Schneider’s or any of the other packing house plants wouldn’t 

be happy if they had Intercontinental removed and destroyed? Of course they would be. Mr. Speaker, 

they are competitors of Intercontinental. They don’t want Intercontinental around and they have a 

willing ally in this province. Their ally is the Leader of the Opposition, who is shooting the bullets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what some of the Eastern corporate friends of the Liberal Party 

opposite are doing now is they are calling in on the dues that the Liberals and the Leader of the 

Opposition owe them. They are using the Leader of the Opposition to shoot bullets at Intercontinental 

Packers, to try to destroy the Saskatchewan industry. I ask the Leader of the Opposition — 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2221 

he has asked us some questions — I ask him, who is providing the bullets for him? Why is he acting in 

the interests of Eastern corporate businessmen? For a change start acting for the interests of the people 

of the Province of Saskatchewan. Isn’t it always strange, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals can make the 

good deals with New Yorkers and their friends. They can make good deals with Toronto and their 

friends. But when it comes to supporting Saskatchewan, when it comes to providing jobs for 

Saskatchewan people, when it comes to protecting the Saskatchewan industry, what does the Liberal 

Party do? They attack everything that Saskatchewan stands for. That is what the Leader of the 

Opposition is doing here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it, the Leader of the Opposition is the 

mouthpiece of all those private companies, that would have Intercontinental Packers destroyed. He is 

using the $10.2 million debate as a red herring for all of this. I say to you, Sir, and to all the Members of 

the Legislative Assembly, the Province of Saskatchewan and the farmers aren’t going to be fooled by 

that type of tactics. The farmers and the working men of Saskatchewan and Regina know what the 

Mendel family contributed. They know what this means to the Province of Saskatchewan. They realize 

the developmental strategy of the Government of Saskatchewan. They know the need to diversify. They 

know the need to build a strong and viable Saskatchewan and I say to this House that we are going to 

accomplish that goal but not by negative and irresponsible tactics of the Leader of the Opposition and 

his lonely band of Liberals opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying one thing and that is in connection with the whole issue of 

$10.2 million and whether it is a red herring. I don’t agree with the Progressive Conservative Party, that 

is quite obvious. In today’s Leader-Post and Star-Phoenix there is a story by the P. C. Leader, Mr. Dick 

Collver. Mr. Collver says and I am quoting: 

 

It is ridiculous to argue about whether a 45 per cent interest in Intercontinental Packers is worth $10 

million or $2 million or $35.79 million. The crucial issue is surely whether the Government of 

Saskatchewan should have made the investment in the first place. 

 

That surely is the issue behind this whole debate on agreements and the like. Should the Government of 

Saskatchewan have made this investment in the first place? That is the issue. The Liberals are saying 

that we should not have. The Liberals are saying the company should have been sold out to outside 

interests and it should perhaps have been phased out of the Province of Saskatchewan. The Liberals are 

saying that we should not take a chance on Saskatchewan. That is what the Liberals are saying. That is 

the issue and I am proud to say in supporting this motion that I stand with this group that is about to 

build a positive and dynamic and strong Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2222 

Mr. J. G. Richards: (Saskatoon University) — Mr. Speaker, it is with a certain sadness that I enter 

into this debate finally. I have stayed throughout the afternoon in my chair and I listened attentively to 

speakers from both sides of the House and I now rise before the Hon. Leader of the Opposition closes 

the debate to include my own comments. 

 

The Hon. Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) at one point during the afternoon said there were 

three issues involved. I think he was correct. The first issue is that of Government involvement in 

business and in particular, Government involvement in meat packing. The second issue is the issue of 

secrecy. The question of the right for the public to know, as opposed to the right of the Government to 

maintain confidential its business. The third issue is the question of competence. Unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, I find that the escalation of the rhetoric this afternoon is clouding what are three crucial issues. 

I thoroughly disagree with the Member from Milestone as much as I agree with the principle of 

Government involvement in meat packing, but unlike many Members on this side of the House, I cannot 

agree that you can separate this issue from the other two issues. If the question of the finances are not 

satisfactorily resolved we risk discrediting the whole idea of government meat packing, of integrating 

forward the agriculture industry to get the benefits that we hope to get by increased processing. 

 

We must allow, Mr. Speaker, that the experience of joint ventures of government in private business 

throughout the history of this country has been a history of corporate exploitation of the people. There 

are many unhappy precedents that we have to live down and be shown that we are, hopefully, living 

down. It is in the history of that experience that I call upon the Government to be willing to publish the 

financial data, the accounts, the income statements, the deals, etc. We can return back to the railroads in 

the late 19th century and the public scandals and subsidies involved there. To come very close to home 

in this last decade we have only to look at the deals with which the Members opposite engaged in Prince 

Albert Pulp Company, setting up a Crown corporation such as Prince Albert Pulp Wood in order to 

subsidize Prince Albert Pulp Company and the whole disputable baggage which went along with that 

kind of development of the forest industry. Is it any wonder given that historical experience that the 

people are going to ask questions about Intercontinental. I hope sincerely that this is not a deal which is 

in that tradition. I think the only way you can really show that it isn’t, is to give the people of 

Saskatchewan the financial statistics that are involved and have faith in the people of Saskatchewan 

using them wisely. We cannot, because of our fear about the manipulations of what the Opposition will 

do with such statistics, conceal them. It is essential that the public have the right to know these figures, it 

is essential that the public have these figures. Until we have these figures how can we intelligently argue 

against such items as the article in the Financial Post and elementary stock exchange calculations in 

terms of price-earning ratios. 

 

I am prepared to admit that one balance statement sheet produced by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 

is not a case made, on the other hand a whole series of circumstantial pieces 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2223 

of evidence have come to light which I want to see refuted. I want to see the facts reach the light of day 

and I want to see the principle of government involvement in meat packing and a whole series of other 

industries go forward successfully. We cannot go forward, we cannot advance into resource industries if 

we get caught up with secrecy, if we get caught up with paying too much, of buying a pig in a poke. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J. E. Brockelbank: (Minister of Government Services) — Since I have been referred to earlier 

in the debate as ‘smiling’ about this particular issue, I thought I should say a few words before the 

debate closes. It has something to do with more than smiling, it has something to do with the fact that I 

come from the city of Saskatoon and know something about Intercontinental Packers and know 

something about industry in the city of Saskatoon, which I have the honour to represent in this 

Legislature. 

 

This afternoon when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) introduced the motion into the House, I 

think we were agreed that we saw at that time the most incredible grab bag of loose ends that we have 

ever seen in this Legislature, when he put forward his argument. He had half truths, unsupported 

evidence, innuendo. He attacked individuals, he attacked and tried to destroy Intercontinental Packers in 

this Province. Mr. Speaker, the Members in this Chamber are not about to let that kind of argument 

circulate about this province without contesting it here and now where it should properly be contested. 

The question asks for the agreements. This is the question that the Leader of the Opposition when he 

was in government refused to answer. He refused to answer in this very Chamber, Mr. Speaker. I can 

recall, Mr. Speaker, when we asked questions about Prince Albert Pulp, when we asked questions about 

Saskatchewan Forest Products, when we asked questions about Waskesiu Holdings, another subsidiary 

of Saskatchewan Pulpwoods. No answers. Mr. Speaker, a stone wall. A stone wall of indifference to our 

questions. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Member says that we should produce the evidence, that we should 

show the agreements here in this Chamber. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition views this thing as if it were in a vacuum where the disclosure of the facts 

with regard to this can be observed as if it were an experiment in some laboratory, where its disclosure 

would have no effect on anything else that was going on in the Province of Saskatchewan. And 

interestingly enough, he views this focussed on one thing, if it doesn’t show a profit it is not a good deal. 

This is consistent with the Leader of the Opposition because I can recall when we were talking about the 

Pulp Mill at Doré Lake. The Leader of the Opposition and his government were so concentrated on the 

idea that a profit had to be shown that they ignored a number of other features of that situation which 

were very important to the people of Saskatchewan. It was our privilege at that time, Mr. Speaker, to 

expose that deal about that Pulp Mill to the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2224 

We exposed it on a number of points. One, it was not a good financial deal. Two, the matter of pollution 

was not properly dealt with. Three, reforestation policy was not adequate. I think we were quite 

successful in exposing that deal to the people of Saskatchewan for exactly what it was, Mr. Speaker. 

This deal, too, the Leader of the Opposition thinks is a deal that he is going to expose because it is not 

profitable, because he can’t see instant jobs, because he can’t see instant profit, he is saying it is a bad 

deal. He excludes, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we are retraining jobs in the Province of Saskatchewan, he 

excludes from his argument completely the agricultural and economic development of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. This is something that we are mandated to do by the election of 1971. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says I was smiling in this picture. Well that’s true I was 

smiling. I’ll let him in on a little secret of why I was smiling. A great deal of my life is wrapped up in 

that city, just a mile down the street from Intercontinental Packers is the former Gulf Refinery. That 

refinery today is a rusting pile of scrap metal. That occurred when the Leader of the Opposition was on 

this side of the House. As a matter of fact, on Valentine’s Day in 1969 I made a speech in this House 

and made reference to the fact that the refining industry was fleeing the Province of Saskatchewan and 

nothing was being done about it. There was no foresight by the government of that day, Mr. Speaker. 

And I made reference to it in the debate and I quoted a paper from outside the Province of 

Saskatchewan, the Edmonton Journal, an article in that newspaper said: 

 

Imperial Oil Limited is planning to build an $85 million refinery in the Edmonton area, according to 

Journal sources. The 100,000 barrel a day refinery would be the biggest in Western Canada, putting 

Edmonton in an unassailable position for years to come as a city with the greatest refining capacity 

west of Ontario. According to the Journal sources Imperial will announce its plan to build the 

refinery within the next six months. After the refinery comes into operation during the early ’70s 

Imperial would phase out its other plants across the prairies and would distribute products in a 

pipeline in the same manner as Gulf Oil Canada proposed to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I was smiling at that time for my own personal reasons because I thought to myself, 

these people in the meat packing industry won’t have to face the same problem that I had to face and 

that other people had to face who worked for Gulf Oil in that refinery in Saskatoon. I know, personally, 

of 30 families that went to Alberta. I know of 15 families that went to Nova Scotia. I know of another 5 

or so families that went to the West Coast. They subtracted from that community and this province those 

industrial jobs because they went to other refineries. At that time, Mr. Speaker, I referred to what the 

subtraction of 100 industrial jobs would do to the Province of Saskatchewan and by reversing it, Mr. 

Speaker, I think you can see clearly what the addition of 100 industrial jobs will do to the Province of 

Saskatchewan. It means $360,000 (this is if they leave) less in retail sales, $270,000 per year less in 

bank deposits, 174 less workers in supporting industries, 107 less passenger cars purchased, $590,000 

less in personal income, 112 households less, 296 people less. And that happened right there in 

Saskatoon, one mile down the street from Intercontinental 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2225 

Packers, Mr. Speaker. I don’t believe that this is being conducted as a clinical experiment in a 

laboratory, in a vacuum where nothing else will be influenced. 

 

However, we will give the Opposition and the people of Saskatchewan as much information as is 

possible to give them without jeopardizing the deal at all. I think that is a responsible position to take. 

We want to keep those jobs here, Mr. Speaker. We want to keep that packing industry growing in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. We have a far wider view than the Leader of the Opposition portrayed here 

this afternoon. 

 

I think time will show, Mr. Speaker, that we are right and that this is, in fact, a profitable deal for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I had the opportunity to see that there is now real concerned feeling in the community of Saskatoon 

about the purchase of this plant by the Government. I was at a meeting of about 150 people in Saskatoon 

a week ago. One person brought up the matter of the Intercontinental deal and he said they thought it 

was a reasonably good deal for the Province of Saskatchewan. I heard several people in the audience 

murmur that “Yes we agree” that it was probably a good deal for the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. In that audience, Mr. Speaker, I recognized a considerable number of people from 

Intercontinental Packers and I recognized a number of people who were still left in Saskatoon who used 

to work at the Gulf Oil Refinery. They saw nothing wrong with that deal. They realized that the 

Government has foresight and they are prepared to stand by the decision of the Government and see it 

come to fruition a few years from now. I’m sure they will not be disappointed. 

 

I think this debate, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon has illustrated very clearly that the decision made on this 

Motion will be one of really ‘who has the hindsight and who has the foresight’. And I think by 

exercising our hindsight at this time we can see that the Members opposite when they were on this side 

of the House didn’t recognize the problem with the oil industry, with the milling industry, with the 

baking industry and they didn’t recognize it with the meat packing industry. This, in time will show that 

this Government on this side of the House had the foresight to take action, to carry out our mandate to 

the people of Saskatchewan, to build up the agricultural industry, to keep jobs in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and I’m certainly in favour of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have come to the conclusion over the years that the Attorney 

General’s job is to spruce up the troops over there when they get down and out. The Member who just 

sat down, his job is to put them back to sleep again, and they both succeed quite well. 

 

It was very interesting. He talks about the oil deal. Well, we are going to watch with interest then as to 

what his Government does about the oil situation because Imperial Oil announced over a year ago that 

they are pulling out. Now, up to this point I have seen no announcement. I haven’t seen any move on the 

part of the NDP to do anything about it. They are not pulling out until 1975 or ’76 so don’t tell us that 

you 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2226 

haven’t had lots of time to make plans and do something. So, we’ll watch with interest. If we failed in 

keeping Gulf Oil here, then we are going to watch with interest while you sit back and I hope do 

something about keeping Imperial Oil here or replacing them with something else. I think you will do 

exactly what you have done up to this point and that’s absolutely nothing. 

 

I want to refer, for a moment, to some of the remarks by the Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. 

Richards). I want to make it very clear to begin with and go on record, that when we talk about the 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill deal and the subsidiary of Sask Pulpwood and any other subsidiaries that we 

had, there was nothing underhand, every contract was tabled. This Government had been the 

government for 19 months, if the Liberal Party, or myself, or anyone else did any wrongdoing why 

hasn’t the Government said anything, by laying it before the public? The subsidy that we gave to the 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill through Saskatchewan Pulpwood Limited, was, and we never made any bones 

about it, in the nature of $1.5 to $2 to $2.5 million. Now, that to me, was a good deal because we got a 

viable industry that’s there, it is making pulp, I’m sure it’s even making a profit now and it’s producing 

good jobs and good revenue. As far as the Meadow Lake Pulp Mill was concerned, it was another good 

deal. We put in over $10 million into that deal for the protection of the environment. There was nothing 

wrong with that deal, the people of that part of Saskatchewan when the NDP cancelled that deal at a cost 

of over $6 million to the public were doomed because they didn’t replace it with anything. They have 

had 19 months and those people are doomed to rot on social aid and they are doing that now and the 

Government opposite hasn’t got any answer and they haven’t had any answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let there be very clear understanding that there is no comparison between the laying on the 

table of all the facts concerning the pulp mill deal and the laying on the table of the facts of this deal. We 

have yet to be given any facts, except they say $10.2 million for 45 per cent of the shares, some verbal 

information we’ve had today in this House about options and a promise that we will get the information 

we are asking for now, but certainly no promise as to when we will get it. 

 

Well, I want to begin by talking about what the Premier said. He never really referred to this. He 

referred to it rather backhandedly and said, “Who looks at a financial statement literally to judge the 

value of a company? That’s past history”. But God help the people of Saskatchewan if he doesn’t know 

(and I’m sure he does) that of course the first thing you look at when you are buying a company is the 

profit and loss statement. And I never heard one speaker get up and deny that these figures were not 

right, that the average net profit for Intercontinental for the last five or six years has been under 

$600,000 and to realize at least a reasonable return on your money, ten times net profit is a fair valuation 

of the company, which comes to about $6 million and the fact that the shareholders’ equity is also a little 

over $ 6 million. 

 

It was interesting watching CK TV tonight. Frank Flegel said he went out because he couldn’t 

understand the right or the wrong of this deal and he talked to two chartered accountants and a 

businessman. The two chartered accountants said . . . 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2227 

Mr. Faris: — Some . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . you go and try talking to somebody yourself, Mr. Preacher and you might find out 

what went wrong in this deal and you might find out, like the Member from Saskatoon University that 

maybe there is something you may be questioning about the Cabinet Ministers in the deal because I 

want to get to the whys of this deal later on. 

 

Now, I don’t say that you can’t add. The Premier said, “Would a company or any business sell out for 

their assets that are on the books, reduced by depreciation over the years?” And the answer is, probably 

not. As a matter of fact, one of the yardsticks used for the most profitable meat companies in this 

country — Schneider’s — is about 1.8 times the shareholders’ net equity. In other words, almost double. 

Well take double the net equity — double it, you’ve got $12 million, for the whole thing, lock, stock and 

barrel. But we paid over $10 million for less than half of it and we are committed, we’ve got an option 

to pay even more five years down the road, so we’ll pay at least $300 a share if we ever exercise the 

option of the other 20 per cent of the shares. 

 

The Premier talked a great deal, as did the Minister of Agriculture, about that great agricultural plan and 

saving the meat industry, the packing industry for Saskatchewan, and yet let’s keep the records straight. 

In spite of handing Mr. Mendel (and that’s exactly what you’ve done) $10.2 million to put in his own 

pocket, and he happens to live, I think, almost all the time in California, and that’s his business, but that 

money didn’t go in to provide new jobs for Saskatchewan people, that money didn’t go in to provide 

new capacity in those plants for the hog producers, the cattle producers or the sheep producers of 

Saskatchewan, it went to Mr. Mendel. We haven’t produced, as a result of this deal, the capacity to 

slaughter one more hog a day, or put one more cow through, or one more sheep or lamb. We haven’t 

increased the capacity in this province one iota and let that be on the record. 

 

As a matter of fact, we could have taken the $10 million and the people could have started their own 

packing plant if that’s the name of the game. But this is neither fish nor fowl. It’s not good capitalism 

and it’s not good socialism that’s for sure. All you’ve done is given one individual (and I don’t care how 

good a citizen he is) $10 million of the taxpayers’ money for something that in truth wasn’t worth more 

that $3-$6 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Blakeney said, you’ve got to look to the future. Well, all right, let’s look to the 

future. How do you judge the future earning power, the future capacity of any business? 

 

1. You look at the management. 
 

Let’s look at the management. Let’s look at the report given to the Cabinet by the management of 

SEDCO. “Management”, that’s the title. 

 

Fred Mendel is now chairman of the board but he continues 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2228 

to have a very definite and important part in management. Without a doubt (and this deal is probably 

the jewel in his crown as a free enterpriser) he’s a great free entrepreneur. 

 

This man happens to be 84 years old. I think he happens to spend most of his time in California. I don’t 

think in all fairness we can look forward to any great new thrust in the management field by Mr. Fred 

Mendel. 

 

The president is Mrs. Johanna Mitchell, Mr. Mendel’s daughter (and I’m quoting from this report). 

She is devoting considerable time to the business and is instituting some changes. Her specific 

influence on the business is still overshadowed by her father whom she contacts frequently, 

particularly on major points. Until Mr. Mendel is absent from the scene, it is most difficult to assess 

successfully her capabilities. 

 

Okay, No. 1 an 84 year old man; No. 2 his daughter with best of intentions. I don’t call that the 

beginning of a very strong management deal. Next we come to Mr. A. E. Gedge. I want to quote what it 

says because it is very interesting: 

 

Mr. A. E. Gedge is vice-president — finance: (this is a dandy because it is true). He is showing his 

worth in the positive direction that he is directing the finance; 

 

And I think he showed his worth over and over and over again to Mr. Mendel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — 

 

 He is the former manager of the main branch of the Bank of Montreal in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Gedge is probably an expert financial man, he certainly has shown it in whatever part he has played 

on behalf of Intercontinental Packers in this deal. 

 

 Fred Mitchell, a grandson of Mr. Mendel is at Saskatoon and actively engaged in the business. 

He is young, keen and is interested and appears to be working hard and effectively. 

 

J. R. A. Robinson, vice-president and general manager is also difficult to assess because of the 

overshadow of the Mendel family. Robinson is not a dynamic individual but seems to direct the 

company in a quiet fashion. He grew up in the packing house business and is apparently competent 

in the marketing area. 

 

That’s the management team. Nothing wrong with them, but don’t tell me it’s a very impressive team as 

we look ahead to the future. Mr. Blakeney says, ‘we’ve got to look to the future’. Okay, tell us what the 

unused capacity of the packing plant is. Tell us, where is the dynamic management. If you base your 

cost to any degree, the price that you paid to any degree on the future prospects of this managing team, I 

don’t think that anybody in this country would fairly and objectively judge, 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2229 

would say that you should have put much on the asset side of the balance sheet. 

 

Well, Mr. Thorson talked a great deal about the Liberals not being interested in having hogs and cattle 

processed here in Saskatchewan and Mr. Messer and others talked about the fact that they had to save 

the packing industry as nothing was done while we were the government. Let me point out, to begin 

with, that one of the best packing plants and most modern packing plants in Canada happens to be 

located in Prince Albert. In Prince Albert East, as a matter of fact, and I am surprised that the Member 

for Prince Albert East hasn’t stood up and defended the interests of the people that work in his 

constituency for Burns and Company. 

 

Burns and Company made a very large and a very significant expansion both in their plant and in their 

work force during the time that we were the Government. 

 

Intercontinental made a very significant and very major expansion in Saskatoon, both in plant and in 

employment, during the time that we were the Government. As a matter of fact, if you look at the 

balance sheet and we have got extra ones here if some of you people have the nerve to dare question 

decisions made by your Cabinet. You will find on the asset side that construction in progress for this 

year of 1971 was $380,000. I don’t call that peanuts. That was going on in 1971 and was going on in ’71 

when we were the Government. So there was expansion, there was growth in the packing house field 

during our term of office. 

 

Mr. Thorson also mentioned that part of the agreement we will see whenever he decides to table that, is 

the option they got and I will look forward to studying this with a great deal of interest. Because it looks 

as if the second deal is even worse than the first one. They are going to wind up paying about $6 million 

for 20 per cent. They paid $10.2 million for 45 per cent at that ratio they are paying about another $12 or 

$13 million compared to this deal. So they will have paid about $17 million and they will have 65 per 

cent of the plant. 

 

Let’s take a look at the multiples of earnings bases or vis-à-vis true value of Burns and Company, this 

year. Markets paid for by the people who put their hard earned money up are paying about 13 times net 

earnings. And they have got good management. Canada Packers are paying 10.9 times net earnings. And 

they have got good management and are expanding. Ipsco, the firm that this Government paid $4.5 

million to get into to about 23 or 26 per cent, right now or were a day or two ago, paying, it was selling 

for 11.5 times net earnings. 

 

These judgements are made by people who put their money up not by people like you spending other 

people’s money. They are saying that these companies well managed, diversified are worth 11 to 12 

times net earnings. 

 

What did you pay for Intercontinental? Look at the record. You paid out over 39 times net earnings. I 

am willing to bet never has there been a deal like that, certainly not in the history of this province. 

 

As a matter of fact, let’s take a look as Mr. Grant (Whitmore Park) pointed out at the money — and I 

call it — that 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2230 

you have blown — since you became the Government. Over $6 million to cancel the pulp mill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was your fault. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No it wasn’t. $4 million to buy into Ipsco. $10.2 million to buy into Intercontinental 

and $30 million spent in acquiring land. You are going to borrow this money at 7, 7½ or 7¾ per cent and 

you are putting it out at less than 4 per cent. You are going to lose about $2 million a year and what is 

even more interesting, you haven’t got control of any, you haven’t got control of Intercontinental, you 

haven’t got control of Ipsco, you haven’t produced one new job, you haven’t produced one new cent of 

revenue for this province. 

 

But they tell us maybe this company would have gone. Maybe somebody would have come and bought 

this and whisked it out of the province. Mr. Speaker, let the Government put this evidence in front of the 

people. I say it is a bogeyman, I say it doesn’t exist. I say the packing industry in Saskatchewan came 

here and will only stay here if there is a thriving cattle and hog industry and that is exactly what has 

been happening in the last few years. 

 

I should like to turn now to the statements of the Attorney General. Whenever things get real tough on 

that side they call on the Attorney General. Tonight he outdid himself. He made his usual talk about the 

Liberals are out, as if being defeated means that everything that we ever stood for, everything we stand 

for now, suddenly didn’t mean a thing. Has no principle, has no backing. And everything the 

Government wants to do just because they won the election is right and honest. And I have to agree with 

the Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards). They stand up there on the other side and say 

the reason we are doing it, over and over again, is because you people did it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope they keep that attitude up. I hope they follow what we did in the last four 

years to the letter of the law, I will give them the blueprint. Because obviously the people will feel 

exactly about them politically as they did about us and they will be in the shadows over there. Talk 

about never learning. You talk about us never learning. Well, I will tell you, we were defeated, we 

learned a lesson. But I will tell you something about you people, you were elected and you didn’t learn a 

lesson. The front benches on that side of the House have got the most swelled heads the most arrogant 

attitude that I have ever seen. 

 

Mr. Messer, the bright young farmers’ friend, flashes around chewing his gum, nothing can go wrong, 

he can do nothing wrong. I am sure that his sycophantic fans are telling him that he is the greatest young 

bright Minister of Agriculture this country has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Romanow, the flashy Attorney General stands up waves his arms and makes a 

great speech. But he got into something tonight that I want to talk about. He said look at those Liberals, 

look at those friends of big business. Who is making their bullets? I will tell you who is making the 

bullets, Mr. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2231 

Romanow. You people are making the bullets. You are making the bullets through the hog marketing, 

you are making the bullets through your arrogant, dictatorial attitude and through your absolute refusal 

in the face of mounting evidence to admit that this is a stinking scandalous deal. A deal in which you 

handed to a man in Saskatoon, $5 or $6 or $7 million too much. 

 

Now I am going to talk your own way. When we were in the pulp mill you used to get up — and you 

were a good one at it, your Premier was a good one, and he gets that snide little look on his face and he 

would say, I wonder what was under the table. I wonder what the Liberals got under the table from the 

pulp mill. 

 

All right, let’s talk about under the table. You tell the people why you paid $5 or $6 million too much to 

one individual to put into his pocket. What kick-back did you get? Don’t sneer. Isn’t it a funny 

coincidence that into this House today was brought an Election Amendment Act to say that political 

parties are going to be limited as to how much they can spend and how much they can collect. Well 

maybe you’ve got yours, Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Premier. I want to point out it was the Attorney 

General who brought the debate to this kind of talk. He said what are those big Eastern friends that are 

telling the Leader of the Opposition to say about this deal, what are they giving him? What payoff is he 

getting? There is no payoff; they are not telling me anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to defend a deal that stinks to high Heaven. I don’t have to stand up here and 

try to explain why they took a Mr. Gedge, the vice-president of Intercon and put him on the board of 

SEDCO and then made the biggest coziest sweetheart deal ever made in this province. I still haven’t got 

an answer. Don’t tell me I am smearing him. If there was nothing under-handed in this deal, if there is 

nothing under the table, if there is nothing crooked, if there is nothing scandalous, if this deal doesn’t 

stink, if you can prove to the people of Saskatchewan that you didn’t pay $6 or $7 million too much, say 

so. Tonight on the television, three businessmen said you paid too much. Schneider said you paid too 

much. Their own statement, this very statement of Intercon says you paid too much. Dun and Bradstreet, 

Financial Post, everybody says you paid too much, except the Government front benchers. They say we 

didn’t pay too much. Mr. Gedge didn’t have a conflict of interest. It is just a funny coincidence that this 

man from the company that we were about to buy and hand him $10 million for half of their interest 

which their own statement says is only worth $3 million. This man had nothing to do with it. Isn’t it an 

amazing coincidence? Wasn’t it an amazing coincidence they put him on the Board. 

 

Why didn’t — when they decide to make the deal then, if there was nothing wrong — why didn’t Mr. 

Gedge say and why didn’t Mr. Romanow say, why didn’t Mr. Premier Blakeney say, I think you had 

better resign. We will put you on the board after it is all over. They didn’t do that. And don’t you think 

the public of Saskatchewan are so naïve that you can get up and say in one breath, nobody believes Dave 

Steuart. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Nobody does. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Okay. Then in the other 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2232 

breath they gave stories that I have destroyed the biggest packing industry in Saskatchewan. Boy! You 

can’t have it both ways. Either nobody believes me and they are not paying any attention or they are 

paying attention. 

 

Mr. Comer: — That’s right. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That’s right says the short light Member from Nipawin (Mr. Comer). If that is right on 

one side, you don’t have something to worry about. But I will tell you, you have got something to worry 

about. The people that believe in honesty and integrity, this deal, I ask you Members in the back bench, 

the ones from Saskatoon. I just ask you to take a look at it. Don’t be afraid, take a look at it. Take it to 

any chartered accountant, ask him to explain it if you don’t understand it. Obviously your front benchers 

don’t. Either that or there is some funny reason they paid too much. Find out the truth, don’t be afraid to 

do what the Member for Saskatoon University does. I tell you, you might live longer politically if you 

do. If you have the nerve to say to these hot shots in the front bench, “Who went out in the last 19 

months and have blown what”. About $50 million of the taxpayers’ money, produced no new jobs, no 

new revenue. Ask them about this deal. Read the financial statement. There are lots here. I will give 

them to you tonight, I will table them, eight or nine or ten. Look at them, use your God given common 

sense, talk to some friends who are in business and then ask Mr. Romanow, ask Mr. Thorson, ask Mr. 

Blakeney, surely you are not afraid to ask them. Why did you guys make what appears to be such a 

rotten lousy deal? Then you tell the people of Saskatchewan if you have nothing to hide, then tell the 

truth. You have been the most incompetent, blundering, stupid Government that has ever governed in 

this province and you have sold it in 19 months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You’re incompetent, you’re secretive, you’re arrogant, you have absolutely refused to 

tell the public time after time what you pay for land, what you paid for this, what you are doing. And 

you can sit and you can smirk and you can giggle and you can laugh. But I am going to tell you boys as I 

said before, you can put it under the rug but the public will remember. I hope you give us this 

information and I ask you because you must have this. Table this tomorrow or the next day, I challenge 

you to table it this week. Don’t hide behind that you have to make a study. You said you were going to 

table it. I hope we see it. We have had a lot of talk about telling us about how much SEDCO owes, you 

passed that one. You haven’t given it to us yet. You passed that one a long time ago. I am sure it doesn’t 

take long to go to SEDCO and say, “How much does Intercontinental Packers owe?” Put it on a piece of 

paper and table it. You haven’t told us yet. Now you tell us you are going to give us this, I hope it isn’t 

just a stall, but I wouldn’t bet a nickel. Somebody said, do I trust them? No, I don’t trust them, I don’t 

trust them for a minute. The people of this province don’t trust them. And I say, Mr. Speaker, just let 

them keep this up and at the first opportunity, they will show Mr. Blakeney and that little band over 

there who are running things that they don’t trust them either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2233 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 49 

Messieurs 

 

Blakeney  Dyck  Meakes  

Wood  Smishek  Romanow  

Messer  Snyder  Kramer  

Thibault Larson Baker 

Brockelbank MacMurchy Pepper  

Byers Thorson Kwasnica 

Carlson Owens Robbins 

Tchorzewski Cowley Taylor 

Matsalla Richards Faris 

Cody Gross Feduniak 

Mostoway Comer Rolfes 

Oliver Feschuk Kaeding 

Flasch Steuart Coupland 

Loken Guy Grant 

Boldt Gardner Weatherald 

MacLeod McPherson  Lane 

Wiebe 

 

NAYS — 00 

Messieurs 

 

Nil 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR RETURNS 

Return No. 225 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 225 showing: 

 

The amount of the $100,000 under Subvote 11 Department of Industry and Commerce 1972-73 

Estimates that has been spent to February 1, 1973. 

 

Hon. K. Thorson: (Minister of Industry and Commerce) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to propose an 

amendment as it stands on the Order Paper, seconded by the Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers) to 

read as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word “Showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(i) The date The Industry and Commerce Development Act, 1972 was proclaimed. 
(ii) The activities to be administered under the Act 
(iii) The cost of activities to date. 
(iv) Recipients of grants under the Act and amounts paid to each. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2234 

Mr. A. R. Guy: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say too much. I am rather glad that the 

Minister did amend this motion, because after all it has been two months since it was originally asked 

for and it was obvious at the time that it was asked that no expenditures had been made and, therefore, 

he didn’t wish to provide any of the information. He is now bringing it up to date to the end of the year. 

We will be very happy to receive what little information I am sure he will provide. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The Motion as amended agreed to, 

 

Return No. 239 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca) for 

Return No. 239 showing: 

 

(a) Whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan had an appraisal done of the assets of 

Intercontinental Packers Limited prior to its purchase of shares in the company. (b) If so, the name 

of the one who made the appraisal. (c) A copy of any such appraisal. And the proposed amendment 

thereto by the Hon. Mr. Thorson. 

 

That all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(a) Whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan had available to it any appraisals of the value 

of the physical assets of Intercontinental Packers Limited prior to the Government’s purchase of 45 

per cent of the shares of the company; and (b) If so, the source of such appraisals; and (c) The value 

of such assets based on such appraisals. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, in closing the debate I suppose it is quite evident that the information that is 

being asked for in this motion is hardly necessary now. The record is clear from the debate earlier today 

that the Government had no appraisal made of the financial statement; they had no investment advice for 

the purchase or else they couldn’t have gotten themselves into such an ungodly deal as they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must warn the Member that he can’t bring in any new matter in closing this debate. 

 

Mr. Guy: — This isn’t very new, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, but this is a new motion. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I think that you will agree, Mr. Speaker, that we are talking about the purchase of 45 per 

cent of the shares of Intercon and whether or not an appraisal was taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member is well aware of the rules that in closing a debate you can’t bring in new 

material, you can only answer the 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2235 

statements made by others. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, this is all that I am answering. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This is a difficult one to answer when speeches weren’t even made. 

 

Mr. Guy: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I will bow to your wishes. After all, like those Members opposite, I 

don’t want to be out of order too often, so I will just say that it is not surprising that we are not getting 

the information that was asked for. It is like all the other motions in this regard. I think the record is very 

clear, Mr. Speaker, that it was a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Resolutions 
 

Resolution No. 12 — Death of the Lakes in the Qu’Appelle Basin 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. K. R. MacLeod 

(Regina Albert Park): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government that emergency action be 

taken to prevent the death of the lakes in the Qu’Appelle Basin: (a) by implementing immediately, 

the recommendations which the Qu’Appelle Basin Study Board feels will have a major impact on 

the management of land and water in the Qu’Appelle Basin and which should be implemented 

without delay, and (b) by giving immediate assistance to cities and towns, particularly Moose Jaw 

and Regina, to provide for the treatment of waste. 

 

Hon. N. E. Byers: (Minister of the Environment) — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this resolution 

proposed by the Hon. Member for Albert Park, I want to say at the outset that I feel that the motion as 

proposed does not fully encompass the Government’s intention or plans with respect to the Qu’Appelle 

question and, therefore, I would proposed an amendment, and if acceptable, subsequently speak to it. 

 

I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Robbins, that: 

 

All the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan: (a) for involving the public in its assessment of the 

report of the Qu’Appelle Basin Study Report as recommended in Recommendation No. 53 of the 

Report (b) for its endorsement in principle of the Framework Plan outlined 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2236 

in the report, and (c) for proceeding with negotiations with the Government of Canada to secure its 

recognition of the broad regional and national benefits that would accrue from corrective programs 

in the Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Qu’Appelle Basin Study recognized the need for involving the public during the 

planning process in order that the resulting plan would be responsive to the needs and wishes of the 

people. The public of Saskatchewan have been involved in a meaningful and useful manner throughout 

the course of the study by means of information meetings, public hearings, work shops and several other 

ways. 

 

I draw to the Members’ attention that a public advisory group consisting of representatives from all 

major interest groups, organizations and users in the Basin, was established. But public consultation 

does not end with the completion of the report. And, indeed, Recommendation No. 53 states and I quote: 

 

It is recommended that this Report be made available to the public and that opportunities for public 

response be provided. 

 

The recommendations contained in this report are those of the Qu’Appelle Basin Study Board and have 

been developed in consultation with the advisory groups. It is, we believe, important that they be 

discussed widely with the public and that opportunity be given for the public to respond to the study 

recommendations. 

 

Since the release of the report a number of meetings have been held at various locations throughout the 

Basin. Over 7,000 copies of the Report and pamphlets have been distributed to the public. 

 

The wide dissemination of information and public participation of the program have resulted, I think, in 

a better public understanding of the recommendations in the study and to the public willingness to take 

co-operative action to solve the problems. 

 

The public response to the study report and recommendations has also been measured by means of a 

questionnaire. Eight per cent of the persons replying to the questionnaire indicate that they are more than 

75 per cent in agreement in principle with the report. Some of the response on certain recommendations 

has been unfavourable. Some individuals or groups find one or more of the recommendations 

unacceptable and this is not unexpected. It is only reasonable that those recommendations that the public 

cannot support be reviewed carefully prior to implementation. 

 

The cities of Regina and Moose Jaw were requested some time ago to develop a plan for tertiary 

treatment of their municipal wastes or sewage. The findings of the Qu’Appelle Study confirmed that 

these two cities contribute some 70 per cent of phosphorous in the streams and lakes. Obviously, 

additional treatment sewage from these cities to remove phosphorous should be the first step in 

correcting the algae problem that threatens the future of these important lakes. Both cities have aerated 

lagoons, which provide a reasonably good level of treatment for their wastes. But because of the lack of 

flow in prairie streams during the major part of the year, the present treatment practices must be 

improved. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2237 

Our basic approach is that the polluters should pay to eliminate pollution. We adopt this philosophy with 

respect to both industry and municipalities. However, the proposed level of treatment is considerably 

greater than most other cities in Canada are required to provide. Studies are under way to investigate the 

best means of providing treatment. 

 

Regina has proposed algae removal as a first stage and the city of Moose Jaw is considering irrigation 

for disposal of their effluents. While the Department of the Environment will require these cities to 

proceed with design and construction of treatment works, we do recognize that it will place a 

particularly heavy financial burden on these two cities. We are negotiating with the Government of 

Canada for a higher level of financial assistance as part of an implementation agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a high priority has been placed on the zoning of the Valley and the development of 

appropriate regulations for the purpose of controlling development, for planning the use of water and 

related land resources, in such a way as to preserve and protect the beauty of the Valley. 

 

The present haphazard development and unplanned approach to land use cannot continue. Demands for 

lands for various uses will increase in the future and it is essential that areas be zoned for the uses to 

which it is best suited. The land base in the Qu’Appelle Basin is limited and the present conflicts in use 

are forerunners of even greater problems that may be anticipated in the future. 

 

Land must be persevered for wild life habitat and it is desirable to preserve certain areas in their natural 

state. The shoreline of the lakes must be allocated in such a way as to provide for the recreational needs 

of the general public as well as for individuals. 

 

Certain areas, of course, should and must be reserved for agriculture. The land use zoning will 

accomplish this by reflecting, as far as possible, the present use and the future needs and physical 

characteristics of the Valley. 

 

The Department of Environment will proceed in the 1973-74 fiscal year to develop zoning and use plans 

for critical areas of the Valley, in co-operation with local government and in consultation with public 

representatives. There are certain misunderstandings that have arisen regarding the land use 

recommendations. 

 

It will not be the intention of this Government to treat land owners in an unfair or arbitrary fashion. The 

purpose of zoning will be to prevent unsafe and unwise future developments in terms of land use. In 

other words, to guide developers to develop areas best suited for the purpose. Where a change in land 

use is required, for example, a change from agriculture to wildlife purposes, we would not intend to 

achieve such change by zoning, but by other means such as purchase, rental or easement. 

 

The Report has recommended control of pollution contributed from certain agricultural operations and 

intensive livestock operations. These sources contribute only a portion of the remaining 30 per cent of 

the nutrients. A high priority will be established on controlling wastes from commercial 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2238 

feedlots and concentrated cattle operations, where these are identified as contributing to water quality 

impairment. 

 

Changes to agricultural practices, with respect to pasturing of cattle and disposal of their waste products 

will not be easy. However, through an education program it is hoped, Mr. Speaker, that agriculture will 

recognize its contribution to pollution and co-operatively take the necessary action that may be required. 

 

We share the general concern for rapid action to resolve the outstanding problems in the Qu’Appelle 

Basin. I can assure this House that the Government of Saskatchewan is moving as quickly as possible in 

the direction of implementation. 

 

Some action on implementation is being undertaken by my Department now. Each department of 

Government is currently assessing the recommendations to determine how priorities can be shifted to 

carry out the necessary action programs. The internal assessment of those recommendations that are of a 

solely provincial responsibility will be completed very shortly. Negotiations for implementation of those 

recommendations that are of a Federal or joint Federal-Provincial responsibility, have been initiated. It is 

hoped that an implementation agreement can be signed this year, which will permit co-operative action 

to be taken on the joint recommendations. 

 

The Report recommends the establishment of a Valley Authority to co-ordinate and control long-term 

development in the Basin. However, there are complex jurisdictional problems in creating such an 

Authority. Solving these problems will take some time, but the Government does not intend to wait for a 

solution to these problems before initiating the implementation phase of the study. 

 

Therefore, in the intervening period an implementation body must take responsibility for early action. 

Such a body would have representation from the three levels of government involved and the public as 

well. The province is prepared to provide increased financial assistance, but the local people who 

receive benefits should contribute in proportion to the benefits they receive. 

 

Those recommendations that are a provincial responsibility will be acted on by the Provincial 

Government as soon as possible. 

 

There should be a strong national interest in the large number of the recommendations. We feel that the 

Federal Government should show strong leadership in the negotiations and the implementation of those 

joint recommendations. However, the Federal-Provincial negotiations will not prevent us from taking 

early action in Saskatchewan on those recommendations where there is a strong public support. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move the amendment as I indicated at the outset of my speech. 

 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald: (Cannington) — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the Minister’s remarks 

and in essence he talked glowingly about the Report itself and I think most Members would concur with 

him in saying that this Report was well put together and that a great deal of 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2239 

work was put into it. I think that that is good. 

 

The Qu’Appelle Valley system has been in a deplorable condition. The study was set up under the 

Liberal administration both in Ottawa and Saskatchewan and we are pleased that the Report is now 

made and we hope that the Government is going to take some action on it. 

 

I listened, Mr. Speaker, carefully as he went over at some length the motherhood parts of the report. I 

looked and waited anxiously for some indication that more financial assistance would be coming forth 

from the Province of Saskatchewan for the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina, that are so completely 

involved and in fact there are some towns that are equally as well affected. 

 

I listened desperately I might say, Mr. Speaker, because for some years as the Opposition, the 

Government now of the day, led many of us to believe that pollution was one of the items high on their 

priority list and that we could expect some action from the Government, more in words but in finance as 

well, because it is the dollars that are going to clean up the Valley system, not the words. 

 

I looked, Mr. Speaker, to an amount of money budgeted for the coming year and I found approximately 

$200,000 and some odd budgeted for capital expenditures under the Department of the Environment for 

the improvement of pollution control in the cities. So it is obvious that that amount of money is not 

going to do any great things to clean up the system in Regina and Moose Jaw, particularly, when one 

considers that it is already estimated that the tertiary plant in Regina will be at least $6 million and that 

the Moose Jaw tertiary treatment plant will be $2½ million. 

 

And then the Minister went on at even greater length and the most damning part of his whole speech 

implies condemnation of the Government. He said that it is the Government’s view that the polluter 

should pay. In other words, Mr. Speaker, in the case of the Qu’Appelle River Valley system it is the 

Government’s view that the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina should pay. I think that it is obvious when 

you look at the amount of dollars that these two cities will be given. 

 

I think this is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because these two cities — while they may be putting the 

pollution into the river — deserve considerably more help from all the people of Saskatchewan than the 

few dollars that apparently they are going to be offered. 

 

I think that all of our Members on this side support more provincial government involvement, 

particularly when one considers the amount of dollars that the Government seems to have available for 

so many other purposes. 

 

I think it is also unfair to expect these cities to put up this kind of money when this Valley, itself, is of so 

much importance to all of the people in Saskatchewan. I think it can be equally said that it is more an act 

of geography of where the two cities are built that is the problem in regard to the amount of money that 

this pollution control equipment is going to cost. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2240 

It turns out, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion and in the opinion of my colleagues, that the Government is 

extremely shortsighted in the financial assistance that they are offering. I would suggest to the 

Government, again, that it is not too late to put dollars where so many of their words have been in the 

past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pollution when it is caused by the citizens of the province, but particularly by the citizens 

of Regina and Moose Jaw, is in many respects a different situation that when pollution is caused by an 

industry. 

 

True, you can apply the rule that the polluter should pay when you apply it in the case of industry, but 

scarcely in our view, should this be the case when you apply it to the general citizenry. 

 

I think that there is a good cause to be made for substantial financial assistance from all of the people of 

the province not just those who are polluting the system, as individuals. This is why, Mr. Speaker, that I 

and my colleagues are extremely disappointed at the financial assistance that apparently will be offered 

these cities and to the other towns involved. 

 

Because I should like in the future to make a more elaborate statement on some of the things in the 

report I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 14 — Urges Government of Canada to Reduce Unemployment 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. E. C. Whelan (Regina 

North East): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to develop adequate employment schemes to 

reduce unemployment in Canada to more acceptable proportions; to disclose details of work plans for 

the winter season at an early enough date to permit maximum participation at the provincial level, and to 

fulfil its responsibilities though its control of Canada’s fiscal, monetary and general economic policies, 

to take action designed to provide long-term solutions to the problem of chronic unemployment in 

Canada. 

 

And the proposed amendment by Mr. Lane: 

 

That wherever the word “Canada” appears, it be deleted and the word “Saskatchewan” be substituted 

therefor, and that the word “municipal “ be substituted for the word “provincial” in the fifth line thereof. 

 

Mr. J. G. Richards: (Saskatoon University) — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this motion previously I 

felt sorely tempted to introduce a subamendment to the effect that unemployment should be a concern of 

both the Federal and Provincial Governments. I feel that we are playing cheap politics with this 

resolution. The initial resolution in blaming the Federal Government and the subamendment in referring 

the problem back to the Provincial Government, amount, in my opinion 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2241 

to cheap political debate. I would have hoped that this Legislature could rise above such games. I will 

refrain from moving a further amendment, take my seat and hope that his ignominious debate comes to 

an end. 

 

Hon. E. I. Wood: (Minister of Municipal Affairs) — Mr. Speaker, I hope that I am fulfilling the Hon. 

Member’s wish that the ignominious part of this debate is now ended. 

 

I do wish to make a few remarks in regard to it. Earlier in this debate some of the Hon. Members 

opposite had some things to say concerning the Winter Works Program for which I am responsible. I do 

not think that I can afford to remain seated and not take part in the debate because of some of the things 

that were said. 

 

The Hon. Member from Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) made a couple of allegations concerning the 

way in which the Winter Works Program is handled. I think that I am compelled to answer in order to 

put the record straight. 

 

I believe he said that the provincially appointed co-ordinator of Winter Works had given political 

lectures to some municipal officials seeking Winter Works grants. And that the co-ordinator was more 

than willing, for political purposes, to delay applications. 

 

I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that neither of these statements is based on facts. What are the facts, Mr. 

Speaker? First, with regard to so-called political lectures the co-ordinator and his staff in the course of 

their work have daily contacts with many municipal officials and officials of community organizations 

seeking information and advice concerning Winter Works Program. 

 

These contacts are by mail, by telephone and by personal visits to our office. With so many kinds of 

programs available, Federal and Provincial, one of the questions most often asked by municipal and 

other officials is: What program is best for us? To answer this question our staff have endeavoured to 

explain the chief features of each of the programs. 

 

The Provincial Local Initiatives Program, for example, is similar to the Federal Local Initiatives 

Program, but they are not identical. For some types of projects the provincial program is more 

advantageous. For other types, the project sponsor could get more assistance from the federal program. 

People look to our officials for useful information. How the giving of this information can be construed 

as political lecturing, I find impossible to understand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The co-ordinator and other people in my Department working with him, are competent, knowledgeable, 

courteous employees, who are dedicated to the task of providing the best possible service to the people 

of Saskatchewan, regardless of where they are or what their political preference may be. 

 

If by retaining top notch people on our staff and providing good service to our people, the Government 

gains any political advantage, I believe that this advantage is well 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2242 

deserved. 

 

Second, with regard to the Hon. Member’s allegation that the Provincial Co-ordinator, for political 

reasons, was more than willing to delay the onward transmission of programs submitted by 

municipalities in Saskatchewan, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member does not have the 

evidence to support such an allegation. 

 

Under the 1971-72 Local Initiative Program, the co-ordinator transmitted for approval by the Federal 

Government, a total of 125 applications which have been received from municipalities. Applications 

which appeared to meet the criteria established for the program, were promptly transmitted to the 

Federal officials, usually within a week of their receipt in Regina. 

 

The delays in approvals were in the federal offices. The time lapse in the federal offices between receipt 

of applications and a decision on its acceptance or rejection was unbelievably long. On the 125 

applications we sent them decisions on 18 of them were made within 20 days. On 62 applications it took 

them up to 40 days to make up their minds, and on another 33 applications it took them up to 60 days. 

Some were held up from between 80 to 90 days. And if anyone is interested in knowing where the 

holdup was last year in regard to these programs which were put through our office and then handled by 

the federal offices, this is undoubtedly where it was. 

 

The Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), and I am sorry he is not in his seat, Mr. Speaker, 

indicated that we were being partial to Saskatoon because of the number of projects approved for that 

city. I have to tell the House that we approve or disapprove applications as they are made to us. If we do 

not get the applications we cannot approve them. And if the applications are not forthcoming from some 

other cities and places in the province, it is not our fault, I submit. 

 

The Hon. Member has indicated that there is some connection between the number of projects approved 

in Saskatoon and the fact there are 6 NDP Members elected from that city. I am not saying that there is 

no connection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatoon have the good sense to elect NDP Members and also they have the good sense 

to formulate plans for Winter Works projects and to apply to my Department for assistance. There may 

be some connection. 

 

The Hon. Member for Cannington has indicated that projects were refused for political reasons. I have 

here, Mr. Speaker, a list of the projects that have been refused. I will not, with your consent, Mr. 

Speaker, read out the names of the places that sent these in, because I would not wish to embarrass them 

unnecessarily. I can say that these following were not approved: 

 

One is in regard to the renovations to a fire hall. This was not approved because it was already under a 

Federal Local Initiatives project. Another one was in regard to replacing boilers in a hospital. In this 

case of the Saskatchewan Hospitalization Services Plan and federal contributions exceeded 50 per cent 

of the cost already and our program cut off at 50 per cent, so we didn’t approve it. Some may think this 

has been 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2243 

political, but I don’t see how it can be construed that way. Another one was in regard to church 

renovations. We say that churches are not accepted under this program, although church halls are 

eligible. Another one is in regard to developing a winter resort. The project started six weeks before the 

application was received, while our brochure says very clearly that payments only start with the 

approval of the application. This sponsor was asked to revise the application and resubmit. We have 

heard nothing further from it. 

 

Another one was to develop a water well. This project was completed before the application was 

submitted, so we just couldn’t accept it. Another one was in regard to sidewalk construction. The 

Municipal Road Assistance Authority pays 50 per cent of the cost, so it was automatically out. Another 

one was arena improvements. This had been approved under the federal program. 

 

I can go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t want to take up the time of the House with reading these to 

you. But I think that you will find that the only ones that were not approved were those for which there 

was very good reason. And any allegation that these are done on a political basis, is entirely false and we 

will not accept that accusation at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also the Hon. Member for Cannington suggested that we have not kept the communities informed of the 

types of projects that were acceptable under the Winter Works Program. He indicated to the House that 

we had approved in some cases people working in rinks and on staffs. He said there would have been a 

great deal more of this if all communities had known that we were accepting that sort of thing. 

 

Well, I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, there was a brochure circulated — widely circulated — in 

the province to all municipalities. We didn’t send them to all organizations because you know that 

would be an impossible thing to do, because we did not know what organizations were wishing to take 

part, although we widely publicized it in the papers and otherwise, that organizations were eligible. But 

this brochure was sent to all municipalities, urban and rural. 

 

We also sent out a circular letter which was distributed to secretary-treasurers and clerks of the RMs, 

villages, towns, and school boards, unit boards and union hospitals. And in this letter, under the heading, 

“Kinds of Projects” appeared the following paragraph: 

 

As last year, the choice of projects is left to the initiative of the individual municipalities. Generally 

speaking projects should prove a useful community service or facility which is within the powers of 

the municipality or other local government organization to provide. The projects should be 

additional to what the sponsor would have done were it not for the Winter Works Incentive grants. 

And above all the projects should provide employment to unemployed persons seeking work. 

 

Attached to the letter was a list of projects classified according to functions, approved under the 1971-72 

Winter Works Programs. Dozens of projects were listed including, Mr. Speaker, 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2244 

under the classification” Recreational and Cultural”, the words ‘additional staff at recreation centres’. So 

we not only approved these but we advertised in advance that these had been approved before. 

 

I have a list here, Mr. Speaker, of some of these that have been approved and in every instance it is 

stated by the organization making application that this work was done by people who would otherwise 

be unemployed. In one instance, says the work had previously been done by volunteer labor, when 

available, but there was too much work to rely on volunteers. They said it was new work that would not 

have been paid for otherwise. 

 

Another one says this would be the first time that a hockey coach has ever been hired in this community. 

This was new work and employment that would not have been gained were it not for this program. 

Another one says this now enables the town to retain on payroll one seasonal employee who otherwise 

would be laid off until spring work resumes. It provides contract employment for others. Without 

assistance this work would be deferred or cancelled. 

 

We have stipulated in our programs, Mr. Speaker, that all people hired on these programs must be 

otherwise unemployed. And this, as has been categorically stated by each organization that sponsored 

the kind of work that is being done, and we would not otherwise have accepted them into the program. 

 

I think that we have made this very clear. By requiring all projects to be cleared through the local 

municipal councils before they come to us we have avoided many of the questionable projects which the 

Federal Government has accepted under its Local Initiatives Program. 

 

Every application we have approved has either been initiated by the local municipality or other local 

government organizations or concurred in by the local council if the project sponsor is a community 

service organization. 

 

These have all been cleared by the local councils. And to that fact we attribute much of the reason that 

we do not have any frivolous projects being approved. In all cases they have indicated that they are 

hiring only people who would otherwise be unemployed and have contacted the Regional Social 

Services before hiring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we took steps early last year in the fall of 1972, in the summer of 1972 to develop 

Provincial Winter Works contingency plans in the event the Federal Government should be late again in 

revealing their plans. 

 

The Provincial Municipal Winter Works Incentive Program which went into effect on November 1, 

1972 was announced early in September. This gave municipalities almost two whole months in which to 

develop their plans and submit their applications. Contrary to what is indicated in the amendment which 

is put forward by the Members opposite the Saskatchewan Winter Works Program this year has allowed 

for municipal planning. We made announcement of it early in order to give the municipalities an 

opportunity to plan and to come forward with their applications in good time to have the work done this 

winter, 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, we have received over 650 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2245 

applications under this year’s provincial program. Compared to this only 300 applications were made 

last year under all the programs both Federal and Provincial which were in operation last winter. 650 

this year, 300 last year under all the programs. 

 

The Federal Local Initiative Program this year, I must admit was much better handled than last year. 

According to the information that we have received from them, 187 applications were approved in 

Saskatchewan. It should be noted that only 47 of these were projects sponsored by the municipalities. 

The other 140 came from community organizations and groups and Indian reserves. 

 

The Federal Government’s Winter Capital Projects Program was not announced until December 6, 1972. 

It was, of course, too late to be of much value this winter. However, we are looking forward to it being a 

good deal more use in the two years to come in which it runs. 

 

Many projects which could have qualified under this program were accepted under the provincial 

program. The point I wish to stress, Mr. Speaker, is that if it were not for the early and prompt action by 

the Provincial Government in implementing its Winter Works Program, projects costing an estimated 

$11 million would not have been undertaken by our local governments, other community services and 

organizations. These projects will pay out in excess of $4 million in wages during the period of 

November 1, 1972 and May 31, 1973. Were it not for the work provided by these projects many, many 

people would have been on unemployment insurance or on social assistance in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are several things more that I wish to say in regard to this amendment and the motion 

before the House. And I ask to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Interim Report of the Special Committee on Welfare 
 

Mr. P. P. Mostoway (Hanley) moved, seconded by Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse) that the Interim Report of the 

Special Committee on Welfare be now concurred in. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, contrary to what some may think, it does give me pleasure to speak on this Report of the 

Special Committee on Welfare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Maybe at this point I should say that perhaps this report should not have been 

labelled a report at all. Perhaps it should have been called an accounting for that was exactly what it was 

intended to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a recent informal meeting of this Committee it was suggested that perhaps my remarks 

should be brief. And brief they will be, at least at this stage. 

 

But before I go on, I wish to emphasize a point. And that is that this Committee functioned extremely 

well and relations 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2246 

between various members were really harmonious. I assure you, Mr. Speaker, politics played no part in 

the work of the Committee. All members were conscientious. 

 

Another point I wish to make is that I can honestly say that all decisions of the Committee were 

unanimous. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Oh, there were often opposing views on certain concepts and practices but major 

decisions were always unanimously arrived at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must, on behalf of the Committee, commend three people who worked with the 

Committee, namely, Mr. Gordon Barnhart, Ms. Merry Harbottle, and Mr. Lorne Dunsmore, who were 

conscientious and most willing at all times in regard to Committee work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Committee feels that a real challenge has been given it by this Assembly. It is true that 

these terms of reference don’t appear to be too fleshy as they appear on page 7 of the Report. However, I 

do want to mention that the expanded terms of reference as implied are such that they involve almost all 

aspects of activity within the Department of Social Services. However, with the capable people involved 

I am sure that the job which the Committee was charged with will be done and done well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as can be easily seen, the Committee held hearings in many communities throughout the 

province. In general, the response was good, although there seemed to be less response in the hearings as 

we moved southward. If response at public hearings seems to taper off in the southern part of the 

province, it must be said that the slack was taken up by briefs. 

 

It should also be mentioned that all municipal bodies were informed by letter as to when and where the 

hearings would be held. As a rule we had good response from these officials in most centres. But this 

was not always the case. 

 

I suppose Members would wish me to relate to them some major concerns of Saskatchewan people as 

we were able to determine through briefs, verbal presentations, opinions sought and questions asked. 

 

I shall relate just some of these concerns. As far as I could determine most people do not question the 

desirability of social assistance to those in need. In fact, it was my distinct impression that many think 

more help should be forthcoming. However, a significant number seem to question the criteria used to 

determine who should be eligible or not. Needless to say bold plans were expounded on to remedy the 

situation. 

 

Many municipal officials seemed to indicate a desire for more consultation in regard to welfare 

recipients in general. Although most said they were glad not to be directly involved, many of these saw 

benefit for all concerned in more communication between Social Services personnel and municipal 

officials. 

 

I think I should be frank in mentioning that some are of 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2247 

the opinion that there may be some abuse in social assistance. However, concrete suggestions as to how 

this might be remedied were few in number. 

 

The Committee mentions three observations in the Report. This is not meant to imply that there were no 

other observations. However, the Committee felt that these would in all probability be delved into quite 

thoroughly in the future. 

 

The first observation in essence says that more information should be made available to the public in 

regard to virtually all aspects of social assistance in this province. It was felt that many people do not 

have an adequate understanding of such things as total expenditures, actual assistance given individuals, 

but not to specific ones, objectives and a host of other things which all people should be aware of in 

order to prevent embarrassment and harassment and to promote more compassionate understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was felt that in future deliberations consideration will probably have to be given to 

treating northern Saskatchewan as a situation by itself in regard to some concerns which are peculiar 

only to the North. For example, I think all Committee members were made acutely aware of the 

language barriers which exist there. I must also hasten to add that some good suggestions were given to 

the Committee on how this might be overcome. One of them possibly being the use of more local people 

who are reasonably proficient in Canadian and one of the Indian languages. 

 

As for the observation labelled unemployed employables, I’m of the opinion that most members feel that 

a good hard look will have to be taken at present Federal-Provincial roles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for me to elaborate further on what this Committee might or might not make 

recommendations on would not be proper at this time. 

 

However, I can assure Members of this House that this Committee anticipates getting on with its work 

very shortly after the session ends in the hope that a final report can be made available for the year’s 

end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) that the Interim Report of the 

Special Committee on Welfare be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald: (Cannington) — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, there does seem to be a 

problem arising from time to time in this situation. I duly and in all respect, Mr. Speaker, make a 

suggestion. According to my understanding of the rules, which could be incorrect, but I do believe is 

correct in this instance. I understand that once you put the motion that the Speaker must then return to 

his Chair and wait to see if a Member rises uncovered. And in all due respect, Mr. Speaker, once you 

have put the motion you have not been returning to your Chair to give an opportunity to a Member to 

rise. Under the rules as I understand them, a Member is not supposed to be on his feet when you are on 

your feet, Mr. Speaker. And, therefore, in all due respect, I believe that sufficient opportunity is not 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2248 

being given to the Members to be able to present themselves in the Assembly to state their case. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The rules that have always been followed as far as I am aware of, by previous 

Speakers and by myself, when a motion comes like this, I ask is the House ready for the question. The 

Members call question and I look around to see, if no one opposes the question. But I don’t wish to cut 

Members off. And if the House is agreeable, I am agreeable to let Members speak. It is not my intention 

to try to prevent Members from speaking. But the Speaker does ask, is the House ready for the question? 

When the question is called, if a Members attempts to rise I always remain seated. 

 

Every Member desiring to speak is to rise in his place uncovered and address himself to Mr. Speaker. So 

if a Member starts to rise and says Mr. Speaker then I immediately take my seat again. I don’t want to 

offend any Member. Is it the will of the House that other Members be allowed to speak? 

 

Agreed. 

 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: (Regina Albert Park) — Mr. Speaker, one may rightfully assume that we are a 

little bashful on this side of the House tonight and that each of us is most anxious to let someone else 

speak ahead of us. No one certainly wants to grab the limelight if any one else wishes to speak. 

 

I have a couple of comments with respect to this Report. I am pleased to hear from the Hon. Chairman 

of the Committee that harmony reigned supreme and that the decisions of the Committee were in fact 

unanimous. 

 

One of the good parts of the committee system is that it allows Members from both sides of the House to 

work together in an atmosphere that allows each of us to observe that the other people are not as bad as 

we let on in this House and I, myself, have had that kind of an experience with the Agriculture 

Committee and I am glad that such harmony reigns with respect to this Committee. I am pleased with 

the compliments to the members that were not formal appointments of the House, that is Mr. Barnhart 

and Ms. Merry Harbottle, particularly, whom we know of, and we always know that their assistance is 

just invaluable and we are delighted that they should do so much to benefit the committees. In fact, I am 

not convinced that the Committee Reports would come anywhere near to the quality that they achieve if 

it were not for the assistance of these people. 

 

Having said that, however, and despite the fact that these were unanimous decisions, it must not be 

thought that all Members of this side of the House always concur with the reasonableness of other 

Members of this side of the House. I must confess that after holding nigh on to 40 meetings (I believe 

there were something close to 40 meetings) and having received close to 200 or perhaps more than 200 

submission, reports, and studies (there were 158 briefs alone, in addition to which there were 

information studies and reports presented, some 29 reports, and 11 information studies), if does seem to 

me that 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2249 

the Committee has brought forth remarkably little. I am concerned that this particular Committee might 

be used as a political vehicle to travel again about the province extensively for purposes of the 

government. I wish to record my own disappointment that this Committee has produced so little after so 

great an effort. While I appreciate the harmony with which it operated, I do not appreciate the amount of 

production that has come forth today from the Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: (Morse) — Well, Mr. Speaker, I had intended not to speak in regard to this report. The 

only opportunity on which I wished to make any comments would have been after some of the Members 

on the other side had made comments in regard to this committee. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Trying to smoke us out again. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — That’s right Mr. Attorney General. I should like to point out though some of the remarks 

made by the Chairman, Mr. Mostoway, the Member from Hanley, that we did have a very harmonious 

summer on the Committee. I think that all of us who attended the hearings and the meetings throughout 

the province shared the same concerns as far as welfare, welfare recipients and the knowledge which 

other people have in the province about those who are receiving welfare. 

 

I should like to take exception to one of the comments which the Chairman made and that is that all 

decisions were not unanimous, I can’t recall that they were all unanimous but I can’t come up with any 

specific point at this time in which they were not unanimous. He is quite right that at the deliberations 

which we had in Committee that we did not all think alike and I think at times they accepted our point of 

view and at times, possibly, we may have accepted their point of view. 

 

One thing though that I was very disappointed in during this summer in talking to the people throughout 

the province was that we found out, what all the problems were relating to welfare but we didn’t find 

any solutions. I say that I am sorry about this because I should have hoped that we would have received 

some solutions from the people of Saskatchewan, that we should have received ideas from the people of 

Saskatchewan as to what they would like to see welfare be like in this province. The reason why I say 

that I was sorry to hear this is because here again it is going to be left up to politicians to sit down and 

come up with the answers. I think if we are going to get meaningful answers we have got to get them 

from the people of this province. I think politicians should be in a position to assess the 

recommendations and the feelings of the people throughout the province before they make their 

recommendations. I am hoping that when the Committee does start to meet again shortly after the 

Session does adjourn, that we shall be able to get ideas from the people whom we call in to meet with us 

and that, if necessary, if we are not able to get ideas from the people in the province and we, as the 

Committee, find it necessary to go outside of this province to find answers, then I think that possibly we 

should look very seriously at those possibilities. 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2250 

I feel that the problems which we have regarding welfare in this province are great problems. Not only 

are there misunderstandings amongst most people throughout the province but some of those 

misunderstandings I think are justified. I don’t want to get into the details on that. I feel that if the 

Legislature has charged us with the responsibility of finding these answers I hope that we can come up 

with the answers. 

 

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I second this Report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault: (Melfort-Kinistino) — Mr. Speaker, as a Member of the Legislature that has served 

on several of these intersessional committees I would not quarrel too much with this Report because it is 

an interim Report. I think in an Interim Report that you have to be fairly careful what you are going to 

say so that you don’t have to undo it in the final report. But with all the presentations that were made it 

is quite easy to see that the final report will have to have a lot of work to be put into it to make a good 

job of it. I also what to compliment the Members on both sides of the House for having worked 

harmoniously as was pointed out. I think this is one vehicle where we can come to grips with a problem 

that society suffers from and take it out of the realm of politics. I am quite sure that when the final report 

come in that it will be a good final report and that the attitude of the members will continue in a very 

co-operative manner. We are looking forward to a good report and I tell you society needs changes in 

our social welfare structure. This Report is very important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A. Taylor: (Minister of Social Services) — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make a very few 

brief remarks concerning the Interim Report. First of all I should say that although I had been appointed 

as a member of the intersessional committee, after my appointment to Cabinet I deliberately did not 

attend meetings, feeling that it would be in the best interests that the Committee be totally independent 

from the Minister of the Crown. I might say that I should like, at this point, to congratulate the members 

of the Committee from both sides of the House. I have received a number of letters following meetings 

which the Committee held throughout the province: Letters which stated how well the Committee had 

been received and how appreciative people were for the attention that was given to their briefs and to 

their comments. I think the members of the Committee ought to be aware that these comments were 

made and have been sent to me, and so I certainly want to pass them on. It is, of course, noticeable that 

the Report is an Interim Report, and we all hope that the Committee is able to reach some final 

conclusions without too much delay, although we recognize that it is a very complicated subject. 

 

The Member for Melfort-Kinistino has just mentioned that changes are needed, and I think everyone in 

the House agrees with this. As I look thorough the Report there is a comment on the 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2251 

unemployed employables and I would suggest to the Committee that one thing they might even consider 

is a definition of what is an unemployed employable. Is it someone 60 years of age, as it is at the present 

time under the present legislation? If he is 60 and physically able to work he is listed as an employable 

and this may no longer be realistic in our society. So I would certainly hope that the Committee give 

some consideration to this. 

 

I noticed also the comment of the Committee regarding public awareness. This is something I have 

personally recognized, There have been a lot of misconceptions regarding who is on welfare and the 

kind of assistance that is being received by those who are on the assistance roll, and I certainly would 

concur with the Committee’s recommendation where they say they would encourage the expansion of 

public information within the Department. So, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I should just like to once 

again congratulate the Committee members for the work they have been doing and urge them, of course, 

as the Minister responsible for this program to a speedy conclusion so that we can bring about the 

changes. We all know changes are needed but we are not sure what they are and, hopefully, they will be 

able to provide us with new directions for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. R. Guy: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say a word or two as a Member who 

has never been on a Legislative Committee. I want to follow up on what the Minister has said. It has 

always been my understanding that Special Committees of the Legislature are set up to deal with a 

problem and go into a problem with the idea of providing recommendations for the Government to act 

on as rapidly as possible. Of course, this is desirable because I think both sides of the House have been 

guilty when we have been in the Government and in Opposition of requesting the Government to move 

more quickly in an area where a study is going on. However, if a study is going to continue for two 

years I think it puts the Government in a difficult position that they can’t bring in legislation which is 

possibly long overdue because if they do then the Opposition takes the position, well why didn’t you 

wait for the final report. This happens I think regardless of what Government is in power. 

 

A great number, as I read this Committee report, of meetings have been held. A great number of briefs 

have been received. I would hope that all committees, and I think of the Business Committee bringing in 

an Interim Report, I think of the Liquor Committee which has been two years in its work and I would 

hope that all committees would, complete their studies, complete their recommendations within the year 

period in order to give the Government their recommendations and prevent the Government from using 

the Committees as an excuse for not moving ahead as rapidly with the necessary legislation that is 

required. I think the whole purpose of committees is to provide recommendations to the government so 

that they can act on them. By holding these Reports over from one year to the other, I think we are 

procrastinating as Members of the Legislature. I should like to back up the words of the Minister of 

Social Welfare that we do get the final report, not only of this committee, but all committees just as 

quickly as we possibly can 



 

April 3, 1973 

 

 

2252 

so that we can bring about the desirable and in many cases necessary changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. P. Mostoway: (Hanley) — Just an answer to the Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod), he 

claims that the Committee brought forth very little. Well, I’ll grant him that that is true, but I think at all 

times it was the feeling of the Committee that they would come out with a proper Report. They felt that 

the people would want a proper Report. They were entitled to one, and consequently instead of coming 

up with a half one, they will come up with a complete one which is what we will do in the future. 

 

The Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) said that we probably didn’t get too many answers. Quite possibly 

he is right although I think he would admit that we did get some answers. Maybe they were not the ones 

that we could use, but it could lead us on to other avenues whereby we could get some answers and 

solutions. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:22 o’clock p.m. 

 


