






















































Hansard: March 20, 1973


1729 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

39th Day 
 

Tuesday, March 20, 1973. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. D. M. McPherson: — (Regina Lakeview) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the 
Members of this House 50 Grade Eight students from Holy Rosary School. They are here with their 
teacher, Mr. Hall. I should like to congratulate Mr. Hall for bringing the class here today. I hope they 
have a very enjoyable day. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, I have great pleasure in welcoming to the 
House some 62 Grade Five students from W. C. Howe School in Regina. They have had a tour of the 
building starting at 1:30 p.m. and are now here to observe the proceedings of democracy in action and 
the dignified proceedings of the House, particularly on this side. They are accompanied by two very fine 
teachers Mrs. Nancy Hill and Miss Joy Ledingham. I would introduce them to you and through you, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Members of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Food Prices Enquiry 
 
Mr. T. M. Weatherald: — (Cannington) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 
direct a question to the Minister in charge of Consumer Affairs. It is well known, Mr. Speaker, to all 
Members here that the House of Commons Committee on Food Prices is recently conducting an enquiry 
into the rising costs of food in this country. According to press reports, some of the information that they 
have been attempting to get has not been forthcoming as readily as might well be desired. The question I 
should like to ask the Minister of Culture and Youth (Consumer Affairs) is: Would the Government of 
Saskatchewan — as they are a fairly large partner in a meat packing firm and will obviously know the 
profit margins involved — be willing to provide the information to the House of Commons enquiry on 
rising food prices? 
 
Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski: — (Minister of Consumer Affairs) Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Member I 
don’t really know to whom he is directing the question, except he said the Minister of Culture and Youth 
which I know is myself. Whether the Government is willing to provide information on food costs is 
something I don’t know how to answer the Member. Certainly we are willing to provide information 
that we may be requested to 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1730 

provide. If we can be of any assistance to the Committee, I as the Minister in my capacity am prepared 
to be of assistance in any way that I can. 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As Minister of Consumer Affairs, I take it then 
that the Government would be willing to provide information on the operating margins of 
Intercontinental Packers regarding the rising food prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I don’t think that is a supplementary question. 
 

Compulsory Arbitration — Elevator Strike 
 
Mr. G. B. Grant: — (Regina Whitmore Park) I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Labour. I 
have been approached by about 10 per cent of the membership in the union, I believe is #102 which the 
members belong to which repair and install elevators in the province. I also understand the settlement is 
forthcoming in quite a number of the provinces for this long drawn out strike. Local members are quite 
concerned that here in Saskatchewan no progress has been made and there doesn’t appear to be anything 
pending. I understand they would welcome compulsory arbitration to settle their troubles. I was 
wondering if the Minister would care to indicate if he is prepared to take the matter up with the union to 
see if any reconciliation of this six-month strike can be undertaken. 
 
Hon. G. T. Snyder: — (Minister of Labour) I didn’t really gather the first part of the question. I 
understand the Member has reference to the elevator strike. The deliberations at the present time as you 
will know are being undertaken in Ontario in light of the fact that this is a national contract. As I 
indicated in the House some time ago the industrial relations people in Ontario are playing a leading role 
in the negotiations with the union with the hope that a settlement will be reached that is mutually 
satisfactory to both management and labor in this particular case. As I indicated also some time ago 
there was a general move I believe instigated by one or two of the provincial governments which seem 
to call for a general enquiry into the whole matter. Our people were in touch with the Ontario 
Department of Labour with the idea of seeing if there was anything that we might add by an intervention 
of our industrial relations people. The advice that was offered to us at that time was that negotiations 
were proceeding and they thought any kind of a general move towards an enquiry would be a detriment 
rather than a help to the ultimate settlement which as I understand is causing some concern in a number 
of quarters. At the present moment we are keeping in close touch and we are not of the mind to tread on 
the toes as it were of the people that are directly involved in the negotiations. We are in touch with them 
on a regular basis and if there is anything we can do to expedite rather than to hinder the matter we will 
certainly be doing everything possible. 
 
Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. If the matter gets to the point where it appears 
compulsory arbitration is 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1731 

the only course, is the Minister prepared to give it the same backing that he has indicated in a general 
way; is he prepared to support such a form of settlement, because it appears that is the course it is 
taking? 
 
Mr. Snyder: — Well I think we’ll cross those bridges when we come to them. I don’t think I am 
prepared at this time to offer any firm commitment about what we might propose to do at some time in 
the future. I think we have to be governed by the actions that are taken elsewhere and the conditions at a 
particular point in time. I don’t think I am in a position where I could possibly give you that kind of an 
undertaking at the moment. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

Land Bank Rental Rates 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like 
to make reference to an article on page 4 of the Leader Post of Monday, March 19, 1973, which had a 
headline, “Land Bank rent to top 10 per cent for land buildings.” Mr. Speaker, this whole article is either 
a deliberate attempt to mislead by taking items out of context under different situations than for what the 
regulations were drafted to cover, or incompetent reporting which shows a complete lack of 
understanding of the subject and of necessary research that is needed in order to prepare such an article. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of what the article says, the Land Bank rent for agricultural land and 
improvements is set at 5 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — The lessee will be paying an average annual depreciation for buildings but this isn’t part 
of his rent. He is buying the improvements and thereby building up a lease equity in these 
improvements. When he has finished buying those improvements through that percentage contribution 
his rental rates will be discounted downwards. 
 
Section 20 of The Land Bank Act deals with non-farmers leasing farm homes, not required by the 
agricultural lessee. Their rent is set up by regulation to be 4 per cent above prime; prime is presently 6 
per cent. Thus their rent, and only in that case, would be 10 per cent. This covers the cost of borrowed 
money to purchase the buildings plus the maintenance; 10 per cent plus depreciation is very fair rental 
rate in relation to equivalent accommodation in towns and cities. 
 
The section of the article dealing with the 5 per cent floor and the 6½ per cent rental ceiling on land rent 
appears to intentionally convey the possibility of it being set at any level between these two points. The 
regulation is specific that it is set at 1 per cent below bank prime rate which it was at this time this 
morning, 6 per cent and still is 6 per cent. Regardless of this, the rate has been struck for leases drawn in 
1973 at 5 per cent. This rate is assured by regulation to the 1973 lessees for at least a 10-year period. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1732 

The article further refers to the purchase price of land should a lessee exercise his option after five years. 
The price is set by regulation to be the purchase price or the market value at the time, whichever is 
greater. The 5 per cent interest rate recognizes the possibility of capital gains in land accruing to the 
Commission during this period of ownership. Any fair-minded person will agree that you can’t have it 
both ways. 
 
I have been assured that the reference to a statement attributed to Mr. Gib Wesson, Chairman of the 
Commission, regarding the Commission wishing to turn a profit on the resale of land is completely 
erroneous. Regulations state that a prospective lessee cannot have a resource base of less than $30,000 
or more than $150,000. The article infers that this applies only to direct-line descendants. It applies to all 
lessees; however, in open competition these people are eliminated from competition. In cases of 
direct-line descent, this situation must be assessed before the land is purchased. Again, Mr. Speaker, I 
state emphatically that rental rate to agricultural lessees is 5 per cent of land and improvement. The 
regulations, when read in conjunction with this Act are clear, Mr. Speaker, and only those who wish not 
to understand it can make it otherwise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, if I could be permitted a word to reply. I think this is 
a good indication of the Minister not bringing this before the House in time. He waits until it is in the 
Gazette, statements are made in the Press, he has a good deal of time to clear . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is the Hon. Member replying to? 
 
Mr. Gardner: — He made a statement . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, the Minister was rising on a Point of Privilege, referring to a press release. 
Order! I should like to know just how the Member is attempting to reply so that we may stay in order. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe the Hon. Member was speaking as a Point of Privilege. I 
think it was a statement, a Minister’s statement before the Orders of the Day. As such a Member on this 
side can make a very brief comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — He was making a statement in relation to a press release, not as a new statement of 
government policy. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — (Milestone) He did not rise on a Point of Privilege. The Press was commenting on 
something in the Gazette, not what the Minister has said. It was not a Point of Privilege at all, Sir. It was 
a question, the Minister rose before the Orders of the Day to make a statement. The tradition of this 
House has been that the Opposition has an opportunity to respond. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1733 

Mr. Speaker: — I am not denying that, I am just asking the Hon. Member what he is replying to 
because he was commenting on a press statement. I am asking just how he is replying, because it is not a 
debatable item at this time. 
 
Mr. Gardner: — I am just replying to the statement the Minister made. He is apparently giving us some 
information that he should have provided to us some time ago. If this information had been available 
perhaps the confusion that the Minister is complaining about today wouldn’t exist. This is all the more 
reason why estimates should have been in, why the Land Bank should have been before us so that we 
could find these things out. We have mentioned on many occasions that we have been trying to get 
information about the Land Bank, it has been denied us and it is no wonder that confusion exists such as 
the Minister referred to today. 
 
It is unfortunate that he is keeping us in the dark about much of this information and we have to find it in 
the Press and of course it can easily be misinterpreted. 
 
Mr. Messer: — I would recommend to the Member that he look through the Saskatchewan Gazette, 
they were all gazetted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, we can’t debate these issues. 
 

School Grants 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald: — (Milestone) I should like to make a comment on the Minister’s statement. I 
noticed as usual since the beginning of the Session in January the Minister has once again carried on the 
practice of the Government announcing policy to the Press before any information is released in the 
House. Therefore I don’t have an opportunity to comment on the material laid on the Table. I do want to 
comment on what was made available to the general public. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it is with real 
regret that we the people of Saskatchewan and particularly the property taxpayers in Saskatchewan are 
not going to get the benefits of $26.4 million which was definitely allocated by the Federal Minister of 
Finance for the reduction of property taxes in the secondary school system in the Dominion of Canada. 
Provinces in Canada have been attempting for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, to get the Federal 
Government to make a contribution to the education costs in elementary and secondary schools. The 
NDP has pursued this course themselves in negotiations with Ottawa. Now for the first time, the Federal 
Government has been willing to make a contribution toward elementary and secondary education in the 
Dominion of Canada and this Government and the Minister of Education has absolutely refused to pass 
on that $26.4 million for the reduction of property grants. This would have made possible, Mr. Speaker, 
a real reduction in property taxes in the Dominion of Canada and particularly the Province of 
Saskatchewan. I should also like to say that we as yet have had no opportunity to assess the grants 
announced on property mill rates . . . 
 
Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) Mr. Speaker, may I rise on a Point of Order. It seems 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1734 

that the Member is making a statement, and is making a statement pursuant to the tabling of a document. 
The Minister of Education said nothing else. If it is indeed the rule of this House that when a document 
is tabled the Members on the other side have an opportunity to make a statement, then I would be 
delighted to be advised of it, because I wasn’t aware of it. If, in fact, it is the rule that the Member can 
reply only when the Minister makes a statement on the Orders of the Day, then I heard no statement. I 
am confused about the rule of order in which the Member for Milestone is making this statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think the Point of Order is well taken. I think that the Members are getting a little 
away from what the rules are intended for. When a document is tabled we should not have a debate on a 
tabling of a statement. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I thought maybe he was asking a question, I was waiting for him to 
ask. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Land Bank Policies 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, just one question of the Minister of Agriculture before the 
Orders of the Day. I wonder if in light of the Press release the Minister spoke of, in light of rumors and 
the other problems with respect to the Land Bank, will the Minister now reconsider his stand, his refusal 
to give us details of policies and transactions and give us a promise that during the course of this Session 
we will have the opportunity to debate this entire question. Surely, Mr. Speaker, when the Press can get 
confused, it must give credence to the view that the people of the province are equally confused as to 
where he is going with the Land Bank. He has an opportunity to reconsider and would he not give us a 
promise that he will put these details and the policies of the Land Bank before this House before we 
adjourn? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I would be more than happy to file the regulations so that not only the 
Members opposite could better inform themselves in regard to the guidelines of the Land Bank 
Commission, but also the Press. The answer is “No” in regard to the rest of the question. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 10 — Request Discontinuance of Title, ‘The Honourable’ 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. G. B. Grant (Regina 
Whitmore Park): 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1735 

That this Legislature opposes the improper use of the title “The Honourable” by a former 
Saskatchewan Cabinet Minister, C. M. Fines, now residing in Florida, and that the Legislature requests 
him to discontinue the use of this title. 

 
Mr. D. W. Michayluk: — (Redberry) Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to this resolution introduced by the 
Hon. Member for Whitmore Park in respect to his concern about the use of the title “Honourable” by an 
ex-member of this Legislature and a member of the Executive Council for 16 years. The Hon. Member 
is opposed to the fact that the one time Provincial Treasurer of Saskatchewan was improperly titled as 
“Honourable” in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, where he has resided for some 15 years and where he is 
currently residing. 
 
When I spoke initially, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that I had met Mr. Fines on several occasions during 
the time he was Provincial Treasurer. Those, Mr. Speaker, were very difficult financial years in 
Saskatchewan. I understand the Honourable Mr. Fines, the then Treasurer brought in 16 balanced 
budgets from 1944 to 1960. 
 
Mr. Fines, since 1960 has left his active participation in politics and has moved to warmer climates. Mr. 
Fines was the Minster responsible for the introduction of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance. He 
was also connected with the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) in city politics. Well, maybe I 
am wrong in that respect. 
 
Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, can you get the Hon. Member to address you or the House, he insists on 
talking to somebody behind him, I can’t hear him. 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — I don’t want to be directed by the Hon. Member how I am to speak. I am trying to 
speak as I am able to, I don’t require any directions from the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park or for 
that matter, any Member from the opposite side. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I don’t think there is anything wrong with the Member 
for Whitmore Park asking that he speak into the mike. We are as interested in hearing what he says on 
this side of the House as anyone is on that side and it is only courtesy that if you have anything 
worthwhile to say, naturally you want as many people to hear it as possible. And that was the only 
request that he speak into the mike so that we on this side could hear. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1736 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Hon. Minister of Public Health will soon have the 
hearing aid program in effect. Then if you are unable to hear, you will be able to get a hearing aid at 
reasonable cost and will hear without difficulty. 
 
Several days following the initial debate on the improper use of the word “Honourable” by the once 
Cabinet Minister, Mr. Lorne Harasen’s Line had contacted Mr. Fines in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, with 
specific questions to the period when he was the Provincial Treasurer and as to what he is doing at the 
present. Mr. Fines gave an explanation to a question asked by Mr. Harasen in respect to the use of the 
title “Honourable.” Hon. Members may recall that the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park brought in a 
clipping from a newspaper where the title was attached to Mr. Fines as Honourable C.M. Fines in charge 
of some . . . 
 
Mr. Kramer: — . . . was the . . . 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — That’s right. The explanation that Mr. Fines gave to Mr. Harasen was that it is 
customary in the United States for people who were connected with public service and where titles were 
used preceding their name, like Mr. Fines, he had the title Honourable C.M. Fines, Provincial Treasurer, 
Province of Saskatchewan, that those titles are used after they retire from public eye. As a matter of fact 
he gave instances of retired Senators living in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. They are no longer Senators but 
because as senators at one time, reference is made to them as Senator Brown or Senator Smith, whatever 
the case may be. 
 
I would ask the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park to forget the past. It is very regrettable that we have to 
bring this topic in the Legislature, particularly in a resolution of this type. 
 

That this Legislature opposes the improper use of the title “The Honourable” by a former 
Saskatchewan Cabinet Minister, C.M. Fines, now residing in Florida, and that the Legislature requests 
him to discontinue the use of the title. 

 
I suggest that as Legislative Members we have no right to forbid members of the Press in the United 
States using a title now which Mr. Fines formerly had while a Member of this Legislature. 
 
Therefore I will oppose this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, and I trust the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park 
will forgive the Hon. C.M. Fines for what they had gone through in the years when they were closely 
associated in the city of Regina instead of encouraging Members of this House to support and prohibit 
the use of the name “Honourable” even by people over which Mr. Fines has no control. 
 
I will oppose this Resolution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. F. Meakes: — (Touchwood) Mr. Speaker, I just want to rise for two or three minutes. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1737 

Of all the nonsensical resolutions that I have ever seen on an Order Paper, this one takes the cake. The 
only reason I rise is that I had the privilege and the honor of sitting in this House with the Honourable 
Clarence Fines. I really don’t care whether they call him “Honourable” down there or not. I knew 
Clarence Fines to be an honorable man. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meakes: — In fact, I consider he was one of the finest men that ever entered this Legislature and 
have sat with a lot of them. His ability, his honesty and his integrity while he was in this House was 
beyond reproach. And I just kind of object to attacks on this man who served his city and this province 
for close to a quarter of a century. Mr. Speaker, I just had to rise and say that I think this pretty small, in 
fact, not only pretty small, it is very small. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, may I rise to add a word or two. I knew Mr. Fines very well, I 
worked for him as a public servant. I had a very high regard for him as a public administrator and as a 
very, very skilled Provincial Treasurer of this province. I think anyone who looks at the financing record 
of this province from 1944 to 1960 must see that a very excellent job of financing was done. The only 
quarrel may be that it was on the conservative side. Fair enough. The circumstances in the 1940s and the 
1950s were such that a conservative approach to financing was I think dictated by the circumstances of 
the day. 
 
I listened with a good deal of interest to the words of the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) and I 
heard nothing which suggested to me that Mr. C.M. Fines was in any way responsible for the improper 
use of the words “The Honourable”. The Resolution clearly states that the improper use of the title is by 
the Hon. C.M. Fines, not by the Fort Lauderdale newspaper, not by any other newspaper, but by the 
Hon. C.M. Fines. I heard no evidence of that whatever. I think that unless the Hon. Member has some 
evidence of it he ought not to put on the Order Paper a resolution which is critical of a former Member 
and a distinguished former Member of this House. I believe that this particular resolution really doesn’t 
do the Member for Whitmore Park credit. He has a reputation in this House of being a fair-minded 
person and this does not, as I say, come up to his usual standards of fair-mindedness in this House. And 
I think that on reflection he will rather regret that he put this on the Order Paper. I, for my part, feel that 
he has not made a case and that I will certainly be voting against this resolution. I feel it unfortunate that 
it was placed on the Order Paper. I feel it is even more unfortunate that it was place on the Order Paper 
by a Member for Regina and a Member for Regina who knew the Hon. C. M. Fines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, I think there is one point that should be clarified here. And 
of course that is the resolution that appeared on the Order Paper in no way at all questions the integrity, 
the honesty or the performance of the man while he 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1738 

was Provincial Treasurer or in any other responsible position that he may have held here in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. If the Members opposite have taken the view that this is the point and the purpose of 
this motion then I respectfully suggest that they have not got the point of the motion at all. The point of 
the motion is whether the term “Honourable” which is supposedly being used by Mr. Fines in his present 
abode in Florida is in fact, a title that he is entitled to use. In fact, it could be almost considered that 
using a title to which he is not now entitled to is casting a reflection on every Member of this House. 
Now I am sure that when Members opposite are defeated, if not in the next election, some day along the 
line Ministers on that side of the House will be defeated the same as Ministers have been on this side in 
the past and certainly in the present and in the future; I doubt very much that there is any Minister or 
former Minister in this House today who will, once his time in public life is over, will deliberately go 
out and use the title “Honourable”. I think this is the point and the only point that is being raised in this 
resolution that: we wonder whether a person who held an honored position in this House and did earn 
the title and use the title “Honourable” under the circumstances when he was entitled to do so; whether 
this is a good reflection on the House that he served in the manner which he did; and whether the 
continued use of it when I think it is quite clear in parliamentary procedure that he is not entitled to the 
use of that term today, if it does not in fact reflect upon all those who are presently holding that title, 
who have held it in the past and who will no doubt hold it in the future. And I think that is the only point 
of this resolution. It raises this point as to whether this is a reflection upon the responsibility and dignity 
of this Legislature. 
 
Mr. G. Snyder: — (Moose Jaw South) Mr. Speaker, just in passing I think the point has been made and 
made well that the charge that the former Hon. C. M. Fines was using that designation improperly, has 
not been established and I would suggest that probably it has not been established any more than it 
might properly be established in this House that the new Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. 
MacDonald) is somehow using a designation improperly. You will probably find on your desk a Xerox 
piece of material that is addressed to the Hon. Don MacDonald. I think this is really very small potatoes. 
I think it is something that could be properly represented as a waste of the time of this House and surely 
there are things of more consequence that the Legislature could be discussing. 
 
Mr. G. B. Grant: — (Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, first of all I wish to take back what I said about the 
Hon. Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk). I would just as soon he did not use the microphone 
because he has so little to say that I wouldn’t have missed any if he had turned right around and faced 
the back of the room. I regret that he is not here and I hope somebody will convey that message to him, 
if they don’t I will do it myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only brought this to the attention of the House because it was quite apparent, if not to the 
Members of this House, to many other people, that this just wasn’t a ‘loose use’ of this title by other 
people. In my remarks I said I had no objection whatsoever to the casual use of these titles. I was the 
first one to mention that in this House. I still have no objection to it because I realize you can’t stop 
people from 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1739 

doing this. But this is more than a casual use. There is no doubt in my mind that the interview was given 
to the young lady because she didn’t know the difference between a provincial treasurer and a minister 
of the treasury, which we didn’t have at that time. She didn’t know the difference between a deputy 
Prime Minister and she promoted him to the “Right Honourable” at one stage. But this is just an 
indication of what was going on down there and Mr. Fines was doing nothing to correct it. 
 
I think it really has more sense to it than the Hon. Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) is prepared 
to admit and I am disappointed that he made that statement because usually he is pretty well under 
control but I seem to have got his blood pressure up a bit. But it must have more sense to it, or bearing, 
than he admits because there were four or five who spoke to it over there. And we on this side of the 
House until you raised these points had no intention of pushing the matter any further because I feel that 
we have accomplished what we wanted whether you defeat the motion or not. Because in recent 
publications in the Fort Lauderdale area the “Honourable” Clarence Fines is now referred to as Mr. 
Fines. And on a radio program in February he was referred to as Mr. Fines. So I am quite confident and I 
think Mr. Fines and I are still on speaking terms because I understand while I didn’t hear the radio 
program, he invited me down there and said if I came down he would see to it that I was addressed as 
“The Honourable”. Well I would be very glad to go down. I don’t think I will partake of this hospitality 
and I have no desire to have the title used if I do go down. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
Resolution No. 6 — Urges the Government of Canada to Amend the National Transportation Act 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. W. A. Robbins 
(Saskatoon Nutana Centre): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to amend the National Transportation Act so that 
national transport policy be directed to promote provincial and regional economic development rather 
than act as a brake on industrial expansion. 

 
Mr. J. R. Kowalchuk: — (Melville) Mr. Speaker, I think this Resolution is an excellent resolution. It is 
timely, it’s to the point. And never was there more need to look at this question of policies regarding 
National transportation than there is right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we speak of national transportation policy we must remember that it is within the 
total sphere of transportation that we are talking about. We are all too inclined to look at transportation 
from the viewpoint of the railroad, more recently truck-tractor but included must be air-transport, pipe 
transport and others. 
 
Each in its own way has a definite bearing on the working of the other. And trucking in particular has 
had a tremendous bearing on rail line operation. 
 
The whole question of transportation must be looked at in an overall global direction but emphasis on 
what the policies 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1740 

will do to Western Canada and in our case what will it do to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now having said this, Mr. Speaker, I still maintain as did the other speakers that the crisis in 
transportation right now is railroads. And it is rail lines freight policies that must be looked at 
immediately. Rail lines are still the life blood of prairie agriculture. 
 
Now I will not go into a review of statistics which were so ably presented the other day by the mover of 
this Resolution, the Hon. Member from Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) and also the very excellent and 
very capable and statistically analyzed information on the CN or the CP by the Member for 
Assiniboia-Bengough (Mr. Lang). 
 
I would only be repeating the facts, the facts which prove beyond the shadow of a doubt, that the 
‘corporate rip-off’ by these and other companies such as the Hudson’s Bay Company, ever since Canada 
became a nation in 1867, and even before that, especially in the rail line transportation have had very 
detrimental effects on the growth and the expansion of Western Canada. 
 
We are asking, once again, that this be changed: that Western Canada transportation policies be changed 
to benefit the West rather than the all powerful central East; that the Federal Government look at the use 
of Port Churchill in a realistic manner; that, in fact the practice of discrimination based on eastern 
numerical strength be done way with once and for all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the greatest single factor that has maintained Western Canadians, as “hewers of wood and 
drawers of water,” for Central Canada has been the national transport policies imposed by the Federal 
Government, as I said before, ever since the formation of Canada. 
 
Now there was a time that a policy favoring Central Canada, Ontario and Quebec, was not considered 
that important. And if Western Canada hollered a little, they were pacified of course by some goodies 
from the Federal Government. And today, Mr. Speaker, that is not acceptable. All people, regardless of 
political beliefs want fair pool and fair play. The people of Western Canada realize that we, here out 
West, are going to lose altogether no matter what our other differences might be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happens in Canadian transportation policy especially as to how it affects western 
agricultural Canada, will have a greater bearing as to whether Canada stays as one united nation, a 
greater bearing than the bilingual and bicultural question that confronts us today. 
 
Let me illustrate just two glaring examples of this discrimination. CN and CP rail charges per ton for 
freighting farm machinery and other steel products to Saskatchewan are over 130 per cent greater than 
that charged on the same materials being shipped to Vancouver. To ship rapeseed oil it costs more than 
100 per cent than the shipping of rapeseed itself, blatantly evident discrimination against western 
processors and benefiting the eastern plants. The inevitable result of this practice will eventually mean 
closure of our Saskatchewan rapeseed processing plants and will, Mr. Speaker, eliminate all chances of 
additional rapeseed plants being set up. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1741 

This could be paralleled in many other fields of endeavor in Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, whether it is 
in the area of shipping goods, grain, rapeseed oil or exporting prairie made farm machinery, or 
importing the goods that farmers need to operate that great industry, agriculture, transportation policies 
involving transportation costs determine the final outcome. 
 
Transportation policies will determine whether Western Canada, including Saskatchewan, will diversify 
its economy, build up, expand and become more viable, or simply stagnate and deteriorate community 
wise and be allowed to become a back pasture for the eastern interests, simply to be used and exploited 
when they feel there is a need for them to do so. 
 
Now if we don’t put up a concerted strenuous fight, if all Canadians are not made aware of the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, if the financial greed of Central Canada supersedes what is in the best interests of all of 
Canada, then indeed the ideal of Canadian unity, Canadian independence, Canadian nationalism will be 
completely dissipated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one may be asked: Surely you don’t mean to say that the dismal picture that you paint can 
be totally attributed to the Canadian National Transportation policy? Indeed, Mr. Speaker, a great deal 
can be attributed to it. 
 
Our record of achievement over the past decade or two has proved that we in the West are capable of 
expansion and increased production, that indeed we have been able to export many western 
commodities, but records will also show that the cost of transporting these goods — this has been shown 
by the Members on this side of the House in other speeches — that the cost of transportation either in 
raw or in particular finished products, has either forced the producer out of production or forced him to 
move to closer markets, but most are forced out of the picture altogether. That is where the farmer and 
his associates are finding themselves today. We are boxed in by many detrimental factors, none being 
more serious than the transportation policies imposed upon them by the Federal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to promote provincial and regional development we must have a new national 
non-discriminatory transportation policy. The Federal Government to date, has shown little or no 
inclination or interest, or realization of this fact. The composition of the different boards dealing with 
these important factors indicate that eastern interests are being guarded and protected. 
 
The lack of western members in strength on the Board of Transport Commissioners is deliberate, Mr. 
Speaker. All this has to change. Western Canadian problems must be recognized as Canadian problems. 
 
Now an excellent summing up, I thought, was contained in an editorial in the Leader-Post entitled, 
“Freight Rate Discrimination.” It says this: 
 

Elected and appointed government officials from the four Western provinces are meeting in Saskatoon 
later this month with businessmen and other interested groups for a two-day conference on 
transportation problems faced 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1742 

by the West. The object is to agree on a common attitude for presentation to the Trudeau Government 
at the conference on western problems scheduled to take place in Winnipeg in July. 
 
Let’s hope one result from the Saskatoon meeting will be a clear, unequivocal demand for an 
immediate end to discrimination against the Prairies in freight rates. Blatant discrimination is no way 
to run the railways and allowing it to continue is no way to run a country. 

 
All of us regardless of the many differences of opinion should unite to urge the Federal Government of 
Canada that the National Transportation Act must be amended so that we in the West are not 
discriminated against. That indeed if the Western Canadian economy is to become fully alive and 
vibrant, buoyant and healthy and keep our western communities alive, then now is the time for these 
changes to take place. 
 
I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that there will be unanimous approval of this Resolution by the Assembly. 
And because I am sure that a number of other Members on this side of the House and on the other as 
well will want to participate and say something more to this all important question, I beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 7 — Old Age Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement Increase 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. P. P. Mostoway 
(Hanley): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to proceed immediately with legislation to 
implement a program which includes the following: 
 
1. An increase in the Old Age Security pension to $125 per month. 
2. The Guaranteed Income Supplement be increased so that the combined Old Age Security pension 
and Guaranteed Income Supplement would provide the single pensioner with a guaranteed income of 
$225 a month and a married couple of $375 a month. 

 
Mr. D. Boldt: — (Rosthern) Mr. Speaker, the amount of the old age pension cheque has always been a 
political football for years. I think that it is a disgrace to use our old people in this manner to win 
elections and political support. 
 
The argument that the old age pensioner cannot live on $100 a month, if this is his or her only income, is 
valid. However, this is far from being the case. Pension plans upon retirement have been in existence for 
decades and thousands of Canadians, who have retired, have reached the age of 65, are on good pensions 
and are not in need of additional pensions whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day — and I want to make a reference to the gentleman — the Hon. T. C. 
Douglas was in this House. He has served in this House for a good number of years and retired 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1743 

in 1962, I believe, on a pension, on the maximum pension. What the pension was at that time I don’t 
know but today it is $8,000. He is drawing a good salary as an MP today and if he should retire 
tomorrow he might be on full pension as a Member of the House of Commons, which could bring his 
pension to a total of maybe $15,000 a year. And yet the Member for Hanley wants this gentleman to get 
an extra $25. 
 
It is universal, it is not to the needy. I believe that if one were to investigate individuals, we would find it 
quite common to come across individuals who receive pensions from $500 to $1,000 per month. I, as a 
taxpayer, am absolutely opposed that these people receive additional pensions. 
 
As an MLA, the Member for Hanley, if he is around long enough under present pension conditions, he 
would receive a pension of $8,000 per year — and there is talk that this might be increased. Surely the 
Member is not suggesting that with the present $100 old age pension plus the Canada Pension income 
and his MLA pension plan, plus his superannuation cheque as a teacher, and in many instances it could 
be that the wife is also getting some kind of a pension, that the Canadian taxpayer should be asked to 
pay, universally across the board another pension plus supplemental allowance to guarantee an income 
enough to live on without taking into consideration the pensions we are already now receiving. 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Pensions on a means test. 
 
Mr. Boldt: — Yes, that is what I mean, absolutely on the means test. It is about time that we got our 
senses together and give those people who need it more than $125 a month, and those who don’t need it, 
including my mother, she doesn’t need even the $100. 
 
I am absolutely opposed to increased old age pensions universally across the Board. There are thousands 
of Canadians who need not rob the Federal Treasury and on the other hand there are Canadians who 
might not get along with the $125, particularly if they should spend their last days in a nursing home and 
have no other pension plan to fall back on. 
 
The Federal Government has now increased the basic pension to $100 per month. I believe this will be 
effective April 1st. I would hope that no government will ever go beyond this amount except on a means 
test. 
 
The means test today is a very simple matter. Those people who pay income e tax should not be entitled 
to more old age pensions. The computers do this work for the government. There is no argument that 
inspectors are necessary and that this would become a cumbersome thing. 
 
However, the Member for Hanley, when speaking on this matter, argued that no one could live on $100 
per month and left the impression that all our senior citizens of Canada have to no other income. Surely 
this is not the case with the Saskatchewan civil servants. There are many, many people in the service 
that will retire. Some have retired on I would say between $5,000 to $10,000 pension. If he is of that 
opinion then I suggest to him — and I am glad the Premier is in — I would suggest to the Premier and to 
this Government that if you want to be so generous, then let the Provincial Government, I would call 
upon 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1744 

Them to foot the extra cost. I will therefore move, seconded by the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. 
McPherson). 
 
That all the words after the word “Assembly be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

recommend to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan to proceed immediately with 
legislation to implement a program which includes the following: 
 
1. A $25 per month pension to all Saskatchewan old age security recipients. 
2. A Provincial Guaranteed Income Supplement to be added on to the Federal Supplement to 
guarantee a single pensioner with an income of $225 a month and a married couple of $375 a month. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The debate continued on the motion and the amendment. 
 
Mr. H. H. P. Baker: — (Regina Wascana) Mr. Speaker, after listening to the Member across the way, I 
was looking for an amendment that he was going to ask to cut the old age pension, this was indicated in 
his first remarks. I see the amendment, if I get it correctly, recommends $15 over and above the 
supplement. Is that your amendment? I haven’t got a copy yet, but it was certainly an about face, from 
the way he spoke at the start. I thought for sure that he was going to say let’s take the pensions away 
from the old people. 
 
I want to say to him that at no time do I support the Means Tests. While we have them today, those on 
Old Age Security are under a means test and of course those on the supplement of $170 are also under a 
means test. I don’t agree with these proceedings and I never did. However, we must go along with them. 
They are regulations today under the Dominion Statutes. I would have hoped that he would have written 
to Ottawa before Mr. Turner brought in his Budget, to ask him to add another $25 a month to it. I don’t 
think that he should have brought that amendment here. 
 
However, I am very pleased that he has a change of heart. It has taken him a long time to have him move 
and follow the policy of humanity first, in asking for another $25. It is surprising that he is now 
supporting and believing in democratic socialism. 
 
Mr. Cody: — He didn’t really mean it! 
 
Mr. Baker: — He didn’t really mean it, one Member says here. I am very pleased that he has moved it 
and to find that there is a change of heart on that side. But I totally disagree with him on the Means 
Tests. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I am responsible . . . 
 
Mr. Baker: — Mr. McPherson said that he is responsible for pushing him to move it. Well, I know that 
the Member for Lakeview would become a socialist before the Member for Rosthern or Whitmore Park, 
that is for sure. I will say that much for him. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1745 

I am very pleased to take part in this debate, Mr. Speaker. The amendment, after thinking on it for 
awhile, certainly needs some refining, but most important of all, it lacks real sincerity. I don’t mind 
amendments being made if the people moving them do so in a sincere way and bring them here with real 
thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very anxious to speak to this motion in the affirmative in respect to increased 
pensions for senor citizens. On the one hand I am proud to have the opportunity to add my voice to those 
who call for further provision for our pioneers. On the other hand I am deeply ashamed that this motion 
or amendment and our many speeches are even necessary. I cannot possibly express to you the dismay I 
feel when I consider how the years have been allowed to drift by while governments have remained 
inactive and senior citizens in our country have been forced to live in poverty, or near poverty, most of 
the time. 
 
All across this vast country of ours today, people are enjoying the fruits of labor of another generation. 
The quality of life that is offered to the natives, a quality made possible through the efforts of our senior 
citizens is envied by the inhabitants of many other countries. We, in Saskatchewan should be especially 
aware of the contribution made by our senior citizens. This province, and indeed this country has a 
relatively short history. We can survey that history and can see very easily the trials and the heartbreaks 
that faced the men and the women who settled here, and who through strength of body and undying 
inner courage produced the Saskatchewan we know today. The Saskatchewan of which we are so proud. 
One would expect that we should be overcome with a sense of gratitude and that we should feel inspired 
to look to our senior citizens with sincere respect and admiration. One would think that we should be 
doing everything in our power to repay even in small measure, the debt we owe them. After all, Canada 
is one of the few countries whose pioneers are still alive. We should be honored to have the opportunity 
of knowing these individuals. 
 
But as it is, just what exactly is our relationship to our senior citizens? The standard of living which we 
grant our pioneers certainly would not suggest appreciation for a job well done. Let’s face it! We all 
know many people spend as much on entertainment and luxury in any given month, as the average 
senior citizen is provided to live on. Why the great discrepancy? Why can no financial arrangement be 
made whereby an aging generation, to whom we owe so much, to whom we owe everything we have 
and are today, can not be raised to even minimum standards of living. I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is no reason. We know there is plenty of wealth in Canada. Even Canada’s Finance Minister said 
so and a good portion of this must be shared with our senior citizens. I can see no excuse, fellow 
Members, for the fiddling around we have done year after year in this area. Is it any wonder that so 
many of the older people are discouraged at the inaction of our governments today. I have to say the 
worst offender over the years has been our senior government, which has practically complete power 
and responsibility. I’m not pointing at any political party, this has been the case all along. I believe that 
through continued application from the various levels of government, more and more recognition will 
eventually be given to our senior citizens and to their plight. 
 
It is without doubt our duty as a Provincial Legislature to continue to press the Federal Government for 
more action. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1746 

The New Democrats in Ottawa have made the battle of the senior citizens their battle, resulting in the 
modest changes in the basic pension to $100 a month and to $170 per month to those requiring the 
supplement. 
 
The basic pension of $100 seems to be a shortsighted policy and it does not meet the increasing living 
costs in this country. I say the basic pension should be at least $150 per month, or say $125 a month this 
year and $150 per month beginning in 1974. Those needing the supplement, rather than the $170 per 
month should receive at least $200 or $225 per month. For man and wife the allowance would be $375. 
 
Seeing Ottawa did not have the foresight to raise pensions for those on supplement, it is now incumbent 
upon us to raise it at least another $30 per month, bringing it up to $200, as the minimum guaranteed 
income. I say we have to do it now, and during this Session. 
 
As a Provincial Government, we the New Democrats, have made real progress for our senior citizens. 
We have managed to help make their declining years a bit more bearable in some areas. The immediate 
elimination of deterrent fees came as a welcome relief to the many who find frequent visits to the doctor 
and hospitals a necessity. Following this, we removed the medical care premium for people of 65 years 
and over; a move for which we were lauded by the pensioners. The agreement on the inclusion of 
chiropractic treatment as an insured health service has widened the range of medical attention possible 
for all people in Saskatchewan. It means that our senior citizens have one more service included in that 
free package we gave them not so long ago and this is good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that Mr. Taylor, the Minister of Social Services, under whose particular jurisdiction the needs 
and desires of our senior citizens fall, has the welfare of these people at heart. The $3 million allocated 
for our homes for the aged is certainly an humanitarian gesture. The total of $639,815 to be paid out by 
the department in grants to assist with the cost of construction of housing for senior citizens is 
creditable. Similarly I am pleased to see that a substantial amount of money has been provided to 
improve community services for the aged — $61,000 to be precise. I know that such services as 
Meals-on-Wheels in various centres throughout our province have been greatly appreciated by our 
senior citizens. The research assistance provided through the Community Grants and Standards Division 
of the Department of Social Services has helped communities to establish and maintain programs and 
services for their elderly residents. It is hoped that the existence of this division will help make other 
communities aware of their responsibility to the aged. 
 
I am glad to see, Mr. Speaker, that throughout our province several communities are in the process of 
construction housing facilities through cost-sharing with the Federal Government and Provincial 
Government. They have been able to provide pleasant surroundings where the older residents of the 
locality can live and still retain that degree of independence which is so important to them. 
 
In 1972, Mr. Wood was able to announce the construction of such units at Moose Jaw, Biggar, 
Humboldt, Yorkton, Weyburn, Rocanville, Saskatoon and Regina. We need to hear more 
announcements like this. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1747 

Many people in public life would like to take credit for the initiation and development and construction 
of senior citizens’ accommodations in the city of Regina. The recent opening of the “Heritage” was an 
exciting event in this city. It is located in my constituency. I believe in most cases where such occasions 
take place it was customary that the MLA was informed of the opening and I would think should be part 
of the program, regardless of on which side of the House he may sit. I must say, while I was not 
permitted to take part in the program, I didn’t even get an invitation. I had to invite myself. Perhaps I 
wouldn’t have been slighted if I didn’t have a hand in the development. After convincing my city 
council to approve it, it took me two years to get this project under way. Arrangements were all 
completed when I left office. I won’t tell you the treatment I got from the former Premier and Mr. Estey 
in trying to get it through. I will say, Cy MacDonald, who later became Minister, supported me on some 
projects and I will give him credit for that; Mr. Boldt did support me on the first pioneer village 
development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — But the man who really stuck with me to get it approved, that is the Heritage and the 
extended pioneer village, was Mr. Andras in Ottawa, as CMHC wanted to make this their first pilot 
project — a high-rise for the elderly. They requested that they design it as the first one of its kind in 
Canada. I agreed to this. However, they were to associate themselves with a local architect. It is now 
completed — 127 living quarters for our pioneers. I’m not one to look for praise, but I do resent that 
some people like to take credit when they were actually a hindrance rather than of assistance, and to me 
to not even be asked to be a participant in an event like this, is a gross insult. I say, without fear of 
contradiction from anyone, that if I hadn’t initiated this and carried the ball through those trying years, it 
would not be a reality today. I think it is most despicable and a most despicable ploy on the part of those 
guilty of such disrespect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — I could tell a similar story on the development of the $2.3 million new addition to 
Pioneer Village Nursing Home which I had initiated simultaneously. This project, now completed, 
houses close to another 300 people for nursing care, which has recently been filled too. This was in 
addition to a $2.5 million project built in the early 1960s in Pioneer Village. I shall be looking forward 
to that opening as well. 
 
Many other low rental housing projects were built in 1959 and the 1960s which also provided senior 
citizens’ quarters; 109 units were built in Regent Court, leaving some 30 units for pensioners; 141 units 
were built in Greer Court, which also accommodated some senior citizens; 60 single family units were 
built which took in some of our aged. Many church groups in the 1960s built homes for senior citizens. 
 
I believe I should list them. First of all I would like to say that Pioneer Village today, in its complete 
complex can now accommodate 824 people. Wascana Hospital which was built 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1748 

under a CCF Government, formerly known as the Geriatric Centre, was a great boon to this city before 
the 1960s. During the 1960s the Santa Maria Home was built; Hewitt Place; Mutchmor Lodge; The 
Lutheran Home; Salvation Army Eventide Home; Qu’Appelle House. Private homes also included 
Parkside Nursing Home; Extendicare; Collette Home and Central Park Lodge. Well over $18 million 
was spent in Regina from 1959 up to the present for our senior citizens. I hope that we, in the future, will 
keep abreast with needed and changing conditions for the elderly. 
 
The implementation of a new program to provide hearing aids at a reduced cost will come as very 
welcome news to many elderly residents in Saskatchewan. I think that we all agree that the cost of 
hearing aids, over the years had not been within the reach of our pensioners. I am pleased the New 
Democratic Government was able to take this important action. 
 
This year in Saskatchewan senior citizens will be able to make much needed improvements to their 
home through the grants from $200 to $500 being made available to senior citizens for this purpose. 
Admittedly no major renovations would be possible on such a sum, but at least we are going in the right 
direction. 
 
The $285,000 budgeted for community services to elderly people who are living at home, should greatly 
increase the potential in that area. 
 
The new system of payment to be inaugurated in respect to special care homes should ensure better care 
for the many senior citizens housed in that type of institution. 
 
The Property Improvement Grant raised from $78 to $144 will be of great assistance to many of our 
pensioners in this city and throughout the province. In many instances this will actually cover half of 
their tax bill. In my opinion it really is a tax cut on property, which in essence is our basic policy to 
remove the tax load from property, particularly our homes. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, shows that provincially we are concerned about our senior citizens. Every year we 
are making more progress. But as valuable as our efforts may seem to us the fact still remains that the 
pension paid to senior citizens by the Federal Government is inadequate. 
 
I noted with interest in a study done in the city of Saskatoon not long ago, that the great majority of the 
senior citizens felt that an increase in income of $40 per month would improve living conditions to their 
satisfaction. Not a grasping lot are they? But I say that pensions should be raised to at least $200 per 
month, for those on supplement. I also say, Mr. Speaker, that the Canada Pension Plan should be revised 
to pay pensions at 60 years of age for men and 58 years of age for women. Actually the overall pension 
payment program and the Canada Pension Plan should have been put together at the outset of the 
Canada Pension scheme. 
 
The New Democrats in British Columbia supplemented the pension. The New Democrats in Manitoba, I 
understand, are about to do the same thing. It is our responsibility to get into a cash-sharing arrangement 
with Ottawa as soon as possible so that payment can be made to those in need of at least $200 to $225 
per month. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1749 

I am sure that the Members on Both sides of this House are agreed upon the importance of the motion 
that is before us. I know that I supporter wholeheartedly all efforts to improve the lot of our senior 
citizens. I do believe that the time is long overdue and the Federal Government should wake up to the 
gravity of the situation. I hope that the united support in our Legislature could evoke some positive 
response from the Federal Government on behalf of our senior citizens. However, it appears that Ottawa 
will not act on this further at this time, so I make a strong recommendation to our own Provincial 
Government and to the Finance Minister, Mr. Cowley, to bring in a Bill to provide $30 per month for 
our pensioners, making to $200 per month, as a guaranteed income per month, a basic income to our 
senior citizens on supplement. I suggest that this provision be made now and to be made effective July 
1st of this year. Had Ottawa included this amount in their Budget it wouldn’t be necessary for us to have 
to add funds to compensate these people on supplement — the $125 old age security would have been 
much better than the $100 — I wouldn’t have to make this speech and request more today. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that while the NDP have done a fine job in Ottawa, I would have hoped that 
Mr. Lewis would have put a price tag in giving support to the present government today and I think that 
price tag should have been higher for old age pensioners and I would have suggested that as of this year 
$125 per month for those on old age security, $150 per month as of January 1, 1974, and $200 per 
month, now at least, for those on supplement as a guaranteed income and that $225 could have come 
later. So I say that I would have hoped that our Government there would have done this and my NDP 
colleagues actually should have asked for fixed amounts before they gave support to the government of 
the day. Otherwise, this will be done for many years and I think that our pensioners need it now. I 
congratulate the Government on bringing it part of the way. I don’t condemn them for it. I congratulate 
them, but it didn’t go far enough. I would have hoped the minority group in Ottawa, the power that our 
Party wields there as 31 Members, that this would have been the opportune time to put price tags on 
needs for our senior citizens, and also a price tag on things for the western farmer so that he would have 
some form of guaranteed income too. 
 
I think we missed the boat, Mr. Speaker, on this and I would still urge the Federal Government, if we are 
going to be continually supporting them there, that they do more in supplementing the income of the 
western people, pensioners and farmers as well. The price tag that I would have put on for the farmers is 
similar to the remarks I made in my speech on the Throne Speech, to have so much paid for a number of 
bushels of wheat on the first grain sold; and you all know what that figure was, 2,500 bushels at $3.00 
per bushel and it be paid to every farmer in the West. This would give them a measure of a guaranteed 
income. 
 
I hope that we may still do more there and ask the Federal Government to reconsider their positions and 
do something for the West. This is our opportunity while we have a minority government and you and I 
on both sides of this House should support them. Then they will deserve our support if they come in 
with such a response. They didn’t go far enough, Mr. Speaker, and I would hope that our good NDP 
friends and colleagues in Ottawa will request more over the next month or two. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1750 

Mr. Speaker, I support this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I hate to burden the House with the 
old cliché that I hadn’t intended to enter the debate, and really I hadn’t until the Member for Rosthern 
(Mr. Boldt) rose and I think left some incorrect impressions with relation to pensions. He made some 
comments about the Member from Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) getting a pension of $8,000 a year when he 
leaves this House and if he is successful in staying here for a while. He would have to be here a mighty 
long time. In fact, few, if any, Members of this House will ever draw $8,000 a year pension in terms of 
the MLAs’ pension fund. The individual would have to have at least 25 or 26 sessions and that’s pretty 
difficult to accomplish. I should like to point out that I was here from 1964 to 1967, I left involuntarily, I 
might say, and came back in 1971 and 36 of the 59 Members who were here in 1967 when I left had 
departed. Two of us did return, Mr. Larson from Pelly and myself. I might just use an example to 
illustrate the point. A Member who had been a Member of the Federal House for a period of time and 
was in this House for a period of time and even sat as a Cabinet Minister (Sandy Nicholson from 
Saskatoon) does not draw any pension from this Legislature. He did not qualify in terms of the 
regulations related to the number of sessions he sat in this House. Frankly, I think that is one of the basic 
things wrong with our pensions. Individuals should get pensions for their period of service. When we get 
worried about the fact that some individual may end up with too large a pension we should realize the 
income tax system taxes a goodly portion of those funds. I can cite many cases of individuals who have 
sat in this House who are in pretty severe financial circumstances due to the fact that the pension fund 
really is not accomplishing what it set out to do. 
 
I should like to say that Mr. Boldt, in my opinion, had one point in his favor in terms of his remarks 
when he mentioned that flat rate increases had some serious defects. They do. It is quite obvious if 
Members think about the situation that there are some clear defects in a flat rate pension increase. 
Obviously this is true because the man living in Corner Brook, Newfoundland can live much more 
cheaply than the man living in Toronto or Montreal. In fact when the Canada Pension Plan was initiated, 
and incidentally that was a plan expounded by the former leader of the CCF, Mr. M. J. Coldwell, back as 
far as 1945, and if you want to check the record you will find 11 out of the 12 sections of the program he 
presented at that time later became law in the Canada Pension Plan. The purpose of the Plan was to have 
an earnings related plan which would eventually prevent the necessity of giving increases related to the 
Old Age Security on a flat rate basis. Also I think Members should clearly keep in mind that the Old 
Age Pension Security Fund has a tax base and it receives payments from income tax and sales tax at the 
federal level and the pension must therefore bear some relationship to the payments that are made into 
that fund. 
 
I noticed that one of the Members speaking recently made some comment with respect to retirement at 
an earlier age. I certainly agree with that, but I must also point out that there are costs involved here that 
we should be aware of. I think it 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1751 

was mentioned that males should be retired at 60 under the Canada Pension Plan and females at 58. I 
hope women’s groups won’t be against me in terms of this remark but that is not realistic because in 
actual fact women are not the weaker sex. They are tougher and they last longer and the costs are greater 
in terms of retiring women than they are in terms of retiring men. The only thing that women can do 
about it is to die off earlier and that is not a very bright prospect. 
 
Insofar as the Resolution itself is concerned, although I feel it has defects and I have mentioned this in 
terms of my comments, I would support it in a general way because of the necessity of attempting to 
keep up with the very heavy inflationary trend that we have in our country. Obviously there are people 
who are caught very severely in terms of this sort of thing. The Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) has 
mentioned the fact that some people will get fairly substantial pensions but that can be and is taxed back 
through the income tax rate. In a general way, of course, I support the Resolution but I ask Members 
realistically to face up to the facts in relation to pensions and I point out once again, that unless we get to 
the stage where we actually pay a pension for the period of service with the money set aside for that 
pension on a vested basis owned by the employee and locked in for that purpose payable at pensionable 
age, we will not solve pension problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. M. McPherson: — (Regina Lakeview) Mr. Speaker, there will be more said about this and there 
are several Members on this side who want to speak on the amendment and on the Resolution. I beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 8 — Construction of 40 Miles of Rail Line 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. E. F. Gardner 
(Moosomin): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Federal Government to: 
 
1. Immediately construct the 40 miles of rail line to connect Ashcroft, British Columbia on the main 
line of the CNR and the CPR with Clinton, British Columbia on the B. C. Railway. 
 
2. Develop the required grain storage and loading facilities at the Port of Squamish in order to 
provide an alternative for the movement of grain from the Prairies to west coast terminals. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): 
 
That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

Commends the Government of Saskatchewan for bringing to the attention of the Federal Government 
last year the need to construct 40 miles of rail line to connect 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1752 

Ashcroft, British Columbia on the main line of the CNR and CPR with Clinton, B. C. on the B. C. 
Railway and, further, urges the Federal Government to: (a) immediately undertake construction of the 
said 40 miles, and (b) develop grain storage and loading facilities at Squamish and Prince Rupert for 
the better movement of grain from the Prairies. 

 
Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate on this job when you lose your voice 
but after the Attorney General spoke on this Resolution the other day I feel that I should say a few 
words. I should like to re-emphasize our position and make it clear on this particular resolution. We are 
not suggesting that this is the answer to all our present and future grain moving problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the Hon. Member rose before I got this motion straightened out. He was 
the original mover of the motion and now the Hon. Member is closing the debate, so if any Member 
wishes to speak before the Hon. Member they would have to do so now. I don’t know whether I 
proposed that question. 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Well, I was a little disappointed I though perhaps some of them would speak, Mr. 
Speaker. We are not suggesting that this particular resolution is the answer to all our present and future 
grain-handling problems. We feel that this is one of quite a number of proposals that deserve very close 
scrutiny, one of a very large number. We realize that some problems could be involved and we didn’t 
dwell on these in the debate but certainly there would be a few problems that would have to be worked 
out. The Crows Nest Pass rates may not apply to the B. C. Railroad and this would have to be done by 
negotiation. There are some problems perhaps with conservationists who object to ships moving up 
Howe Sound so close to Vancouver. But we had hoped that this motion could be passed and supported 
by all Members. 
 
We are disappointed that the Government Members and especially the Attorney General (Mr. 
Romanow) felt that it was necessary to play political games with this particular resolution.. We were 
amused by the Attorney General’s speech and if you will recall the other day, Mr. Speaker, he got up in 
this House and off the cuff made quite a speech on this particular motion. We were amused but we were 
enlightened. We were amused when he stood there with the Debates and Proceedings in his hand and 
talked about the terrible things that the Member from Moosomin and the Member from Cannington (Mr. 
Weatherald) had said in the debate last year. Then he proceeded to quote a bit from the Member from 
Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), something that he had said. Then he pointed to the Member from 
Moosomin and the Member from Cannington and called us the gold dust twins and again re-emphasized 
the terrible things we had said last year in this particular debate. Then again he quoted the Member from 
Lumsden (Mr. Lane) and told what he said in the debate. But he neglected to quote what I said in the 
debate and, of course, for a very good reason. He had the record of the debate in his hand and he knew, 
Mr. Speaker, that I had not spoken in this debate at all. He must have known because he was waving the 
Debates and Proceedings around. I should like to ask you, Mr. Speaker, what does this do for the 
credibility of the Attorney General? Now we could have got up and objected because both the Member 
for 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1753 

Cannington and myself knew that we hadn’t said a word in this debate. But really in doing this he was 
making our case. He was proving that his credibility was low, he was proving that his mention of this 
railroad last year just wasn’t believable. He was proving that if official sources were seriously going to 
look at this proposal then the suggestion would have to come from someone with some credibility, not 
someone who would get up and wave the Debates and Proceedings and talk about the terrible things that 
we had said, when he knew very well we hadn’t spoken in the debate. 
 
Of course, this is why we introduced the Resolution in the first place. We wanted to lend some 
credibility to this particular suggestion. We have made our point, the records of the House will show our 
position on this particular resolution. We are, of course, not going to vote for the childish amendment 
introduced by the Attorney General. We regret that this proposal is going to be denied unanimous 
approval because of the meaningless, political tampering of the Attorney General. The NDP have 
destroyed a good resolution for political reasons and it shows perhaps that they really don’t care about 
the grain movement or the problems at the West Coast. This Resolution certainly deserved better 
treatment than it was given by the Attorney General in this debate and I am sure that all the people in 
Saskatchewan will agree with this. However, as I have stated, we have made our position clear, we have 
given credibility to a very worthwhile project. This is what we intended to do and I believe we have 
succeeded. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Resolution No. 11 — To Investigate and Report on Program Changes at Saskatchewan Hospital 
North Battleford 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. G. B. Grant (Regina 
Whitmore Park): 
 

That this Legislative Assembly recommend to the Government of Saskatchewan that a Legislative 
Committee be established to investigate and report on: 
 
(1) Program changes at Saskatchewan Hospital — North Battleford since July 1, 1971. 
(2) Staff changes since July 1, 1971, including an examination of new position created and 
qualifications of persons appointed. 
(3) Staff morale. 
(4) Deaths from accidental or unnatural causes since July 1, 1971. 
(5) Any other matters affecting the quality of care or efficiency of operation. 

 
Hon. W. E. Smishek: — (Minister of Health) Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park 
pleaded with us that he wanted the debate on this Resolution to be non-political. Let me quote him: 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1754 

I am going to do my level best to keep this on a non-political plane. I feel that the matter is of such 
importance I do not feel it should be kicked around in the Press by me. 

 
He went on to say that, “We need an investigation, let’s have an impartial one.” 
 
Does he really believe that a legislative committee could or would be impartial or would be 
non-political, Mr. Speaker? I doubt that he as the mover of the Resolution can possibly be convinced 
that such a committee could be impartial or non-political. I doubt whether it could be possible, Mr. 
Speaker, to constitute any more highly partisan and political committee than what he has proposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, listening to part of his address and reading the whole text of the speech he made on Friday, 
March 2nd, I really doubt very much whether he is convinced about getting up such a committee. In fact 
I doubt whether the Resolution is really his idea. Mr. Speaker, I have a feeling that the Hon. Member is 
somewhat embarrassed about this Resolution. 
 
Members will have observed that shortly after this Session opened the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 
(Mr. Steuart) advised this House that the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) had made a trip 
to North Battleford and was making another trip for further investigations at the Saskatchewan Hospital 
in North Battleford. It is instructive to observe that he did not report on his investigation. That in itself 
tells the story perhaps better than I can describe. I note, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member made two 
trips to North Battleford, the second trip was on February 14th. He arrived at the North Battleford 
Hospital at about 3:45 in the afternoon unaccompanied and left 25 minutes later. I wonder how one can 
possibly make an investigation of such a large institution as the North Battleford Hospital and be able to 
become informed within a period of 25 minutes, Mr. Speaker. I know that from my own experience, I 
have been there on three separate occasions and have spent several hours on every visit and there is still 
a lot that I have to learn about the particular hospital. Apparently, the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park 
arrived and within 25 minutes became fully knowledgeable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the Hon. Member was there on two occasions, he made that confession. It is 
interesting that during his two investigations he did not find any scandals, he did not find any political 
interference, no staff purges, no dismissals, Mr. Speaker. He found a well run institution. He found a 
hospital with provisional accreditation, with a much improved staff to patient ratio. I believe the Hon. 
Member would like to see the debate conducted on a non-political plane. The Hon. Member in his 
remarks said if I may quote him again: 
 

I doubt if much benefit will come to the hospital if Members of this House get into a long-drawn out 
debate of charges and counter charges as to degree of responsibility. 

 
I agree. But he must also agree that we did not raise this particular issue, it was the Leader of the 
Opposition who first of all raised the particular question. Mr. Grant went on to say: 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1755 

As the Minister of Health I felt and I took a special interest in the mentally ill, and I certainly pushed 
for improvements in the physical plant which I am sure contributed to the provisional accreditation 
which the hospital now has. 

 
I concede that he did push for improvements in the physical plant which did help to obtain provisional 
accreditation. I am also aware of the difficulties he had in obtaining funds for improving facilities. The 
people of Saskatchewan know very well that improving health services for the people had a low priority 
among his colleagues when he was in the Cabinet. Therefore, he does deserve perhaps special thanks for 
his efforts and I do commend him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to the attention of the House that in the current Estimates in the Department 
of Government Services we are providing $1.8 million in the current budget for the improvement of 
facilities that are provincially run institutions. This is for the physical plant improvements including 
improvements at the North Battleford Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not know which Liberal Member of the Opposition I should listen to and from whom I 
should take advice. I do not know which one of them enunciates Liberal policies. The Hon. Member for 
Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) the Liberal health critic is opposed to legislative committees. In fact 
last July, if you recall, he said that the legislative and intersessional committees were a waste of his time 
and a waste of public funds. He said that he would refuse to sit on intersessional committees. This is the 
Liberal health critic. But on the other hand the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park, the former Minister of 
Health, is saying let’s have more of such committees. Whom are we to listen to and what is the Liberal 
policy really all about? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to be as non-political as possible in this debate, this I shall attempt to do. 
While I agree that during his remarks the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park was not very provocative, 
his leader on the other hand did not follow that same kind of role when he talked about the North 
Battleford hospital or our mental health programs. Some of his remarks over the last few months have 
been highly political, his speeches inside and outside the Legislature and his statements to the Press have 
in many cases been misleading and damaging to the psychiatric programs in the province. I feel that I do 
have a responsibility to set the record straight. Mr. Speaker, I am also compelled to speak in defence of 
my department and the institution at North Battleford and the staff at North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member made reference to an article that appeared in the North Battleford News 
Optimist on February 9th. In any organization, it is normal to have problems, especially an organization 
as large as the Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford. With over 500 staff, one is constantly striving to 
improve services. There have been many channels of communications established so that every staff 
member can bring his suggestions forward for action. 
 
It is odd that if things are so bad as reported by Mr. Bowers that these complaints were not brought to 
the attention of the executive director, or through other regular nursing channels, 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1756 

or through the union officers, as grievances, or through the suggestion box that is there for the 
employees to use. The only way that Mr. Bowers chose to bring his ideas is through the Press. It is also 
interesting to note that while Mr. Bowers thinks things are so bad he has failed to communicate his 
complaints to anyone. He knows full well that he can write and communicate with the Minister, I have 
never received any communications from Mr. Bowers. Apparently some people prefer to have publicity 
to practical approaches to problems. 
 
Mr. Grant’s friend claims credit for all the great changes at the hospital which have been taken by 
management. This is nonsense, Mr. Speaker. All staff are involved in successful changes. Credit must 
certainly be given to all staff involved in changes over the last year, which led to the hospital being 
awarded provisional accreditation. 
 
The patients whom we serve do not particularly care about who claims credit for the reforms. Patients 
are just pleased to see that there are reforms. They are pleased today to be able to wear their own clothes 
instead of the institutional issues. They can now smoke without having to ask staff members for 
matches. They can now read and write personal letters without having them censored by the staff. They 
can now eat in a modern cafeteria. 
 
However, very few psychiatric nurses are as naïve as Mr. Bowers, who implies that all the great changes 
at the hospital would have taken place sooner than they did, if psychiatric nurses had been given, as he 
says, the right to think and function. Mr. Speaker, I am sure no one has denied any of the psychiatric 
nurses the right of thought and the right to function in delivering good service to the patients. 
 
Such changes have been and must be a team effort to be a success among the nurses, the doctors, 
seamstresses, the occupational therapists, the electricians and, in fact, all classifications have contributed 
and are contributing toward improved services at North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Steuart knows perfectly well that some of the many great reforms would have been long delayed 
had it not been for the leadership of such men as the late Dr. Lawson, just to name one of them. 
 
Psychiatric nurses in Saskatchewan are probably the best trained in Canada. They have helped make the 
Saskatchewan psychiatric services emulated throughout the world. They are, for the most part unlike 
Mr. Bowers, who works to tear down what has taken a lot of staff to build up over many years. 
 
In fact it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that with all the problems we have with our psychiatric services, 
and I concede that there are problems, it is interesting that people from all over North America and 
people from all over Canada still come to Saskatchewan to look at the Saskatchewan Psychiatric 
Services Plan and concede and praise it as still being a leader in Canada and in North America. 
 
Now the Hon. Leader of the Opposition claims that resignations at North Battleford were too high. In 
fact, during the 1972 period resignations ran about 9 per cent which is not excessive when compared to 
previous years. For example, in 1969 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1757 

the rate was 11 per cent. In fact, when you compare the resignations and staff changes, in most cases a 
normal turnover, it doesn’t compare that badly with the entire public service and I am sure not badly 
with private industry in this province and in other places. 
 
Mr. Bowers in his article claims that morale amongst the hospital staff is at an all-time low. He does not 
tell us how he assessed morale — it was probably through some inaccurate method of ‘sniffing the air’. 
As inaccurate as some of hits statements. 
 
We have more accurate methods of testing the morale of the staff. A scientific survey was carried out by 
Dr. Neufelt, Director of Operations Research in November 1971 and October of 1972. The survey 
showed that there was no significant overall change in the morale during the past year. One group, the 
student nurses, declined somewhat, but this is understandable in view of the transfer of the student 
nurses from the Department of Public Health and Psychiatric Services to the Department of Education. 
There were some concerns about this transfer and perhaps it had some effect on the morale of the 
student nurses. 
 
In contrast, staff in the business department showed a significant improvement in overall morale. I am 
told that the survey indicated that the morale at the North Battleford Hospital as a whole in the 
institution had improved considerably during the past year, based on the scientific studies that were 
conducted. 
 
The Hon. Member for Whitmore Park has also raised the question of staff morale. I would suggest to 
both him and the Leader of the Opposition that the most discouraging thing to the staff over the last few 
weeks has been the total negative and unjustified attacks made by the Leader of the Opposition against 
the hospital staff at North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us look at some of the other criticisms that have been made. The Leader of the 
Opposition says that the care of patients in the institution has declined. I say that this is a lot of nonsense 
and balderdash. The evidence points entirely the other way. Surely one of the first pieces of evidence on 
this score is the provisional accreditation of the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. It became 
the first mental hospital west of Manitoba to be provisionally accredited following an inspection in 
October 1972. I want to lay some stress on this because accreditation comes about only as a result of an 
objective inspection by outside surveyors who have absolutely no reason to be other than completely fair 
and completely objective. 
 
The surveyors, Dr. Murray and Dr. Cahn, generally commented very favorably on the hospital. Their 
first recommendation was that the Provincial Government, administration and medical and nursing staff 
are to be commended for the remarkable change in the program of patient care, which has enabled such 
an amazing reduction in patient numbers. They went on to commend the very well organized nursing 
service and the good dietary services that are provided to the patients. They thought that the renovation 
of the physical plant had upgraded the older buildings to a very good standard. The high order of 
housekeeping was noted and the quality of professional and technical personnel in the treatment was 
praised by the assessors. Naturally there were some criticisms, but they were not of a major order or 
accreditation would not have been granted. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1758 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the Member from Whitmore Park have suggested that I 
somehow did the wrong thing in sending my Deputy Minister and the Director of Psychiatric Services to 
North Battleford to look into complaints at the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford last year. 
Shortly after taking office, we began to receive some complaints from the staff at the hospital. In order 
to ascertain the veracity of those complaints, I sent senior officials to North Battleford to talk directly to 
members of the staff. 
 
Two days were spent listening to problems raised by the staff. Their complaints generally concerned 
such items as: Uncertainty over the transfer of the Psychogeriatric Centre from the Department of Public 
Health to Department of Social Services. Some staff were anxious as to what the transfer would mean 
tom them personally. Mr. Speaker, that was one of the significant complaints because some 75 staff 
members were to be transferred — they wanted to know about their security, about their salary, about 
their collective bargaining agent, their union. 
 
Another problem was the housing question. The Hon. Member from Whitmore Park will know a number 
of the staff occupy the housing that is around the hospital. There is also the apartment. The housing is 
becoming somewhat run down, it needs repair, the same thing applies in case of the apartment. We have 
had representations and I am sure that he has had representations from the North Battleford community 
that people who are working at the hospital at North Battleford and the Weyburn hospital should no 
longer be provided for by the Government and that the people be moved into the community so that they 
can mingle more with the people in these cities and make their overall contribution by way of taxes and 
participate more in the life of the community. I know he had that kind of representation and I have had 
them. 
 
The fourth problem that was raised was the car take-home privileges for persons on stand-by duty. 
 
The fifth question was that of staff uniforms. At one time uniforms were provided but because of 
changes many of the staff have been encouraged to wear the clothes they normally wear, their street 
clothes, in the institutions so as to create more of a homey atmosphere rather than an institutional 
atmosphere. 
 
The sixth question was one which the former Government deliberately created by their own action, was 
that of the salary increment policy. Salary increments were denied as you may recall in 1970-71 to a lot 
of the staff. In fact, there was a deliberate policy of denying 25 per cent of the staff increments, three 
people received increment increases while the fourth one was told that he couldn’t have the increase. 
 
I later held a meeting with both union and management officials to discuss all these questions and items 
that have been raised. First, we met separately with the union and management, then we had a joint 
meeting. Our discussions were frank and open. I think this whole process helped to pinpoint the real 
problem areas and gave us some guidance for a better relationship in the future. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1759 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition charges that a number of persons were appointed to the 
hospital because of political consideration. The Leader of the Opposition submitted the names of four 
people and implied that they somehow came by their appointment through influence of Members of the 
Legislature. Mr. Speaker, I regret that the Leader of the Opposition isn’t here. And I would ask the Hon. 
Member for Whitmore Park to take particular note of this because I think it is important that the Leader 
of the Opposition get a full report on these particular appointments. I think that it is unfortunate that he 
raised names of people but now that he has raised them I want to clear their names and point out the way 
these people were appointed. 
 
He raised the name of Jack Degenstine — this man was appointed on a temporary basis to the position 
of kitchen assistant on November 2, 1972, due to the immediate need for additional help in the kitchen. 
Why was he so appointed? Because he had seemed to be a satisfactory employee while on a temporary 
basis working in the kitchen during the period — and I want the Hon. Member to take note — during the 
period April 1, 1970 to April 30, 1971. He was first hired for a full year on a temporary basis by the 
former administration, a period when the Member opposite was the Minister in charge. Mr. Degenstine 
again served on a temporary basis from May 15 to June 30, 1972. Mr. Degenstine was interviewed 
initially by Miss Dodds, Dietitian, and Mr. Simpson, Supervisor of Personnel. 
 
The name of Mr. Andre Duvelle has also been raised. This man was appointed on a probationary basis 
on September 1, 1972 and his services were terminated on February 16, 1973. He was a probationary 
employee, he did not fulfill his probationary period satisfactorily and in keeping with the collective 
bargaining agreement his services were terminated. 
 
The classification was general duty personnel and Mr. Duvelle was one of nine persons certified for the 
position out of a total of 47 applicants responding to an advertisement in the local paper. He was 
interviewed by a panel consisting of Mrs. Thompson, Executive Housekeeper, Mr. F. Simpson, the 
Supervisor of Personnel, this same man was there prior to my taking office. The same thing is true of 
Mrs. Thompson. Mr. R. Wallin, a union representative was present in accordance with the collective 
bargaining agreement. As a general duty personnel he was assigned housekeeping duties. His 
qualifications were Grade X education and he did work for a period of about two weeks in the kitchen in 
the summer of 1972, prior to his full time appointment in September. 
 
The name of Miss Evelyn Ruso was another name raised by the Leader of the Opposition. She was 
appointed as a probationary Nurses Aide II. Her classification came about as result of advertising. Miss 
Ruso was interviewed on July 27, 1972, by a panel consisting of Mrs. Keogh, Assistant Director of 
Nursing, Mr. Simpson and Mr. Stade, a union representative was present. In this case a total of 54 
applications were received and 18 people were hired as a result of this advertisement. She was one of 
many people that were hired during that period. Her qualifications include Grade Twelve which is 
certainly adequate for a nurses aide position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, reference was also made to a pending promotion of Mr. Warren Sprecker. Mr. Sprecker 
became a student in the 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1760 

psychiatric nurses training programs on October 30, 1953. He graduated as a psychiatric nurse on 
January 1, 1957, and from 1957 to 1973 has been a psychiatric nurse. He is being assigned to floating 
duties in shift rotation because of his years of seniority, as are five other nursing staff members. 
 
The selection was made in accordance with seniority provision of the union agreement. This 
reassignment of duty doesn’t involve any changes in reclassification or any change in pay. The only 
thing that happened is that he will now be on rotation, rather than on permanent shift. Yet somehow the 
Leader of the Opposition dragged in this man’s name and implied that he was a political appointee. This 
man has been with the North Battleford Hospital since 1953, a period of 20 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at these appointments. A temporary kitchen assistant, a probationary general duty clerk and a 
nurse’s aide. In all cases, posting took place at the hospital and at other locals of C. U. P. E. 
simultaneously with the advertisement as is required in the collective bargaining agreement. 
Appointments were processed following the Public Service regulations and procedures. 
 
Do these appointments suggest influence? Indeed not, Mr. Speaker! The facts prove that the accusations 
are entirely without foundations. 
 
By contrast, Mr. Speaker, let us look for a moment at some examples of Liberal hiring procedures in the 
institutions being run by the Provincial Government. I give you an example of what the Liberals were 
doing. 
 
Well, here is an appointment that was made on June 24, 1971 — June 24, a day after the election, a day 
after the Liberals were defeated. 
 
Here is one Maxwell Joseph Jerome appointed by Order-in-Council to the position of electrician at the 
Saskatchewan Training School at Prince Albert. I have a copy of that Order-in-Council in my hand. The 
Order-in-Council notes that the salary is to be paid from May 18, 1971. That was just shortly before the 
election was called. There was no competition, there was no interviewing panel, the position was not 
advertised — a fairly typical Liberal way of appointing people. 
 
That may seem like a strange way to appoint staff, Mr. Speaker, but then we all know that the Hon. 
Member for Prince Albert made many special appointments. In fact, in the case of the Prince Albert 
Training School the Hon. Leader of the Opposition always assisted the management in hiring staff. In 
fact, I am told that at the Prince Albert Training School no one could possibly be hired by the 
management without first being screened by the Provincial Treasurer of that day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is another appointment that is very interesting that was made of a personnel director at 
the former hospital in Weyburn. His name was Mr. Griffen. What were his qualifications? Well, he was 
a mink rancher. He was about 62 or 63 years of age. He had never had any personnel experience, but he 
had one important experience, he was the president of the Liberal Party in that constituency for many 
years, and for many years was the organizer and key person in the Liberal organization. He was 
appointed by Order-in-Council in April of 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1761 

1971. He had two important things to do and that was to assist the Liberal Party in their campaign and 
particularly among the hospital employees and the next thing he was doing was sitting at his desk and 
smoking cigars. 
 
You know the Liberals have had lots to say during this Session and the previous session about defeated 
candidates being given jobs. I want to remind the Opposition that when an engineer was required at 
Moose Jaw at the Training School, they hired a painter. His main qualifications were that he was a 
defeated Liberal candidate. 
 
May I cite another example. They say that we have appointed some people who were candidates for the 
NDP. The man whom I have made reference to from Moose Jaw is still being employed by the Moose 
Jaw Training School. Another person who is in my department who was a Liberal candidate is an 
Education Director of the Alcoholism Commission, and was a defeated candidate, in fact ran against the 
Premier at one time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) in his resolution has also raised the 
question of staff changes since July of 1971. There have, of course, been some changes in staff just as 
there were in 1969 and 1970 as a result of resignations and terminations. I have already said that in 1969 
there was the highest turnover that was ever recorded in that hospital. But I challenge the Opposition to 
show any case where political motivation entered the appointments. 
 
Now the major staff change that was made was the appointment of Dr. John Gray as Executive Director 
following the resignation of Dr. Poulakakis. I hardly think that we can be accused of political bias on the 
part of John Gray. After all he was hired in 1966, during the former administration. He has been with the 
department since that time. It was my feeling that we should have a non-medical director and I gather 
that the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park agrees that we should be hiring professional administrative 
people rather than medical people. This is what we also did in case of Weyburn, in the Souris Valley 
Hospital. We did hire a non-medical person, a person who was in the government service since 1966. 
This was because I felt that we should free the chief psychiatrist of the hospital in order to carry out the 
active practice of psychiatry, rather than being worried by such administrative problems as sewage 
lagoons and operating a laundry and other non-medical matters. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I can advise this House that it was early last March when I met with Dr. 
Poulakakis. We discussed the hospital and it was his idea that he would serve the institution better by 
practicing psychiatry, devoting his time to the medical and psychiatric practice rather than be the 
administrator. 
 
So the change was made with full discussion, with full consultation in this case. The qualifications of 
Dr. Gray who was a non-medical doctor are excellent. He has a degree in philosophy from the 
University of London. He has broad experience in administration. He also has other courses, including 
psychology, which I think will be helpful in his work. 
 
In terms of staff changes since July 1971, I can tell you that there were only 450 resignations or 
terminations for the whole of 1971, this out of a total staff of 585 is a ratio of 6.8 per cent. For 1972, I 
have already given the figures. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1762 

On the matter of the ratio of staff to patients, may I point out that in the period 1958-69 we had an 
average daily census of 828 patients and a total staff of 629. This gave us a ratio of one staff member to 
1.32 patients. As of December 1972, the average daily census was 373 and a total staff establishment of 
551. This gives a ratio of one person to only .68 patients. Surely this is a tremendous change and this is 
an indication of our desire to provide better services to the patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us turn for a moment to some of the other unfounded charges that the Leader of the 
Opposition has made. I also want to deal with the first part of the Resolution that the Hon. Member for 
Whitmore Park has proposed. 
 
The first part of the Resolution deals with program changes in the Saskatchewan Hospital since we took 
office. I do not feel there were many sudden changes that he really pointed out nor were there any 
sudden changes that have been made. Certainly the open door policy, which has been criticized by the 
Opposition, was a gradual development over many years. This idea is very often misunderstood. The 
whole idea is to give patients more freedom and responsibility, but the policy is not, and never has been 
a selective opening of doors in areas where this was felt to be in the best interest of the patients. 
 
A great deal has been made of the tragic cases of a very few persons who wanted out of the hospital and 
subsequently died. But it must be remembered that this kind of tragic event has never been avoidable no 
matter what precautions are taken. The incidents that have taken place, in the last year cannot be counted 
as if it is the only time that they have taken place. 
 
I look to the example of July 1965, a man escaped from the North Battleford Hospital and his body was 
not found by the hunters until November 11, 1966, a year and some months later. 
 
To give another example, a lady escaped on June 10, 1967, and her body was not found until November 
10, 1967. These kinds of incidents then and now are continuing to be problems. People escape from 
even the most closely guarded institutions. People escape from jails, from prison, and they escaped from 
war camps and concentration camps. 
 
I think it is shameful of the Opposition to use such incidents, tragic as they are, to smear the very 
excellent overall program of the hospital. As the Opposition well knows, we could bring up a number of 
names which made the headlines during the years they were in government, names which strike terror 
into the hearts of people of this province. I have no wish, Mr. Speaker, to resort to that kind of gutter 
politics as the Leader of the Opposition has already resorted to. 
 
It is sufficient to point out that the number of deaths at the hospital has steadily declined each year. As 
an example, in 1969 there were 95 deaths at the hospital. Last year there were 31 — less than one-third 
the number of deaths just four years previously. Admittedly there are fewer patients. The hospital staff 
has done an excellent job of reducing the death toll. They deserve better than Liberal mud-slinging for 
their efforts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1763 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I should now like to turn to the Liberal record between 1964 and 1971, 
in the case of psychiatric services. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition several weeks ago said 
 

We ran into the same problems and the same criticism when you people were on this side of the 
House. We then hired a man called Dr. Frazier. We commissioned him to carry out the report and he 
did it. We brought into effect most of his recommendations. That report was not a favorable report. It 
did cast some aspersions on what we were doing. 

 
Well, the Leader of the Opposition put it rather mildly. The report did, indeed, cast aspersions on what 
they were doing. I would remind you that it was not the only report that came out during the Liberal 
regime. 
 
In 1966 they set up an Ad Hoc Committee on the resettlement of the mentally ill. This Committee came 
up with severe criticism of the program. Next year following the massacre of nine people by a patient 
discharged a few days prior from the North Battleford Hospital, they called in Dr. Frazier and he wrote a 
very critical report about the program. 
 
The next year, 1968, Mr. Prefontaine was brought in and produced a third report which contained many 
criticisms. You say you implemented many of the recommendations of the Frazier Report. In fact, there 
were 47 recommendations — 22 of those recommendations were completely ignored. Others were 
partially implemented. You adopted only a little better than half of the recommendations of the Frazier 
Report. 
 
I say you conveniently forgot about some of them. What happened to the Research and Training Centre 
to accommodate the mentally ill criminals? Nothing but a series of long drawn out and fruitless 
negotiations with Ottawa. What happened to Dr. Frazier’s recommendations about the pension plan, the 
incentive pay and the possibility of contract employment? What became of the Commission for 
psychiatric services with the commissioner as a qualified psychiatrist reporting directly to the Minister 
of Public Health? 
 
These are only a few of the recommendations which were ignored. I will admit that following the 
Frazier Report significant improvements in the community program were made, but it took a great deal 
of public criticism to bring those about. I suggest to you that some of these tragic incidents might have 
been avoided had the response to the community pressures come faster and earlier. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition boasts of what was done following the Frazier Report. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the official records show a different side of the story and cast really more doubt on what the Leader was 
trying to tell us the other day. 
 
A fine example of what the Liberal Government actually did is contained in the Treasury Board Minute 
of July 17, 1969 — Treasury Minute 5299. I want to read paragraph five to you from the Minute. I 
quote: 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1764 

It was agreed that for 1969-70 a sum of a half a million dollars should appear specifically in the 
printed Estimates as an amount to be allocated for the implementation of the Frazier Commission 
Report. It would be understood, however, that of this amount only $250,000 should be spent in 
1969-70. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you will note in the Estimates they showed $500,000 but they had already previously 
decided what would be spent was only half of that amount. Mr. Speaker, the other half would be frozen. 
The record shows that really the only amount that was spent was $250,000 yet they led this Legislature 
and the people of Saskatchewan to believe that they were going to be spending $500,000 for 
implementing the Frazier Report. I can cite more of such examples, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In concluding, Mr. Speaker, in a period of 20 months we have done certain things to improve the 
psychiatric services program: 
 
1. We have successfully brought about provisional accreditation of the Saskatchewan Hospital at North 
Battleford. 
 
2. We converted a part of the Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn into the Souris Valley Extended Car 
Hospital and proceeded with planning to build a new psychiatric centre in Weyburn. 
 
3. We took a portion of the old Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford, and converted it into a modern 
nursing home. 
 
4. The number of mental hospital deaths has declined in the last year. 
 
5. We increased staff-patient ratios at the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. 
 
6. We strengthened community programs. 
 
7. At the present time we are working things through with the officials in this city of developing a new 
psychiatric centre in the city of Regina. 
 
You have seen the report of Dr. Clarkson recommending a 60-bed unit. Hopefully the General Hospital 
Board, the city council and the South Saskatchewan Hospital Board now have had a chance to study this 
report. I am anxious to see that we do move as rapidly as we can in trying to develop a new psychiatric 
centre in Regina, because the Monroe Wing is completely out of date and it is no longer a suitable 
facility for treating mentally ill patients. 
 
8. We have improved the staffing at the Moose Jaw Training School for the retarded and intend to 
further strengthen that particular institution. 
 
I need hardly remind the Members of the transfer of the Prince Albert and the Moose Jaw Training 
Schools to Core Services, whereby we’ll will have an input from the Department of Social Services, 
Department of Education and the Department of Public Health to provide better services for the 
mentally retarded. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1765 

9. We have improved the psychiatric nurses training program. We have substantially improved the 
salaries of psychiatrists. I have already indicated that the salary level ranges from $22,000 to $39,000 for 
psychiatrists in this province, which I believe is a reasonably good wage. 
 
You know in the years from 1958 to 1967 only 41.3 per cent of all the students enrolled in the three 
nursing programs graduated; whereas at the present time with us developing the new approach to 
psychiatric nurses training, we have an indication that between 77 to 80 per cent of those will continue 
with their courses and be able to complete them and thus relieve the pressure for badly needed 
psychiatric nursing staff from time to time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one looks at the total expenditures for psychiatric services in the last year of the 
Liberal administration it totalled $16.9 million spent on programs for the mentally ill and the mentally 
retarded. In order to make a direct comparison with today we have to take into account the budget of the 
Souris Valley Extended Care Hospital, the Riverside Home at North Battleford, as well as the training 
schools and we will find that this year in the Budget, the expenditure will be over $20.5 million, or 
within a period of less than two years, we have increased the expenditure for the mentally retarded and 
the mental health program by 21.5 per cent. I think that in itself shows that we are prepared to spend 
money to improve programs for the mentally sick. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also acknowledge that there are problems in our psychiatric program. One of our 
biggest problems is to be able to get a sufficient number of Canadian certified psychiatrists. This is a 
problem that has not only been here for the last twenty months. I’m sure the Hon. Member for Whitmore 
Park (Mr. Grant) will concede that during the seven years that they were in office, they faced the same 
kind of a problem and that problem was there prior to them taking office. 
 
First of all, we, in Canada, are not training enough psychiatrists for our needs. Psychiatry is somewhat a 
new field of medicine. There is more demand to provide services, it is a field of medicine that is 
expanding. Our universities are not graduating enough psychiatrists in this country. Most of our 
psychiatrists come from countries other than our own; they come from nations whose cultures are 
different than ours. This too creates a problem for them, for the patients and for the families of the 
patients. 
 
I already have had discussions, on several occasions, with the College of Medicine. This is an area 
where our universities, our College of Medicine has a major responsibility since we are spending in the 
order of $6 million a year on medical education. I think it is fair for the Government to insist that the 
university start producing the kind of people that we need so that we can deliver a better health service 
for our people. In the case of psychiatrists there is a shortage to which there is no easy solution. We are 
trying to recruit, we are particularly trying to recruit Canadian certified psychiatrists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to return to the subject matter of this Resolution. The history of psychiatric care is 
full of investigation committees over the years. In looking at the records 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1766 

I find that the first investigation committee that was set up was somewhere about 1918 to investigate the 
psychiatric program in our mental hospitals which were established in the province at that time. 
 
I cannot but feel concern, however, when I know that these committees seem to be called into action 
after a particular crisis. I do not intend to continue the Liberal tradition of making changes, setting up 
committees, on a crisis to crisis basis. Rather, we feel that problems should be anticipated in advance 
and steps taken to meet them before they do occur. I believe that there is not the slightest need for an 
investigation committee, particularly the kind of a committee that is suggested by the Hon. Member to 
look into the North Battleford Hospital. More than that, I feel that the resolution itself, casts an 
unwelcome slur on the very fine efforts that have been made by the staff of that hospital needs to be 
investigated. I have given you the facts, which I believe refute the allegations of the Members of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move an amendment to Resolution No. 11. 
 
That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

the staff and management of the Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford, be commended for their 
efforts in bringing about positive changes in the hospital which have led to its recognition by the 
Canadian Council on Hospital Accreditation as the first mental hospital west of the Province of 
Manitoba to receive provisional accreditation. 

 
Hon. E. Kramer: — (Minister of Highways) Mr. Speaker, I have very little left to say after that 
statement of the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). I certainly hope after those facts have been placed 
before the House, those well-chosen words of the Minister of Health, that those people across the floor 
and especially the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) would stop trying to trade in tragedy. 
 
This is exactly what they chose to do when those unfortunate incidents occurred last summer. 
 
Liberals seem to have difficulty in understanding any situation, Mr. Speaker. They seek revenge for 
criticism that I levelled at them when they were in office. Then the situation, Mr. Speaker, was vastly 
different. Let me point out to the former Minister of Health and they can pass it on to the Leader of the 
Opposition who is out stumping the country now with some more falsifications of facts. 
 
Let me tell them that when I criticized them for their program, or their lack of one, it wasn’t a case of 
people walking away or escaping, it was a case of people who were known psychopaths being pushed 
out by that administration and completely ignoring the danger to the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1767 

Mr. Kramer: — That is where they stand accused and it is a vastly different situation today. I told the 
Minster (the Leader of the Opposition), the former Minister of Health, the former Provincial Treasurer, 
early in this Session that if he didn’t produce some facts that I would be forced to brake the rules of this 
House and call him a liar. In fact, the facts that were given regarding appointments, which he said I was 
making, those alleged facts have now been brought forward indicating, Mr. Speaker, that I should be 
breaking the rules of this House. In fact, I don’t know, but I would say that it would be unparliamentary 
for me to call him a liar, but he was not telling the truth and it ads up to the same thing. He knew he was 
not telling the truth when he made those statements at North Battleford. I’m not concerned with what he 
says at North Battleford, because he is the laughing stock of North Battleford, because people know, 
even Liberal appointments there are laughing at the statements made by Mr. Steuart. They are laughing 
because they’ve never been interfered with, they know they are political appointments and they still 
have their jobs. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Oh yes, oh yes! Unfortunately! Frankly, I think for all the use that some of them are 
they ought to be fired. If we did fire them we would have to keep them on social aid anyway because 
they are not fit to work at anything useful. 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — What about . . . 
 
Mr. Kramer: — That’s true of some of you appointments — that’s the value of some of your 
appointments. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say this, that if these people would just stop talking for a while 
and start listening, they are always talking when they ought to be listening. They should know the 
difference between an honest mistake on the part of the staff and that was an honest mistake when our 
poor friend walked out in below zero weather. I criticized that too, I think they should be watched 
closer, but as the Minister of Health has said they do escape. But I hope this Minister of Health or any 
Minister of Health of this Government will not be guilty at any time of forcing people out. I know of one 
poor old man who is in that institution, who begged not to be put out because he didn’t trust himself, and 
tragedy did occur. His family will never, never, get over, nor he, because he just had that particular bent 
and that particular psychopathic tendency. He begged to be allowed to remain, but he was pushed out. 
That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. There will be other tragedies, there’s no doubt in the world that there 
will be people who will escape from prison, there will be people who were former patients who will 
probably commit crimes — I recommend this to the Minster of Health and I have said this to him before 
— that we must take care and seclude the known psychopath. It’s bad enough to have people at large 
who are potentially dangerous and anybody could be potentially dangerous but once they have proven 
their irresponsibility and those dangerous tendencies, I believe that society must keep them as kindly and 
as safely as possible away from those areas that they are hell-bent to move into. I say hell-bent because 
that’s the only way you can describe these psychopaths. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1768 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say too that I’m not entirely happy with the present program 
and I don’t mind repeating that again. I’m not happy with the Saskatchewan Plan. I’m not happy with 
the system of boarding out these patients. I know that there are a lot of good homes, but I know that 
there are still and there were homes in 1970, ’71, ’72, and 1973 that are taking advantage of boarding 
patients; where they are collected the board money and working them as well. There is just no way you 
can police this. I recommend very, very careful surveillance by the Minister of Health in these cases. 
 
I believe that in retrospect we probably had better care and safer care when we had the farm and the 
livestock and an atmosphere where those people at the Saskatchewan Hospital were kept occupied and 
kept happy. They were far happier, Mr. Speaker, than some of the people who are boarding out and 
sitting around in cellars and attics today and yesterday and since the so-called Saskatchewan Plan 
became completely bent on getting people out at all costs; it became a fetish when these people opposite 
were in power. I am not blaming — and I want to make this very clear — I am not entirely blaming the 
former Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) who is sitting opposite, and I think this is a warning to the 
Minister of Health, some of the same people that advise him are still around advising the present 
Minister of Health. I believe that we have got to take some second looks. Sometimes it may not be so 
much of a tragedy that we don’t find as many of these professionals available to give us advice. I think 
we have to take a careful look at some of the advice we get from the high-paid help in any area because 
we had better remember that whether it be in psychiatry or medicine or even highways sometimes they 
forget to relate to common sense and people. We have to remember that it is the people our there, the 
taxpayers, wherever they may be, those ordinary Joes all around Saskatchewan to make the final 
judgment. If those advisors don’t measure up or if the Minster takes the wrong advice from them, he is 
going to get the blame not the man behind him. The Minister is on the firing line. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, than an investigation is necessary at this time. I believe that things are 
improving and I believe that the accreditation that was granted, on the same page that the criticism was 
printed incidentally and I raised that before, I think is some commendation. We are a long way from 
being out of the woods yet in psychiatric care and I certainly am not going to stand in this House and 
say, ‘God’s in his heaven and all is well with the world,’ as far as psychiatric care is concerned in this 
province. I think we have to proceed in some of these things with the utmost caution but I wish, as I said 
at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that these people opposite would not try to trade on tragedy, would try to talk 
sense and would not come into this House with a lot of innuendo. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Like you did? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — I beg your pardon! I think the Member for Milestone says I did. The only reason and 
the only time I raised this issue in the House, Mr. Speaker, and the Member for Milestone knows it and 
the Member for Whitmore Park knows it, was after I had done everything I could, speaking to the now 
Leader of the Opposition trying to get him to do something about this and not to proceed post haste with 
Saskatchewan Plan recommendations and they went ahead anyway and laughed at me, so I had to raise 
it. It is a vastly different situation than somebody who escapes. These 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1769 

People did not escape and the scars of those mistakes remain on many families in this province today. 
Those people who were forced out of that hospital left a trail of rape, murder and arson, Mr. Member for 
Milestone, and there is some responsibility if not all responsibility rests on those Members opposite. But 
I said they did it and I know they did it on advice of others and the indications are and I say again, be 
careful of the advice, Mr. Minister of Health. I will not support this motion. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The debate continues on the motion as amended. 
 
Mr. Grant: — (Regina Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I have ever listened to a debate in the 
House — and I hope the Hon. Member from The Battlefords doesn’t leave because I want to say a few 
nice things about him and I wouldn’t want him to miss it — I haven’t heard a debate for sometime 
where the Members have had to resort to so many diversionary moves in order to make their point. 
There was very, very little said, Mr. Speaker, about the Resolution the Minister of Health made 
reference to briefly. Instead of that it sounded more like a Throne Speech he was making about the 
Health Department or speaking to his constituents about the good work he was dong. They both 
admitted shortcomings and for a while I almost thought the Member from The Battlefords was going to 
support the motion. He, and rightly so I think, expressed concern about several phases of the psychiatric 
program and particularly the Saskatchewan Plan which is really the psychiatric program, and the 
boarding out process which is a very vital part of that program. I remind him that I made reference to 
these two areas in my remarks and indicated that there were quite a number of reservations and this to 
me is an area that will not be corrected by the department or by the advisors the Minster has, or anyone 
outside of this House. 
 
I was very careful initially to endorse what Mr. Bowers had said that both parties had been guilty of 
creating a smog or fog around Battleford, sometimes I dare say it has been a result of intentional smog 
and other times unintentional. But I don’t think any party can be completely clear of responsibility as far 
as the North Battleford Hospital is concerned. 
 
I think one of the concerns of the Ministers of Health in the past was money and I presume it is the same 
concern now because I am sure the present Minister isn’t getting all the money he would like to give 
North Battleford or his psychiatric program. An increase of 21 per cent isn’t that earth shattering over a 
two-budget period. But there does seem to be a bit of an apathy on the part of the MLAs and the public 
at large as to the care of our mentally ill. I think it is largely because people are unable to cope with it 
themselves and so the unfortunate person ends up in an institution and as the old saying goes, ‘out of 
sight out of mind’. I feel that the present administration is continuing to bury its head if it does not 
support the motion because I think only by an inquiry of this House are we going to satisfy ourselves 
that the Saskatchewan Plan is the right plan, that the boarding-out program is being properly carried out. 
The e Hon. Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) certainly doesn’t think so and I don’t think I do. I 
don’t think the lady from Indian Head, whose letter I read, thinks so and I am sure the Minister doesn’t 
think so because I 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1770 

am positive he gets some complaints about this program. Now I would expect that if there were an 
inquiry that it would include this type of thing because the boarding out program certainly has an effect 
on the morale of the staff up on Battleford. It’s part of the program. The open-door policy would 
certainly be examined and I believe before I cam back to the Chambers the Minister made reference to 
the fact that I had only spent 25 minutes in the hospital. I think that is approximately right and I 
hesitated to go there at all but I felt that in all fairness to Dr. Gray I should, to let him know what I was 
up to. I did not go any place that he did not invite me to. Twenty minutes of that 25 was taken up 
looking around the institution at improvements that have been made and are being made. 
 
I will tell you one thing that happened that day and it was below zero the day I was there, when Dr. Gray 
and I came to the door there was a poor male patient outside in this shirt sleeves and had been out there 
for some considerable time as I found out later. Between Dr. Gray and myself we got him back into the 
institution but why that individual did not wander away I don’t know. I don’t know the man’s thinking 
but I learned afterwards that he was outside on the front steps during the entire period of my visit with 
Dr. Gray. Now for this man to get out of that building it required him to go by the reception desk, by Dr. 
Gary’s office, by all the secretaries’ offices and out through the front door. Now the Minister said that 
the open-door policy didn’t mean that all the doors were open, there were selected doors. I wouldn’t 
expect the front door of the building to be required to be locked but it seems strange that a patient of the 
I. Q. of this particular individual could wander by all those out for 20 or 25 minutes on a day that was 
below zero. I did not make mention of that previously but I feel that it is worthy in view of the 
discussion that has come up. 
 
I don’t think that there are very many points that the Minister brought up that are directly related to the 
situation in North Battleford and the problems that exist there. He knows as well as I do the problems. I 
indicated that they are not easy to pinpoint, they are not easy of solution and I know he is trying, I know 
the people of this department are trying. I really believe, as the Hon. Member from The Battlefords says, 
that as long as the Minister is getting the same type of advice that there is not going to be any major 
change in the psychiatric program in North Battleford or elsewhere. 
 
It is all well and good for him to tell what a wonderful job the Government has done in Weyburn and in 
Moose Jaw and in North Battleford and these other places, and let’s not kid ourselves a good many of 
those things were started when I was Minister. Likewise I inherited some of Mr. Steuart’s activities Mr. 
Steuart inherited some of Mr. Blakeney’s. This is natural and life goes on and none of us can take full 
credit of all the changes that take place. I think also that there is some considerable merit in the approach 
that Saskatchewan has taken over the years. Merely to say that the North Battleford Hospital has been 
accredited is an adoration of what is being done up there, don’t satisfy me by any means, because the 
accreditation committee spends a relatively short time in that institution. I would say compared to the 25 
minutes I spent, the time they spent on their inspection is relatively shorter. Now I am not saying they 
spent less than 25 minutes but they went there for a specific reason and a specific job. 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1771 

I don’t believe the Minister has answered the question I have on the Order Paper as to what the 
reservations are in the provisional accreditation which is granted the hospital. I haven’t’ heard of that 
yet. I also realize that when the accreditation committee was in North Battleford they spent little or no 
time, and I think I am correct when I say no time, in the community and I think they spent little time on 
the subject of deaths as a result of people wandering away from the institution. So the accreditation 
program really doesn’t have that much bearing on the situation that exists there. 
 
I strongly feel that there should be a non-medical person at the head of this institution and while the 
Minister can classify Dr. Gray as a non-medical person, I guess he is, he is a psychologist, but I still 
don’t think the day to day administration of that hospital should be left to a psychologist, a psychiatrist 
or a medical doctor, but should be the responsibility of a professional administrator which is recognized 
across Canada in other acute hospitals. I see no reason why mental hospitals should not be treated the 
same. 
 
The other suggestion which I made at the time and I think it is worthy of the consideration of this House 
and by the department, is that a portion of the psychiatric program in Saskatchewan should be divorced 
from the Department of Public Health. I made this suggestion that a Board of Governors be set up for 
the North Battleford Hospital; I am not really that concerned about where it is set up but it might be a 
good place to start it, and get the operation of the hospital somewhat removed from the direct 
supervision of the psychiatric branch of the Department of Public Health. For some strange reason, and I 
have been as guilty as other Ministers, possibly because of advice, we feel that only the Department of 
Health can run a psychiatric program. I know the private psychiatrists certainly don’t feel this way. I 
know the concern of the department officials, they say the Department of Health will end up handling all 
the miserable, mean cases and the private psychiatrists will only handle the easy ones. I don’t think it is 
as simple as that. I think the psychiatrists are responsible and I believe there was some reservation made 
in the newspaper the other day by a local psychiatrist commenting on the psychiatric centre here in 
Regina. 
 
The Minister went back to 1965 and 1967 and made reference to two escapees who were found dead 
some months later and classified them in the same category as those who escaped form jails. Well the 
only reason people escape from custody is lack of supervision and lack of care and I think it is partially 
due in today’s society to the fact that we are certainly living in a permissive society and we are more 
tolerant of the movements of these people than we used to be. 
 
I don’t think it’s shameful to bring up these cases. He said they could bring up cases themselves that 
happened when we were the Government. I seem to recall that they didn’t hesitate to bring them up 
when they were on this side of the House. I was the brunt of quite a few of their remarks and I think this 
is all right partially because of those remarks and partially because of our own reaction, Dr. Frazier was 
selected and we didn’t have to wait until the Opposition demanded the appointment of Dr. Frazier. I 
brought in that appointment within a few days of that sad event up there. But let’s not be sanctimonious 
and say that they have not been guilty of bringing up these things but I really can’t see much point in 
doing so. 



 
March 20, 1973 
 

 
1772 

The Minister cited that the number of deaths had declined. This is certainly true. I have stood up in this 
House and have said the same thing and it is partially the result of the lowering of the number of patients 
but also it is probably more directly a result of the better medical care resulting from the health plans 
here in Saskatchewan. He did not comment that there was any lowering of unnatural deaths and this was 
the point that I was making in my motion, that there has been an abnormal number of unnatural deaths in 
the past year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to drag out this debate any longer. It is quite evident that the Members 
opposite wish to continue with their heads buried in the sand as far as North Battleford is concerned. 
They are not prepared to recognize the news stories that are emanating from there and the Member from 
The Battlefords may say that the Liberals are the laughing stock or their leaders are the laughing stock in 
North Battleford. I can tell you what, if you don’t support this motion, you fellows are going to be the 
laughing stock of a good number of the staff members there. There is a low staff morale; there is an 
abnormal turnover of staff; there is unhappiness with the allocation of duties up there; there is 
unhappiness with the direction that is being given, not only by the head of the hospital and I am not 
downgrading Dr. Gray one iota; there is concern because of the direction that is coming from the 
Minister’s office and from the Psychiatric Branch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly urge the Members to support this motion, because we are not trading in tragedy 
as the Member from The Battlefords said. He held his temper very well until the Member for Milestone 
came in and he got a little hot-tongued. I want to commend him for restraining himself to the extent that 
he did. I think he is improving, age is mellowing him quite a bit and I am pleased to see that he stayed in 
the House. 
 
I am indeed sorry everyone present did not support the motion, because I think in the long run it would 
be to the benefit of the North Battleford institution; not only the staff but the patients and for the welfare 
of the Saskatchewan Plan as a whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas — 40 
Messieurs 

Blakeney Dyck Meakes 
Wood Smishek Romanow 
Snyder Bowerman Kramer 
Thibault Larson Kowalchuk 
Baker MacMurchy Pepper 
Michayluk Byers Thorson 
Whelan Kwasnica Carlson 
Engel Owens Robbins 
Tchorzewski Cowley Matsalla 
Richards Faris Cody 
Gross Feduniak Mostoway 
Comer Lange Hanson 
Oliver Feschuk Kaeding 
Flasch   
 



 
March 20, 1973 

 

 
1773 

Nays — 14 
Messieurs 

Coupland Loken Guy 
Grant Boldt MacDonald (Milestone) 
McIsaac Gardner Weatherald 
MacLeod McPherson Lane 
Macdonald (Moose Jaw N.) Wiebe  
 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


