



















































Hansard: March 19, 1973


1703 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

38th Day 
 

Monday, March 19, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. F. Meakes: — (Touchwood) Mr. Speaker, on your behalf I want to introduce a group of students 

from your constituency, the high school at Wishart. Some of these children, I believe, come from my 

constituency which borders a few miles south of Wishart. They are with their teacher, Mr. Millham. 

They are in the Speaker’s Gallery. I am sure that you would want me to say, Sir, and I am sure the other 

Members of the House would want me to warmly welcome them to the Legislature. May they have a 

pleasant and informative visit and may they have a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I. W. Carlson: — (Yorkton) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the Members of 

this Assembly, 40 Grade Twelve students from St. Joseph’s College and Sacred Heart Academy in the 

city of Yorkton. These students are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Eugene Hnatiuk and Sister 

Mechtildt. I am sure that all Members of the Assembly will join with me in wishing that these students 

have an educational, informative day here in Regina and that they have a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. R. Kowalchuk: — (Melville) Mr. Speaker, I too, should like to add a word of welcome through 

you, Sir, to the students from the Sacred Heart Academy and St. Joseph’s College. I am sure that most of 

you know that the students who go to those two schools come from Saskatchewan and clear across 

Canada. In fact, many of them came from the United States. A number of those students come from my 

home town of Goodeve School. And through you, Sir, I want to bid them welcome and I wish them well 

and a safe journey back home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. P. Mostoway: — (Hanley) Mr. Speaker, I too, should like to welcome the students from St. 

Joseph’s and Sacred Heart. I do this because I had the pleasure of attending St. Joseph’s a few years ago 

— well maybe a few more than that. But I just wanted to say that I had many experiences of pleasure 

there, and I can well understand that we caused a few headaches to the Brothers. Now I really appreciate 

the reason why upon leaving, all Brothers waved very lustily. I hope you have a very good afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1704 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Saskatoon Riversdale) Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to the 

Legislative Assembly, 51 students from Pleasant Hill School in the city of Saskatoon. These are 51 

Grade Six students who have made the journey from Saskatoon to visit the Legislature and to watch the 

Legislative Assembly in action. They are accompanied by two teachers. They are Mr. Bender and Mr. 

Matson. Pleasant Hill is an old and honorable school from Saskatoon. We all welcome to the Legislative 

Assembly these students. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
 

Hon. E. I. Mr. Wood: — (Minister of Municipal Affairs) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 

should like to make a short announcement regarding the setting up of the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation. 

 

This Housing Corporation has been established by a Provincial Order-in-Council pursuant to the Crown 

Corporation’s Act. The corporation will be managed by a Board of Directors whose appointments are 

also included in the said Order-in-Council. 

 

I will be acting as chairman of the Board. The members will also include, Mr. William Davies, Mr. 

Harry C. Gemmel, Mr. D. M. Wallace, who is with the Budget Bureau of the city of Regina; Mr. H. E. 

Wellman community planner of the city of Saskatoon and Mr. W. T. Wardill of the town of Eatonia, 

which will give some recognition of the smaller places in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: – I expect to introduce legislation later on in this Session pertaining to the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation and related programs. These programs will be directed to providing suitable 

accommodation for people of low and moderate incomes, improving substandard housing and related 

amenities, and providing an adequate supply of serviced land for housing and related purposes and 

conducting research into Saskatchewan’s housing needs. 

 

I should like to point out that the reason for setting up the corporation prior to related legislation being 

introduced into the House, is to allow the Board to hire staff and expedite the necessary administrative 

work to allow the Housing Corporation to become fully operative at the earliest possible date. 

 

I should like to indicate that the province will continue 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1705 

to stress close federal-provincial co-operation in the development and delivery of housing programs, but 

we will not be hesitant to act alone to fill gaps when we find it necessary. 

 

I would emphasize that many Saskatchewan housing problems are unique to the province and that it is 

the intention of this Government to become more active and aggressive in the determination of housing 

requirements and delivery of housing programs to satisfy these needs. 

 

I would also point out that the establishment of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation fulfils another of 

the election promises made by the New Democratic Party in their 1971 election platform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, on a very brief comment on the Hon. Minister’s 

announcement. 

 

I regret very much that the Government did not see fit to bring in legislation and debate this issue in the 

normal manner. To me it is just another illustration, something similar to the Hog Marketing 

Commission. 

 

This Government is doing what it thinks it knows best. I see no reason, and the Minister gave a very 

weak argument really, as to why he couldn’t wait for legislation. 

 

We have been in Session now for six weeks and he could have had the Bill in front of us. It was 

announced in the Throne Debate and surely that would have been the place to discuss the move of the 

Government to step into a housing commission. 

 

On the other hand I welcome the fact that the Government is moving to further the housing possibilities 

in the province and if this is their channel, fine and dandy. I just regret the manner in which they have 

gone about it. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Shares Purchased in Choiceland Iron Mines Limited 
 

Mr. J. G. Lane: — (Lumsden) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day a question to the Hon. 

Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley). 

 

In light of the Government’s incursion into the market place and the concerns of the investing public in 

Saskatchewan, and the rumors that are abounding in the market place — not started by the Liberals but 

by the investors themselves — has the Government made any purchase of offered to purchase any shares 

in Choiceland Iron Mines Limited? 

 

Hon. E. L. Cowley: — (Minister of Finance) I think, Mr. Speaker, that that question would be better 

placed on the Order Paper as I am not aware of all of the agencies which could be involved. I can say 

that I am unaware of any in my Department. If the Member wishes a more 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1706 

complete answer to that question he would be better to place it on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Are you saying that you do not know of any offers to purchase . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The Minister’s answer is not debatable. It was not a supplementary 

question, it was a good try though. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. E. I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 70 — An Act 

respecting Urban and Rural Planning and Development. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to present Bill No. 70, an Act respecting Urban and Rural 

Planning and Development referred to by its short title, The Planning and Development Act. 

 

Planning Acts are nothing new to this province, indeed, we have had similar legislation since 1917. 

Major changes took place in 1928, 1945 and 1965. In 1968 it became clear that The Community 

Planning Act had serious deficiencies and since that time a major review of planning legislation was 

undertaken initially by Professor Bryden. Due to the rapid advances made in the field of planning, the 

existing Act, in its present form, is incapable of meeting the demands and needs for public involvement, 

the need for better land use controls, the long-range planning desires of municipalities or of the 

government. 

 

The object of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to clarify and to consolidate planning legislation in this province 

and to introduce certain new measures. It is this Government’s intention to provide local municipalities 

with effective planning legislation to enable them to deal with both long-term and day-to-day planning 

problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are living in an age when the citizen is demanding the right to be heard and demanding 

the right to participate in the democratic process. This Government is conscious of the fact that in some 

areas of the existing planning legislation, no such right exists. Greater provision has therefore been made 

for the public to challenge the planning decisions and actions of the municipal and provincial 

governments. 

 

The citizens will have the right to appeal more decisions to the Provincial Government to exercise its 

planning functions and to provide the powers necessary to guide or control development within those 

areas over which it has jurisdiction. It enables the Government to deal effectively with planning 

problems which are outside the control of any one municipality such as a sub-division of land. It enables 

the Government to provide assistance in those areas where municipalities do not have the technical or 

financial resources to provide a proper planning service to its citizens. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1707 

The Bill provides the authority by which municipalities may voluntarily prepare a comprehensive set of 

proposals for the long-term development of the community. This will be in the form of municipal 

development plans or zoning by-laws depending upon the size of the community and the complexity of 

the problem. However, where the circumstances indicate need for control of development, provision is 

made for the mandatory adoption of development plans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has become very obvious over the last year or so that some municipalities have found 

themselves in great difficulty when dealing with the problems associated with speculative development, 

due to the fact that the municipality concerned has not taken advantage of provisions made in the present 

Act, for the preparations and adoption of community planning schemes on a voluntary basis. 

 

Although it is my hope that municipalities will adopt development plans on a voluntary basis, the power 

should be available within the Act to make the adoption of such plans mandatory in those cases where 

the public interest would be best served by such an arrangement. 

 

Proposals of this nature will be subject to examination and comment by the public. The public will have 

the right to express their views, both to the local council and the government and such submissions will 

be of the greatest importance when considering the approval or otherwise of the plan. 

 

The Development Plan will consist of survey material, a written statement, a public capital works’ 

program, zoning and land use controls. The Plan will be subject to a statutory review at least every five 

years. This section of the Bill replaces the reference to community planning schemes in the present Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many sections of this Bill are the same or very similar to those in the present Act and quite 

a few are housekeeping amendments. I do not wish to take up the time of the House in dealing with 

individual sections which will be dealt with in Committee. There are, however, certain important 

additions that I should like to bring to the attention of the House at this time. 

 

Although the law has provided for zone controls for many years, a large number of municipalities still 

do not have this basic type of control. It is absolutely essential for the protection of the residents of an 

area, the municipality and the province, that certain municipalities, particularly in the resort areas of the 

province, should have such controls. 

 

Also in the interest of justice, it will now be mandatory for municipalities that have a zoning by-law, to 

also have a zoning appeals board. To ensure as far as possible that an Appeals Board is independent, a 

municipality with a population in excess of 5,000 may not include any municipal council member on the 

Board. 

 

The Minister, a municipal council or planning commission may appeal a Zoning Appeals Board decision 

to the Provincial Planning Appeals Board. At the present time there is no method whereby such an 

appeal could be made in order to rectify any injustice which may have had occurred. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1708 

The subdivision of land within the province is causing some concern, both to municipalities and the 

government. Public reserve requirements have now been adjusted so that dedication may be on a sliding 

scale up to a maximum of 10 per cent of the land to be subdivided. 

 

Steps will be taken to deal with the very difficult problems of flood protection, development on unstable 

ground and dealing with unregistered, obsolete subdivision plans. It is proposed to introduce provisions 

in the Bill to permit planned unit development. The present conventional zoning and sub-division 

controls prevent bad development, but also stifle creative and innovative design which development, on 

the basis of a comprehensively planned unit, will permit. 

 

A planned unit development will be designed to a very high standard from the outset and the proposals 

will include the detailed design of buildings, landscaping and public facilities. In return for a high 

standard of design and development, the conventional subdivision controls can be relaxed. Special 

regulations will be prepared to make this possible. Provision is also made for the protection of roads by 

the application of protective road development control regulations. 

 

By this method it is hoped to prevent uncontrolled and unsightly development alongside roads in areas 

where no municipal development control exists. 

 

Municipalities will be encouraged to protect existing stands of trees and woodlands within their area by 

passing tree preservation by-laws. The Minister of Highways will be given powers to replot land to 

protect highways and adjacent lands and to regularize subdivisions affected by a highway improvement 

program. 

 

In other words, we will be expecting that the Department of Highways will clean up any subdivision 

problems which are caused by the construction of such a highway. 

 

Provision has been made for the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan to have the power of a municipal 

council under this Bill, so that he can carry out planning functions within that area and to delegate 

certain of these functions to local communities. The Bill will also apply to the Crown to ensure that all 

people and agencies are treated as equals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before moving second reading of this Bill, I would note that there has been some 

discussion in the Press about it, indicating that the Provincial Government was hereby arrogating to 

itself a great deal of powers formerly given to municipalities. 

 

The Sections chosen for special attention were those dealing with the Municipal Development Plans. I 

should like to point out that this Bill is the result of a study by Professor Bryden for the University of 

Saskatchewan., Saskatoon Campus, as I have already stated. This was commissioned by the former 

Liberal Government. 

 

When we first came to office in 1971, I found the Bill in much its present form and ready to be 

presented to the Government for approval, including the sections which are now being criticized in the 

Press. There were, however, some 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1709 

things about this Bill that I questioned and this matter of the power of the Provincial Government to 

insist upon a development plan, where it was deemed to be advisable, was one of them. 

 

It was pointed out to me that whatever the authority might be, it was clear that the Provincial 

Government had responsibility for planning. Provincial responsibility in regard to municipal matters is 

not new. Practically since the beginning of the province, it has been the responsibility of the Department 

of Municipal Affairs to see that municipal business was carried on satisfactorily and where necessary, to 

take control. 

 

While this has not been dome frequently, it has from time to time been done through the years. And 

provincial responsibility and authority to initiate planning control has also been in the Community 

Planning Act for years. 

 

According to the new Act development plans must be worked out with a good deal of discussion with 

local people and property owners. I am not anticipating any instances where the plans will have to be 

initiated by the Provincial Government, but if there are, they will have to abide by the same rules. This 

proposed Act has been widely discussed with the planners and municipal people throughout the province 

and elsewhere. Although I have not discussed it with elected officials before it was introduced in the 

House, lengthy discussions have been held with municipal staff, especially those of the larger cities. 

 

While at first, I thought it rather autocratic, I have been convinced, Mr. Speaker, after one and a half 

years of discussion, that it is right that the province should be prepared to accept its responsibilities and 

have not to hide behind an inadequate Act as an excuse for not endeavoring to have some good planning 

principles applied throughout the province. I should also like to make it clear that contrary to what may 

have been indicated in the Press, when a municipal development plan is approved, it does not mean that 

the municipality will be obliged to carry out all the terms of the plan, either immediately or at a later 

date. It simply means that development contrary to the plan, would not be allowed by any individual, by 

the municipality or by the Provincial Government. Exception has been taken to my use of the word 

‘significant’ in speaking to the interviewing reporter. Possibility I did use the wrong term, but I do 

maintain, Mr. Speaker, that I was right in mentioning what I thought might be a controversial section 

instead of endeavoring to sweep it under the rug. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill, by its very definition, is of a technical nature. I have highlighted those items 

which I feel should be brought to the attention of the House. I am aware that the many detailed 

provisions of the Bill will be discussed in Committee. I would, therefore, move second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister covered many of the difficulties and 

the problems with respect to bringing in any legislation dealing with community planning in his remarks 

on second reading and I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, the frankness with which he dealt with some of these 

problems or some of the 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1710 

weaknesses, if you like, in the legislation that he is introducing. 

 

It is a complex Bill, it is a complicated Bill. The provisions are technical, in fact, the whole field and the 

whole process of planning and planners in today’s world is one that always did leave me a little 

befuddled and it hasn’t improved as time has gone on. 

 

As I see it, Mr. Speaker, one of the chief dangers of the legislation that is before us is the very thing that 

is perhaps there and designed to make this whole process of planning a more democratic process. The 

question of allowing appeals to almost any move along the way, this can certainly be a problem insofar 

as municipal governments are concerned and I can certainly appreciate their concern in this regard. 

Hopefully, this will not prove to be the case, but this certainly, I think, is one of the weaknesses of the 

legislation. 

 

The highway provisions are certainly good. There is no question about that. There are many other 

provisions that are good and as the Minister has pointed out, this is a Bill that has been under study for a 

good number of years, as a matter of fact. 

 

It is a Bill, Mr. Speaker, that covers both rural and urban areas. It is a Bill that is designed originally at 

least, for Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan needs, which are somewhat different in many respects from 

those of other provinces. Because it is as complex as it is, Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave at this time to 

adjourn debate, and may I also take the opportunity to thank the Minister for giving me privately some 

of the explanations behind some of the moves. But I would ask leave to have a look further at some of 

these provisions and adjourn that debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 50 — An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972 — be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. G. Lane: — (Lumsden) Mr. Speaker, when I asked to adjourn debate the other day we finished up 

on some of the remarks from the Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Hanson) who stated that any 

farmer with his head screwed on properly would be in favor of this legislation. We now hear some ‘hear, 

hear’s’ from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that in the Western Producer of Thursday, March 15th, farmers 

(supposedly without their heads screwed on) by the hundreds are urging, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Government of Saskatchewan give a vote to the farmers on the implementation of a Hog Marketing 

Commission. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what the Government opposite has done, is bring in amendments to The Natural 

Products Marketing Act, 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1711 

which will be another touchstone in the Government’s attempts to take over control of the daily lives of 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Government can close down any business in rural Saskatchewan and now can close down any farm 

in Saskatchewan, and they are proud of that fact. Subsection c(a) states: 

 

That the Government can require any or all persons who are engaged in the production or marketing of 

any regulated products to register with the commission; 

 

(c) can require all persons who are engaged in marketing of any of the regulated products to obtain 

licenses from the commission; and 

 

provide guarantees of financial responsibility. 

 

Supposedly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is to help the small farmer. Instead, they want financial guarantees 

before he can get a license and has to go through the political apparatus of the Government in order to 

get the right to produce a commodity. And then, Mr. Speaker, the Government can cancel or suspend 

any license for a violation or any part of any of these rules or regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government is attempting to take control of rural Saskatchewan and this Bill is just 

another aspect in that attempt. To top it all off, the Government then, after setting the rules and 

regulations and the stringent political requirements which it will have, will then put the onus back on the 

farmer to prove that he didn’t break the rules. 

 

The Government is proving its arrogance by attempting to ram this policy down the throats of rural 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan farmers are being told to place themselves totally within the hands of the 

Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reverse onus clause is nothing but the most direct evidence that we could possibly get 

that the Government intends to steam roller its programs down the throats of rural Saskatchewan and 

down the throats of the farmers of Saskatchewan without regard for their future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to Bill 50 make this Act infamous and it will also make the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) infamous. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is attempting to deceive this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Agriculture stated in the Debates and Proceedings, 1971, ‘that 

this Bill was only to be brought in in an emergency’. Those were the words of the Minister of 

Agriculture. The need for a Commission can be better outlined, ‘a need for quick action by the 

Government to correct or improve a deteriorating market crisis’. “Crisis” is the word that the Minster of 

Agriculture uses. That was what the Minister of Agriculture told this House when he asked us to vote on 

that Bill. It’s not true. It’s not true and he proved that he didn’t mean what he said on that date by 

bringing before us The Hog Marketing Commission, without regard to the producers, without regard to 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1712 

the people of Saskatchewan and without regard to what he said in this House. 

 

He states that the hog producers support the implementation of a Commission without a vote. I urge the 

Members opposite and we’ve been accused of paying for this ad in the Western Producer . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who did! 

 

Mr. Lane: — We didn’t have to pay for it because the hog producers themselves did it and they are 

prepared to pay for it with their own contributions. The Liberal Party didn’t have to do anything because 

the Government opposite forced the hog producers to go to the public and go to the people and present 

their side of the story because it wasn’t given by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

What does that Ad state? 

 

Attention: Hog producers mail these coupons to request a vote on The Saskatchewan Hog Marketing 

Commission. 

 

Big bold headlines — 

 

“Did you know — This is the First Commodity in Saskatchewan to be put under Compulsory Selling 

System without a Vote?” 

 

By law, any commodity, including beef, can be put under a compulsory selling system without a vote. 

The Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission is responsible to the Government and not to the hog 

producers. The Saskatchewan Government has presented a Bill to the Legislative Assembly in Regina 

to license all producers. Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission favors selling hogs by negotiation 

of both price and now many hogs each packer gets. The Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission 

has the power to determine the time and place at which a producer may sell. The Saskatchewan 

Government now owns 45 per cent of one of Saskatchewan’s packing houses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has said that the hog producer favored the compulsory 

marketing commission, the implementation without a vote. But what do the hog producers themselves 

say? They say in this public notice that they want a vote, that they want a right to determine their own 

future and yet the arrogant Government opposite and the arrogant Minister of Agriculture say ‘no’. No 

vote — no democratic right to decide your own future. That is the approach of the Government opposite. 

Ram it down the throats of the hog producers without giving them a say as to their own future. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture sees truth staring him in the face and we won’t do anything about it. His 

statement that the Act would only be used in emergencies is not true. The statement that the unvoted 

Commission is supported by the hog producers of Saskatchewan is not true. His political statements on 

corporate farms and his statement in the last Session dealing with Second Reading to The Natural 

Products Marketing Act, he makes the comment: 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1713 

Individual producers fear the advance of horizontal and vertical integration and corporate farming and 

see marketing boards as a useful farm organization to curb such developments. 

 

Those are the comments of the Minister of Agriculture. What does he say outside this Legislation? First 

of all with regard to the matter of corporate farms. A headline in the Star-Phoenix, February 28, 1973: 

 

“Messer Calls for Corporate Farms”. 

 

What he says in the House and what he says in public are two different things and he is overriding the 

duly elected opposition and he shows utter arrogance for the position of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture states that the producers are opposed to vertical integration. 

That’s what he said in the House a year ago. What is the first company bought by the Government 

opposite? A packing plant. Vertical integration. In spite of what he says in the House the producers are 

against it, the Government opposite turns around and buys Intercontinental Packers — 45 per cent 

interest and then pays twice as much as the company is worth in their hurry to get a hold of this and 

completely refute what he said in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the matter of the Intercontinental Packers deal (and it’s relevant in this 

debate) because the Minister of Agriculture has stated that Intercontinental Packers and The Hog 

Marketing Commission will work very closely together. It’s a vital issue in this debate. The Government 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, fell over backwards in their rush to buy Intercon at any price. All that Mr. 

Mendel had to say was, “I want $10 million”, the Government — “we’ll give it to you”. “Just give us 45 

per cent.” And all we have to do is just find the Press statements and the words of the Premier that that 

deal only took three weeks to negotiate between the time that the discussions were started between Mr. 

Mendel and the Government of Saskatchewan. It took three weeks for the Government to spend $10.2 

million to get their clutches on the Intercontinental Packers and in effect, set up government controlled 

vertical integration of the producers of Saskatchewan. That’s precisely what that was made for and it is 

that very reason, Mr. Speaker, that the Government opposite was in such a hurry and such a rush to take 

over Intercontinental Packers. 

 

Again, we’ve had deceit, we’ve had deception. We’ve had untruths by the Government when it came to 

what they intended to do about vertical integration, what they intended to do, but I think in reality this 

Bill makes it very, very clear what direction this Government is going to take. It’s going to take over, 

it’s going to take complete control of rural Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan and it is the 

farmers who are now starting to rise up in protest — the farmers with their heads screwed on properly 

are now starting to rise in protest. The ones who don’t have their heads screwed on properly as the 

Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Hanson) said, are the ones who are sitting back and not 

reacting to what the Government is going to do. 

 

The Government has taken control of the land of rural Saskatchewan and what a farmer can buy and 

what he can’t buy. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1714 

They have now taken control of the agricultural machinery dealers in Saskatchewan. They are taking 

control now, with this Bill and these amendments, of the fruits of the farmer’s labour. That’s NDP 

policy for rural Saskatchewan. The Government intends to control rural Saskatchewan. It tells the people 

in rural Saskatchewan where they can live, how they will work, when they will work, how they will sell, 

when they can sell and when they can buy. That is NDP policy for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

You can accuse the Liberals of rumor-mongering and paying for ads in the Western Producer, but you’ll 

never hide your true purpose from the people of Saskatchewan because your statements, your deceptions 

are becoming evident throughout this province. These amendments will be proudly opposed by the 

Liberal Opposition and we will probably proudly hold meetings around this province to make sure that 

every farmer knows exactly what he is getting from the Government opposite. We make no apologies 

for telling the truth to the farmers of Saskatchewan because you refuse to do it. 

 

This Government, by this Bill, and its statements made in the House last year and its phony, inaccurate 

justification for The Natural Products Marketing Act, is merely trying to cover up what they are 

attempting to do in Saskatchewan, but the people, the people in rural Saskatchewan are no longer being 

fooled. 

 

The only part left that the Government has not yet taken control of in rural Saskatchewan is the chain 

stores, and the markets and we can await for that day because we expect it in the near future. We expect 

the Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs (Mr. Tchorzewski) to make an announcement at any 

time that the Government is going to control the end result of farmers’ products. 

 

I should just like to close, Mr. Speaker, with a quote from the Star-Phoenix of January 25th, 1973, under 

the headline— 

 

“Angry Hog Producer voices Dissatisfaction to Messer” 

 

Mr. Messer replied: 

 

Democracies would be in total chaos if every decision were decided by plebiscite. 

 

When we were the Opposition a marketing agency was one of our platforms. Obviously, somebody 

thought it was a good idea. If you don’t like the way we are operating . . . 

 

and I’m quoting the Minister of Agriculture: 

 

. . . if you don’t like the way we are operating you will have an opportunity to register that disfavor in 

the next election. 

 

I can assure the Government opposite that the farmers of Saskatchewan are starting to register their 

disfavor now and we urge the Government to reconsider this proposal to take over control of the fruits of 

farmers’ labor in Saskatchewan. 

 

Needless to say, we in the Opposition will proudly oppose the amendment proposed by the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1715 

Mr. D. F. MacDonald: — (Moose Jaw) Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words about how 

disappointed I am with the attitude of the NDP members opposite. The hog producers have taken action 

that they feel is necessary. They have taken out an advertisement in the Western Producer, they feel that 

their case is justified so they take out an ad in the Western Producer and what do Members opposite do, 

they belittle the efforts of the hog producers for trying to put forth their position. They say that the 

Liberals put them up to it, that the Liberals paid it. Just because the producers have shown some 

opposition to the party opposite is no reason to belittle their efforts. They have every right to tell this 

Government how they feel about this Bill without being belittled at every turn. It goes further than that. 

Near my community in Moose Jaw a group got together last week at Marquis and again they took a vote 

at that meeting and at that meeting the vote was 84 against the Bill and 3 in favor of the Bill. Again, the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) got on the hot line and he belittled the efforts of that meeting. He 

said that the meeting wasn’t representative and he wanted to know how many hog producers were there. 

Well, it shouldn’t matter to the Minister of Agriculture how many hog producers were there, this Bill 50 

is not concerned alone with the hog producers. Beef producers and producers of any other commodity 

have every right to show their opposition to the Bill. When they do so they have no right to be belittled 

for their efforts. I don’t think the Minister of Agriculture should expect people to roll over and play dead 

just because he is going to put a Bill through. It is a disgraceful action on the part of the Members 

opposite and the Minister of Agriculture. I think he is going to have to learn that he is going to have to 

listen to the farmers of this province and he is not going to be able to steamroller them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. G. MacMurchy 

(Minister of Education) that Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Community Colleges be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. P. P. Mostoway: — (Hanley) Mr. Speaker, permit me to look through this . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson: I got a speech here. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — You have one? If I read on of your speeches, fellas, I am afraid I couldn’t get back 

to the constituency. They wouldn’t have me. I might add that if I read one of your speeches, I wouldn’t 

blame my constituents one bit for running me out of the constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill in regard to community colleges, I think, is a good Bill. I think it is going to be a 

good Bill because it will permit community colleges to be set up within the various areas of the 

province. I think it is good because up until this point, we haven’t had anything to kind of set as a 

go-between universities and our grade schools. It seems to me that there has been a need for this kind of 

a school 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1716 

or a college throughout the province. Very often people will find themselves a little too old to want to go 

to a grade school, or for various reasons, they will not want to go to university because it is extremely 

formal. I think that this will fill the needs of those people. Another thing that I see in this Bill, because of 

the makeup of the board where there will be representation from various people within the district, is 

that this will reflect on the policies and the courses offered at these community colleges. I can see 

courses in various things that local people want. There could even be courses, quite possibly, on 

anthropology. Sometimes they might get into the realm of certain politics. It could be anything that the 

people would want. So I would just want to be very specific in saying that I fully support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. G. Richards: — (Saskatoon University) Mr. Speaker, I should like to rise to say a few words in 

support of the principle of this Bill. 

 

There are three pitfalls which any community college development program must avoid. I hope that we 

have succeeded in avoiding them. The first, but very obvious pitfall, is that we crate community colleges 

merely as a string of second rate universities as has unfortunately happened with certain community 

college programs in other jurisdictions. The second pitfall to be avoided is to conceive community 

colleges as being merely another string of technical training schools. The third pitfall which often has 

bedevilled adult education programs is irrelevant, unstimulating, deadend curricula, stereotyped 

recurrent bad jokes about basket weaving. 

 

If we can avoid the three pitfalls of trying to have second rate universities and trying merely to use them 

as an extension of technical training and of having them loaded down with irrelevant deadend courses, 

we may be able to provide a truly flexible institution which, to use a somewhat hackneyed phrase, will 

bring education to the people. I hope that we shall succeed in doing this. I hope that we shall be able to 

satisfy particular demands by particular people in local areas for the particular kinds of courses they 

want. I think the Department has to its credit been solicitous of discovering what are the felt educational 

needs in local areas which community colleges could serve. 

 

The community college first must remain in some sense a humble institution in the hierarchy of 

educational institutions. It should not aspire to large buildings, large staffs, large budgets, professional 

organizations and all the kind of paraphernalia which we associate with institutionalized education. The 

second purpose which they must observe is the humble one of being an effective, alternate route for 

people to get back into the main stream of education, in particular to get back into universities. 

 

I should like people to realize how few people really do get access to and do get the benefits of publicly 

supported university education. In Saskatchewan one person in eight in the age group of 18 to 24 is 

actually in attendance at 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1717 

university. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the proportion of people in this age bracket attending university is 

actually declining. Enrolment is declining not only as a result of declining provincial population, but 

also because the proportion of people attending university is actually declining. For example, in 1970 — 

13.26 per cent of 18 to 24 year olds were at university and this had declined, admittedly quite 

marginally, but it declined to 12.57 per cent by 1971. If we pride ourselves on the availability of 

post-secondary education and it is seen as a right and not a privilege, the reversal in the trend of rising 

university enrolment and an actual decline in the proportion of young people going to university are 

rather grim statistics. 

 

Another concern not new to educators, the fact that there is obvious discrimination of there being far 

fewer women relative to men actually going to university. In Saskatchewan of the age group 18 to 21 — 

22.7 per cent of the men, but only 15.3 per cent of the women actually get to university. 

 

A final form of discrimination in our society with respect to university education is surely the one with 

respect to age. We take it as factual and we take it as inevitable that the time to go to university is the 

late teens and early twenties and after that you should settle down to the grind of earning a living. Why 

should that be? Why should that be that at an age when people are changing jobs, at an age in which we 

fortunately do have some increase per capita income relative to times gone by, why should it not become 

normal that people at any age in life who desire to return to university should not be able to do so? 

Despite all the rhetoric about availability of education we have got the fairly dismal statistic that those 

students over 30 years of age constitute a mere three per cent of university enrolment. 

 

With that kind of background, Mr. Speaker, of problems of access to university, I hope that the 

community colleges when established will serve as a valuable in-between institution, a humble 

institution perhaps in terms of size, space, staff, etc., but nonetheless an institution serving a very 

valuable function in contribution to the idea of universal access to education. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. E. Guy: — (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make one or two comments. I haven’t 

too much to add to what has already been said by Members on both sides of the House. I think they 

support the principle of the Bill. I think the last speaker, the Member for Saskatoon University, probably 

made the best speech from that side of the House. Most of the Members got up and one after the other 

said, it’s a great thing and they are supporting it, just because it is a New Democratic piece of legislation 

and so it has to be automatically successful. I think the Member for Saskatoon University mentioned 

three pitfalls which on this side of the House we accept as being probably either the reason why it will 

succeed or why it will fail. 

 

He mentioned first of all that we don’t want community colleges being a second-rate university and I 

think we all agree with that idea, with that philosophy. He says we don’t want to have another string of 

trade and technical schools evolving. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1718 

I think that that is also true and a pitfall that must be avoided in this new approach. He said, finally, that 

we don’t want to be burdened down with any more irrelevant, deadened courses. I think we all agree 

with that. 

 

Having referred to those pitfalls and pointing them out, he didn’t go on to say what he saw in the Bill as 

being some reason these pitfalls will be avoided. This is what I should like to make one or two 

comments on this afternoon. He said he hoped that these pitfalls would be avoided and we certainly all 

hope that. I think that built into the legalization there are some very definite reasons why the pitfalls will 

not be avoided. First of all is the absolute control which the Minister has taken over the establishment of 

community colleges. He is the same Minister who has complete control over the university and it is 

becoming more obvious every day. He is the same Minister who has complete control over all the 

technical schools and the technical trades in this province. He is the same Minister who has complete 

control over the ordinary school system. So I say that when you have the same Minister in complete 

control of all the institutions of learning in this province that the chances of what the Hon. Member from 

Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) suggested of a watering down of one system, or overlapping 

another, is quite likely and quite probably what is going to happen. 

 

This is one of the weaknesses I see in the legislation. The Minister has taken too much control upon 

himself. Members opposite spoke of the large amount of local autonomy that was being provided in this 

legislation, well this, of course is nonsense. There is very little local autonomy because the one aspect of 

local autonomy which has to be there, of course, is fiscal autonomy and there is no local fiscal autonomy 

in this legislation at all. All of the money is being provided by the Department of Education through the 

Minister. Therefore, the Government has complete and absolute budgetary control. When Members 

opposite say that they are going to be able to control the courses on a local basis because the members of 

the board have to come from within the region, that is not necessarily true and in fact it is probably not 

true. Whoever holds the money bag will also control the courses. It might be very well for the local 

board to say we want to have a course in xyz and the Minister says well I am sorry we haven’t got that 

kind of money this year, we can’t provide that course. So regardless of what the members on the board 

will like to have in regard to who teaches in the school, their qualifications, their standards, and what 

courses they want in the school, it is all going to boil down to the fact, is the money going to be there. Of 

course, the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) has absolute complete control in the fact that it is 

being funded by the Department of Education and by the province. 

 

This brings up another question that I have some concern about. We’ve seen the university fees 

increased quite substantially this year. We’ve seen the fees in the technical schools increased quite 

substantially this year. The Minister hasn’t said and I hope that he will say categorically when he is 

closing the debate whether there will be any student charges for attending community colleges. He 

didn’t say one way or the other when he introduced the Bill or if he did, I am sorry I missed it. I think 

we in this House would like to be assured that there will not be. If the Government is going to have 100 

per cent fiscal control, then there shouldn’t be any charges 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1719 

against the students taking any of these courses. I hope that he will make that clear. I hope that he will 

make it clear also that not only is he going to have free courses, free education through the community 

college system this year, but it is going to be a practice which will continue. We have all seen how the 

NDP talk about universal accessibility to universities and the abolition of tuition fees and yet over the 

years, and certainly since they have become the Government again a couple of years ago, the tuition fees 

instead of being abolished or reduced are being increased on a very regular basis. 

 

So those are some of the things which we on this side of the House fear may prevent the three pitfalls 

mentioned by the Member previously, as not being avoided. We hope that this system will be successful. 

We’ll be watching the four pilot projects very carefully. I think it is going to take, and I say this with all 

deference to the Minister and quite sincerely, I think it is going to take a great deal of hard work in 

establishing this new system with the pitfalls that have been mentioned. And particularly without falling 

into a pattern of too much government control in an area where if they are going to work it’s got to be if 

they are community colleges in the full sense of the word. I am not sure that the set-up provided in this 

Bill will accomplish it. We hope that it will and we certainly support the principle. 

 

Mr. H. H. Rolfes — (Saskatoon Nutana South) Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on this 

Bill. 

 

First, if I may I should like to say a few words about the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and what he 

had to say about the Bill. It always surprises me, Mr. Speaker, how some one like the Member for 

Athabasca can stand up in this House and speak about local autonomy. When he was a member of the 

Treasury Board, considerable local autonomy was taken away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Those of us who were in the field of education when he was on the Treasury Benches 

know too well what was meant by government interference. We know all too well what it meant when a 

government dictated to local boards. How much they allowed increases in salaries for teachers. We 

know all too well, Mr. Speaker, what it meant when by Order-in-Council they told us and gave 

principals the authority as to how long teachers were to work and when they were to work. We know all 

too well, Mr. Speaker, how they issued school operating grants when they were the Government. 

 

We, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House know that there are pitfalls in this particular Bill. But if you 

were only to present a Bill with no pitfalls you would never present any legislation. We are aware of 

some of the weaknesses of this Bill. And I think Members on this side of the House have pointed them 

out. I agree with the Member from University (Mr. Richards). If community colleges are going to be an 

extension of technical schools or if they are going to be an extension of university then we ought not to 

get into them. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1720 

We don’t want to copy what some of the other provinces have done in Canada. We want to make 

absolutely certain that our community colleges are not going to go the way of community colleges in 

Alberta and Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I go a little bit further I also want to mention that when the Members opposite were 

the Government they also were planning for community colleges. They also made announcements on 

community colleges. A few years ago I was able to get hold of their draft legislation. I wish I still had it 

with me. That particular draft legislation, Mr. Speaker, gave all control, absolutely all control, to the 

Department of Education, to the Minister of Education. There was absolutely no indication that local 

people would make any decisions. The Minister of Education was to decide what courses were to be 

available. The Minister of Education was going to decide who was going to be on the board. The 

Minister of Education was going to decide what schools were going to be built. And by the way, their 

emphasis in that draft legislation if I remember it, was on physical plants. They were going to establish 

physical plants, which of course this legislation does not. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — On a point of Privilege, I wonder if the Member could tell us what draft legislation he 

is speaking of. There certainly was no such legislation ever drafted in the Liberal term of office. At least 

he is not talking about it if that is the case. Now either table it or back it up a little better than he is 

talking about. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, maybe I shouldn’t have used the words ‘draft’ legislation’, it was a 

proposal. It was a proposal by the Department of Education that had gone out to various people and I 

believe it was in July or August of 1971 when I happened to get hold of one of the proposals. And as I 

say, I haven’t got it with me but I am sure that I could find a copy of that proposal some time, I will look 

for it. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I’ll give you one. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — You’ll give me one? If you have one I would appreciate getting one so I could . . . Mr. 

Speaker, what I was trying to say was that the new Bill that we have introduced into the House puts 

emphasis on courses. It de-emphasizes buildings, it de-emphasizes campuses. And I believe that this is 

the heart of the whole Bill. We are going to leave the authority up to the local people to decide what they 

want and what is needed. There is absolutely no doubt that the present situation in education leaves 

much to be desired. The Member for University has already pointed out that only about 18 per cent, if 

we are generous, only 18 per cent of our people go to university or technical schools. What happens to 

the other 82 per cent? What opportunities are there for these people? We spend right now about $50 or 

$60 million on universities and technical schools. Surely another $2 or $3 million for the other 80 or 82 

per cent of the people is not asking too much. 

 

This particular legislation, Mr. Speaker, tries to fill some of the gaps that present education leaves in 

Saskatchewan. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1721 

Those of us who have spent some time in high schools know how fed up many of our young people are 

with education. And some of us have to take the blame for it. I think this innovation that the Minister of 

Education (Mr. MacMurchy) has come up with is a good one. It is an alternative to the present situation 

and certainly deserves support of all Members in this House. 

 

This particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, also makes available to rural people some of the 

opportunities that many of their city friends have. 

 

We said in 1971 when we went about this province during the election that we would equalize 

opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. This is another one of our determinations to carry out those 

promises. I think that people in the various areas of Saskatchewan will be able to decide for themselves 

what the needs are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that just because we pay the bill that we have to determine for the people at 

the local level what the needs are. I don’t think that the present Minister of Education is going to tell the 

people of a particular community, no, because I don’t agree with the needs, you can’t have that. This 

might have been true from 1964-71 but I do not believe that that situation is true today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as long as we have a Minister of Education who believes in community schools, who 

believes in fulfilling the needs of the community, as long as we have a Minister of Education like that, I 

certainly am not too afraid that local needs will not be fulfilled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, there are many gaps in the present educational system. The community 

colleges as I see them in this particular Bill will fill these gaps. And I hope that through the 

establishment of these community colleges throughout the whole Province of Saskatchewan, we will be 

able to maintain a rural way of life. We will be able to give to people who are 30, 35 or 40 years old an 

opportunity to re-educate themselves, to upgrade themselves and obtain the knowledge that they want. 

Many of our people are forced into early retirement. Many of our people have many hours of leisure 

time and they would like to spend this time in more meaningful activities. 

 

I think community colleges will fill this gap. And, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly support the 

legislation that the Minister of Education has brought forth which will establish community colleges in a 

very unique way in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy: — (Minister of Education) Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise again in closing off 

second reading debate to thank all Members in the House for their support of this Bill. A record which is 

so far unusual it would seem to me. I also thank all Members who have spoken on the Bill for their 

suggestions of some of the difficulties we might face as we implement the community college program. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1722 

The Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) talked about the pitfalls. The Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy) continued on and we’re very sensitive to, in fact, those pitfalls as they were raised. 

Concern expressed by the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) about 

the appointment of boards, consultation between boards and the Department of Continuing Education in 

appointment of staff. And we share some of those concerns and the legislation is deliberately drafted in 

the way it is because of our concern about the new concept. Now it is not a new idea but the concept in 

terms of making that idea a reality is something new not only in this country but on the North American 

continent. We are embarking on something unique once again here in Saskatchewan as we implement 

the community college program in the way that we are. 

 

Now, the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) talked about the lack of program in the initial 

stages in the city. We have said that the program won’t begin in Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw 

and Prince Albert. We have said that for two reasons. Because, Mr. Speaker, we want to get a good 

foothold in the country. And because there are all kinds of adult education programs being offered at the 

present time in the four cities, through the university, through the technical vocational operations, 

through the adult education programs that are conducted by school boards. We think that it is necessary 

to begin in the rural communities, in the smaller cities, before we in fact move into the large cities. And 

I don’t think that there is any question that we will see in the future community colleges under way in 

Regina, in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, as we develop, as we get a foothold, as we build in 

the philosophy in the rural communities. 

 

There was a great deal of talk from the Member for Wilkie about how much work had gone on under 

their years of office. How they had put forward a proposal. How they were ready to bring in legislation 

had they been elected. 

 

I think I can say to all Members here, Mr. Speaker, that it was a good thing that they weren’t re-elected 

just in terms of the program that they were going to bring forward. Because not only would it have cost 

the province a good deal of money as we have seen taking place in Ontario and Manitoba, because their 

concept was the technical vocational concept. But also we would not have built in the community 

control which is so vital to the community college program which they have talked about on the other 

side of the House. 

 

As far as control by the Minister, no question, their program would have contained the same kind of 

approach as ours is with respect to the Department of Education or Continuing Education and thus the 

Minister. 

 

Now a very legitimate question was asked, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the financing of the community 

college program. And it is interesting as I listened to the Members opposite that the Member for 

Athabasca was saying that the financial control with the Department of Continuing Education will be a 

very serious drawback to the program. As I recall the Member for Wilkie speaking, said that it is 

necessary in fact to have that financial control in the Department of Continuing Education. 

 

Now we agree with the Member for Wilkie that it is 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1723 

important to have financial control. If the Member for Athabasca believes, I think that is what he was 

saying, that the board should have a right to levy a property levy for community college, then I think he 

is wrong. I think he is wrong and I think the Member for Wilkie thinks he is wrong. If that means 

autonomy for a board to levy a mill rate for this program then I think he is wrong. There has to be, it 

seems to me, some financial control of the program centrally, particularly with respect to the present 

legislation. How it will be financed, now and in the future, will be through a grant from the Department 

of Continuing Education. But there will be a tuition fee charged to students who embark on the 

programs. We don’t see any reason why there shouldn’t be that kind of local input into the program at 

the community level. The board will levy a tuition fee for the varying programs that they conduct. And 

certainly as is the case of the technical student as is in the case of the university student, if assistance is 

needed for the tuition, for board and room by students participating in the program, our loan bursary 

program will be available to them. 

 

Let me, in winding up, say that the legislation as presently drafted is legislation that is drafted for the 

four pilots. We are just going down the road in this new program. The philosophy it seems to us dictates 

some special kinds of clauses in the legislation, some special kinds of restrictions with respect to boards 

and how they are appointed. As we develop the program, as we look into the future, there is no question 

but we can see boards being partially elected or totally elected. No reason why those boards can’t have 

complete autonomy with respect to their staff. But if we are going to make this work it seems to us that 

it is important that we at this point at least have some kind of control. For certainly every one that has 

spoken in this House has said we don’t want junior universities, we don’t want the technical vocational 

approach. We do want the community program. We think this legislation, established for the pilots, will 

bring that forward in this province. And as I said before, we will bring leadership to community 

education, into adult education in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 60 — An Act to provide Financial Assistance to Encourage and Promote the Development and 

Expansion of the Agricultural Industry in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. W. A. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments 

with respect to Bill 60, The FarmStart Bill. As an urban Member I very strongly support this 

Government’s concentration and emphasis on re-vitalization of the rural economy of Saskatchewan. I 

think it is absolutely essential not only for Saskatchewan as a whole but also in terms of the cities, 

Saskatoon, Regina and even the smaller cities. We cannot possibly expand and grow without a 

re-vitalized rural economy. I think we should look at the statistical data related to the 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1724 

situation in agriculture in Saskatchewan. This will enable us to clearly place ourselves in a position 

where we would give strong support to this type of legislation. 

 

Statistically Saskatchewan had some 85,000 farms in 1966. This was reduced to 76,690 by 1971. That 

trend has been here for a long time. In fact it has been here for some 15 or 20 years. The Liberal 

Government from 1964 to 1971 claimed that they were going to try to bring sufficient industrialization 

to the province to stem the population decline and they were not successful, Mr. Speaker. Their 

emphasis, of course, was on bringing industry to the province. This Government’s emphasis is on 

agriculture and the processing industries related to the basic industry — agriculture. 

 

We should take a look at these 77,000 some odd farms in 1971 in relation to their economic situation. Of 

those farms, only 22,000 or a little better than 22,000 actually had sales of agricultural products in that 

year of $10,000. This means if you assume roughly 60 per cent of the costs of production are in 

expenses which have to be recovered in terms of the agricultural industry, that even the top 30-35 per 

cent of our farms only had a net return of about $4,000 per annum. Mr. Speaker, $4,000 per annum is a 

pretty minimal annual income in today’s world, some $333 a month. The 1971 census also indicates 

there were some 24,000 farms in the category which had sales between $5,000 and $10,000 on an annual 

basis. There were some 16,000 farms with sales between $2,500 and $5,000. There were almost 14,000 

farms in the province which had gross sales of less than $2,500. Obviously farmers in this category are 

living well below the poverty line. 

 

One of the major problems in the province and all of us should realize this, is related to the declining 

population particularly in rural areas. Rural inhabitants’ capability of maintaining the social structures 

required in those areas decline as well. Grid roads on which we have an investment of some $175 

million, perhaps $100 million at the provincial level and $75 million on the municipal level; schools 

which probably have a total plant investment in the range of up to $300 million; hospitals that range 

from $350 million to $500 million; business establishments and associated services all added together 

perhaps total some $2 to $3 billion in capital in terms of rural investment which could go down the drain 

unless we take imaginative steps to alter the trend. That will only occur if we are willing to be a bit 

aggressive in terms of what we decide to do. The Liberal Party when they were the government watched 

that steadily decreasing trend in population and did not devise any comprehensive or imaginative 

programs to stem the decline. It is like watching a fellow bleeding to death and saying, I’ll come back 10 

years later and see how you are making out. It just doesn’t work that way. That route leads to disaster. 

 

For us really to do something about this situation, action is required. I am of the opinion that Bill No. 60 

creates a situation that will give us at least a tool which may well assist in halting decline in rural 

population. Mr. Speaker, it may result in an increase, even if that increase occurs on a rather modest 

basis. I noticed the other day when the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) was speaking in this 

debate he said that in reality all this Bill was doing was bringing together a number of prior programs 

which provide incentives for farm operations. Well, if that be the case, so be it, but at least 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1725 

we must make a serious attempt to stem the population decline. 

 

Looking again specifically at the principle of the Bill, it bears a relation to the fact that statistically our 

farms are in trouble and, Mr. Speaker, they have been in trouble for a considerable period of time. We 

may say that with increased grain prices and markets we can make some progress in improving the 

economic returns to the agricultural industry. While true, that can be a pretty dicey situation, because 

there is not much stability in that approach. In actual fact, all the grain production in this province could 

come from about 12,000 people. That would mean that we would have two large provincial centers, 

some minor smaller cities and the rural areas would be largely denuded of population and obviously 

would be denuded of services. I think it highly important that we do our utmost to turn this trend around 

and I believe the FarmStart Bill is one which gives us reason to believe that we can effect this very much 

desired change. 

 

The Bill itself will permit loans up to $60,000 and grants up to $8,000. Under the Bill people will be 

eligible if they have less than $100,000 of productive assets. The Bill is oriented in a manner in which 

people who have incomes of less than $10,000 per annum will be eligible to participate in the FarmStart 

program. This will be another means of creating employment because livestock production is labor 

intensive, much more labor intensive than grain farming. It will assist us to probably increase the 

population in the rural areas and in itself will provide considerable stimulus to the general economy 

because of the need for constructing new facilities related to intensified livestock production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an urban Member of this House I wholeheartedly support the emphasis that the 

Government currently places on measures which may revitalize the rural economy and the rural 

communities of Saskatchewan. Personally, Mr. Speaker, I do not want to live in a province where we 

find large concentrated urban areas with the rural areas largely denuded population and of services. 

Frankly, if that rural population declines sufficiently it will not be possible to maintain even a minimum 

of good community services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. G. Richards: — (Saskatoon University) Mr. Speaker, I too should like to rise in support of the 

principles of this Bill. I think the Bill basically has two purposes. Very simply put, the Bill is seeking to 

encourage one further program towards farm diversification and secondly the Bill displays a very 

healthy concern with the whole question of equity in farm programs. 

 

Diversification, Mr. Speaker, is one of those motherhood words in the realm of farm management, like 

efficiency, good management, etc. Everybody talks about it, everybody is in favor of it, rather like the 

weather, nobody does very much 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1726 

about it. What has really happened in the Saskatchewan rural economy when we take seriously the 

statistics over the last decade of experience with programs designed to encourage farm diversification? I 

am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that we cannot avoid a pessimistic conclusion. In 1961 grains accounted for 67 

per cent, fully two-thirds of the farm cash receipts; livestock in that year accounted for 22 per cent and 

the remainder came from various miscellaneous payments. In 1972, Mr. Speaker, the last year, of 

course, for which data is available, grains accounted for 68 per cent and livestock 25 per cent. After 11 

years experience receipts from grain rose one per cent as a percentage of total cash receipts; livestock 

receipts a three per cent increase. Surely this is not a very dramatic diversification record! There is 

admittedly some shift between different grains. In 1961 wheat contributed 60 per cent of total receipts 

and that had declined to 52 per cent by 1972. Apart from that internal shift within grain production one 

cannot deny the remarkable stability in relative terms of grains versus livestock in total cash receipt 

statistics of the Saskatchewan farms. 

 

To be a little more specific and break these figures down a bit, wheat bottomed out in 1969 at 44 per 

cent of total cash receipts and since then the percentage from wheat has actually been increasing. Wheat 

was 52 per cent in 1972 and with good prospects of sales, (if we get a crop this year) who can be really 

optimistic that, in the short run there will be any further diversification out of wheat. On the other hand, 

as for other grains, after all the attempts that have been made to diversify grain production, other grains 

as a cash percentage peaked in 1969 at 24 per cent of total receipts. They declined by 1972 to 16 per 

cent. As for livestock, it too peaked in 1970 at 27 per cent of farm receipts and it has marginally 

declined down to 25 per cent in 1972. 

 

I don’t mean to be a Cassandra by making public these statements or by analyzing these statistics, but I 

think we must be very acutely conscious of the problem of whether any of our programs will seriously 

put a stop to the charms which wheat has had as the siren attracting the Saskatchewan farmer. One of the 

most persistent characteristics of our provincial economy has been wheat. In 1972, after all the attempts 

at agricultural diversification and beyond that attempts to diversify our economy out of agriculture and 

into mining and manufacturing, 38 per cent of net commodity production in Saskatchewan in 1972 still 

comes from wheat. Add to that other grains and fully 56 per cent of commodity production in 

Saskatchewan still comes from grain. 

 

We all know the dangers of a one-crop economy. We are all anxious of what can happen to our 

provincial economy given instabilities of climate and markets for wheat. With that fear in mind I wish 

this program every success. I hope that it can have the desired impact of seriously convincing farmers to 

diversify. 

 

Referring now to the second principle, that of equity. Equity is another of those vague general words 

which we are all very keen about, but it does hopefully have some substance when it comes to 

determining programs. Far too often agricultural experts are solely concerned with maximizing the 

aggregate of value of commodity production and are unconcerned about one of the distributive effects of 

the income thereby generated in the farm economy. Many farm programs have been discredited, 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1727 

not because the basic intent was wrong but because of their failure to come to grips with who gets the 

benefits from the programs. Programs which provide public money to large farmers discredit themselves 

in the eyes of the public. Therefore, I am pleased that this program is oriented towards smaller farmers 

and it has in it the ceiling for eligibility of $100,000 available assets, and other constraints so that grants 

and subsidized loans will not be going to the large farmers who do not need them. 

 

I am also pleased to see the idea of agricultural development counsellors providing farm management 

skills in the context of family farming and not making the assumption that we necessarily need further 

and further farm consolidation in order to get efficient farm management. There is an element of 

pessimism among agricultural economists who assume the only way to have efficient farming is to do 

away with small operators and to adapt the industrial model of large corporations to farming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Otto Lang deserves a certain credit, from Members on this side of the House, not 

only for having helped get us elected but for the popular uprising against his Agricultural Task Force, 

but rather more seriously for the fact that he, as a politician, was willing to have published the 

Agricultural Task Force report which for all its failures in terms of radical concepts or new directions in 

farming, did at least have the virtue of painting clearly what were the trends in farming in terms of 

increasing size, in terms of declining population etc. It is the reality of these trends which are the 

overwhelming fact in agricultural policy in the 1970s. I hope that FarmStart can, via various pricing 

mechanisms in its grant formulas, have some substantial impact upon diversification. However, I think 

that the farming community at some date in this decade will have to choose explicitly, and hopefully 

there will be a political forum in which it can choose explicitly as to whether it wants to maintain 

independent small family operations, whether it wants to try to revitalize co-op farming as a model or 

whether it wants to accept corporate farming as the inevitable conclusion of Saskatchewan rural 

development. 

 

There are, crudely speaking, those three choices before Saskatchewan farmers. It is not for me, as an 

urban Member, to make that choice for them. All the programs that we have to date, good and however 

well-intentioned, FarmStart may be as one of them, will ultimately prove insufficient unless farmers 

conduct that explicit debate and unless they are prepared to take the legislative measures to make that 

choice real. With that warning and with that air of guarded optimism, I am glad to give my support to 

the principle of FarmStart legislation. 

 

I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

March 19, 1973 

 

 

1728 

INTRODUCTION OF SPECIAL GUEST 
 

Canada’s Easter Seal Timmy 
 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney: — (Premier) I should like to introduce to you a special guest. Seated in the 

Speaker’s Gallery is Master Danny Musgrove, the 1973 Timmy for all of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Many of you I think will have heard of Timmy and seen him on television, seen him 

at two successive Kinockey Games, and know something of the Danny Musgrove story. It is really a 

remarkable story. Danny is 11 years old, he is a grade six student at Richmond Heights School in 

Saskatoon where he maintains a better than average academic standing. He plays defence for his schools 

‘C’ Division hockey team; he has a Fifth Star in swimming at the YMCA; participates in wrestling, floor 

hockey, lacrosse; he plays the trombone in the school band. This is a pretty active life for any young 

fellow. It is a particularly active life for a young fellow who has the disabilities that Danny has. I think 

we all know them, he has a number of physical disabilities, more particularly he has two artificial legs. 

Any of us who have difficulty skating with two good legs as we demonstrated, I think perhaps 

unnecessarily clearly at the Kinockey Night the other night, we all know just what an accomplishment 

that is. I think Danny is a credit to himself particularly, but also to his parents, his school and his city, 

and he is an inspiration for people young and old who suffer from a physical handicap. He is a living 

example that persons who suffer from a physical handicap can, and do, live a full and complete life. 

 

I know that all in this House would want to welcome Danny formally and I will ask him to stand. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, just a very few words to associate myself and the 

Members on this side with the remarks of the Premier. 

 

I am sure that there is one thing we would all agree politically, privately at least, and perhaps this is a 

good time to do it publicly, when we look and listen to the achievements of a young chap like Danny, 

we stop, as politicians — at least I did in listening to the Premier — and realize that there is one thing 

that political parties are not very good at and that is the kind of inspiration and the kind of example that 

this young man has given us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly on this side and all Members, congratulate him on the job he is doing himself 

in showing everybody how one can live with disabilities and live tremendously. I say, again, we are glad 

to see you here. Keep up the good work. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:31 o’clock p.m. 


