



















































Hansard: February 20, 1973


927 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

19th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 20, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce to you and to all 

Members of the Assembly two groups of students from the constituency of Regina North West. The first 

group located in the west gallery consists of 38 Grade Eight students from St. Philip School. Their 

principal Gerald Small is with them. Gerald Small is a man of great teaching ability, he taught my 

children successfully when he was the principal of St. Mary’s School. The other group of students I 

should like to introduce are seated above them in the same gallery and they are from St. Pat’s Annex, 

division of Saskatchewan Applied Arts and Science. This group of 28 upgrading students have their 

teacher Stan Metcalfe with them. One student I should like to call your attention to, Matilda McNeil 

who is from Fort Smith in the North West Territories. A special welcome to this lady. To all the students 

on behalf of the Assembly I say a warm welcome and may your visit with us be pleasant, informative 

and educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

RULINGS BY SPEAKER 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before I call the Orders of the Day I have two different Speaker’s Rulings I should 

like to give at this time. 

 

Appearing on the Order Paper for today, I direct all Hon. Members’ attention to Motions for Returns No. 

42 and 53, as they appear in the Orders of the Day. Both of the said motions are seeking information 

regarding the Workmen’s Compensation Board. I would ask Members to look at Beauchesne’s 

Parliamentary Rules and Forms, fourth Edition 1958, Citation 178, which states that, 

 

Questions addressed to the Ministers should relate to the public affairs with which they are officially 

connected to proceedings pending in Parliament or to any matter of administration for which the 

Minister is responsible. 

 

The problem at this point is: whether a Minister of the Crown is responsible for the Workmen’s 

Compensation Board to the degree that the Minister can answer the two motions under question. Section 

11 of The Workmen’s Compensation Accident Fund Act states, 

 

That appointments to the Board are made by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. 

 

Section 23 of the Act states that: 

 

1. The Board shall appoint an executive secretary and a 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

928 

chief medical officer and may appoint such auditors, actuaries, accountants, inspectors, medical 

referees, other officers, clerks and servants as the board deems necessary for carrying out the 

provisions of this Act and may prescribe their duties and fix their salaries. 

 

2. Every person so appointed shall hold office during the pleasure of the Board. 

 

The Act indicates that the Minister is responsible for the appointment of Board Members and for their 

salaries. The Act is very clear however in spelling out that the Board itself is independently responsible 

for the hiring of the staff, their conduct and their salaries. The staff of the Board is thus the responsibility 

of the Board alone. 

 

Section 29 of the Act states that Members shall enjoy the same immunity and the same privilege as are 

conferred upon judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench for any act done or omitted in the execution of 

their duties. 

 

I refer Hon. Members to the Speaker’s Ruling which carefully examined the powers, rights and 

immunities of the Workmen’s Compensation Board, I refer the Members to the Journals of 

Saskatchewan 1966, page 48. In summary it seems clear that the Legislature can question or debate all 

matters which are directly related to the Board members, but not to appointments made by the Board. 

Administrative actions of the staff since the staff is responsible to the Board and not to the Minister, and 

any decisions of the Board. 

 

Returns No. 42 and 53 pertain to staff appointments and their administrative actions. Since these Returns 

are the responsibility of the Board and not of the Minister of this Assembly, I rule the said motions out 

of order. 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, if I might just ask a question in that regard. Could I ask the 

Attorney General or the Premier where during the proceedings of the Legislature could we get this 

information? 

 

It is a Board that is set by Order in Council. I am sure that somewhere along the line they must have 

some responsibility to this House to answer questions similar to what we have on the Order Paper. I 

should just like to ask the Attorney General when can we get this information which I am sure is public 

information and should be made available to all Members of the Legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it would appear from the rulings which have been made 

in this House over a number of years that the information sought by the Member is not strictly required 

to be answered by the Government at any time, so far as I can appreciate the rulings. I have examined 

some of the authorities and the ruling is, I think, correct in a technical sense. I think that we should 

redefine this matter so that some Member of the Government is in fact responsible for the administration 

of the Board, but that no Minister shall be answerable for the decisions of the Board on the awards that 

they make. I think that this would be consistent with the sort of judicial position of the Board and the 

fact that it is part of the administration of the Government. Without prejudice, and speaking for my 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

929 

colleague the Minister of Labor (Mr. Snyder) I would answer to the Member that we would be prepared 

to answer these questions as an accommodation to the House until we sort this matter out, on the Labor 

Estimates, Administration Vote, if that is satisfactory with the House. As I say, I have looked at this. I 

think the Speaker is entirely right, but I think we ought to sort out this matter as a House, at some 

appropriate time. 

 

Bill No. 1 - An Act to Amend the Land Bank Act 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The second statement I should like to give at this time, standing on the Order Paper for 

today is an Order for Second Reading of Bill No. 1 – An Act to amend The Land Bank Act, 1972. I have 

examined this Bill very closely and have sought legal advice as to the full effect of the proposed Bill. 

The effect of Bill No. 1, if passed, would be to make provisions for the sale of land handled by the Land 

Bank Commission, The Land Bank Act of 1972. 

 

All property, whether real or personal, and all money acquired, administered, possessed or received by 

the Commission, is the property of Her Majesty in the right of Saskatchewan and shall for all purposes 

include taxation of whatever nature and description be deemed to be the property of Her Majesty. Rule 

Number 30 of the Rules and Proceedings of this Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan of 1970 states: 

 

Any vote, resolution, address or Bill introduced into the Assembly for the appropriation of any part of 

the public revenue or of any tax or impost to any purpose whatsoever or to impose any new or 

additional charge upon the public revenue or upon the people, or to release or compound any sum of 

money due to the Crown, or to grant any property of the Crown, or to authorize any loan or any charge 

upon the credit of the province, shall be recommended to the Assembly by Message of His Honor the 

Lieutenant Governor before it is considered by the Assembly. 

 

As I say, that is our Standing Order 30. 

 

Under The Land Bank Act, 1972, all land held by the Commission is the property of Her Majesty. Since 

Bill No. 1 provides for the selling of this Crown land, it is a money bill and contravenes Rule 30. I, 

therefore, rule Bill No. 1 out of order. 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, on your ruling Sir, general interpretation of this ruling has 

always dwelt upon the question whether or not a motion moved by the Opposition would bring about 

public spending. While I appreciate that this legislation, Bill No. 1 that is before us, if adopted, could 

possibly bring that about, but it doesn’t because we would debate it and adopt it, it doesn’t necessarily 

bring about a return of funds or money to the Queen, or the Government in this case. The immediate 

result of adopting that Bill would not necessarily infringe upon Rule 30. I suggest in all deference, Mr. 

Speaker, that your strict interpretation of that Rule doesn’t apply to the question of whether or not we 

debate the Bill in question. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, surely there is a difference between an option and a 

requirement. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

930 

Mr. Speaker: —  I have sought the legal advice which is available to me and that is the information that 

I have that this is a money bill. Because any motion which purports to either acquire to the Crown 

additional property or transfer or dispose of it becomes a money bill. Under Standing Rule 30, then I 

have no option but to rule this out of order. Members can discuss this during the Estimates or during 

other times what they have in mind. I have no knowledge that amendments to this Bill will be brought in 

by the Minister concerned, at that time Members may discuss it. But at this time I have no alternative 

than to rule it out of order. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, again on the point and on your ruling, I must disagree in a sense — I see 

your point, I can read the rule, of course — but the fact remains that the adoption or the debate on this 

particular bill and indeed its adoption would not necessarily result in any additional income or charge 

being returned a sum of money to the province. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would urge you to 

reconsider or go back again to your legal advisors and have a look at this. A mere adoption of it 

wouldn’t necessarily mean funds or money immediately coming to the province or the provincial coffers 

as a result. It is on that point, on the point of the option, that I would have to disagree with your ruling in 

that sense. 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, Rule 30 to me indicates quite clearly that it would have to 

be a charge on the public purse, this bill we don’t feel in any way is. We designed it very carefully for 

that purpose. The only part in Rule 30 which may be a bit of a problem, or debatable and we looked at 

this too, says, "or to grant any property of the Crown." This says ‘grant’, it doesn’t say ‘sell’ or dispose 

in some other manner. I don’t believe that the part about a charge in the public purse applies at all as far 

as this particular Bill is concerned. The part about ‘grant any property of the Crown’ if this was 

construed as selling, of course, could be a problem. My interpretation of grant would certainly be grant 

of some property without charge and this is not, of course, what we are doing in the Bill. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, maybe this isn’t on the point, but I put it forward as 

a suggestion to you in reconsidering. The present legislation, of course, does provide that after a given 

period of time the lands in the particular bill referred to may be sold. All we are doing is changing the 

date. So in that sense again, may I respectfully suggest to ask you to reconsider this ruling in this case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, have you called Orders of the Day? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No not yet. 

 

I am prepared to hold it over, but if I do hold it over until I have a chance to go over it, that this Bill 

cannot be called today. But my advice has been that, a disposition, whether it could be a loss or a gain or 

even an equal value, it is still property of the Crown and which can only be done by a Minister of the 

Crown. But I am prepared to hold it over until a future day and discuss privately with any of the 

Members concerned. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

931 

STATEMENT 

 

Automobile Accident Insurance 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I 

might be permitted to make a brief statement concerning Automobile Accident Insurance rates for 

1973-74. 

 

During the 1972-73 licence year auto insurance claims increased sharply, as Members know and the Act 

experienced a large underwriting loss. Indications are that little improvement can be expected during the 

1973-74 licence year. In 1972 the experience and frequency of claims was approximately 20 per cent 

over last year, producing an estimated underwriting loss of $2 million during the licence year, the Act 

will be paying out 98 cents out of every dollar taken, compared with the break-even point of 84 cents. In 

view of this increasing trend and on the advice of management, it has been decided to increase those 

classes of licences that are putting an abnormal drain on the fund. For those vehicles 1952 or older, rates 

will not change. For 1953 to 1963 year models, rates not only will not change upwards, but will be 

reduced an average of $5.00. Rates for 1964 and 1965 year models will also remain unchanged. 

However, for 1966 to 1969 vehicles rates will be increased an average of $3.00 to $5.00. The 1970-73 

models will be increased in rate by $15.00 to $20.00. All 1974 models have been set as a new rate 

group, at an average rate of $125. 

 

Experience dictates that the rate increases are required also for lightweight newer models in the farm 

truck class. Rates on those trucks over 7,500 pounds used almost exclusively for farm purposes remain 

basically unchanged. Rates on all 1965 and older trucks, regardless of pounds, will also remain the 

same. For those newer model trucks 7,500 pounds and under, the following rates will apply: 1966 and 

1967 models have increased from $3.00 to $5.00; 1968 to 1971 have been increased from $11.00 to 

$15.00; 1972 to 1974 models have been increased by $25.00. These rates again reflect the fact that the 

newer the model of the vehicle, the more costly the repair. 

 

For taxis, trucks, power units, semi-trailers and dealer plates, an overall increase of the present 

premiums is also required to bring these groups into line. It is planned to use accumulated reserves 

during the following years to stabilize rates. Without these rate increases today, the reserve fund would 

soon be depleted. 

 

Mr. Speaker in 1972 Saskatchewan motorists travelled 3.7 billion miles, but they were very costly miles. 

Saskatchewan motorists set their own auto insurance rates. In 1973 let’s all make an individual effort to 

save lives and dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in comment on the statement made by the 

Minister. I am pleased to see he made it to the House. I see the ad here in the Leader-Post that the Hon. 

Roy Romanow will go on the television tonight. I saw on the same ad a picture of Brigitte Bardot 

covering something up. I don’t know how much is 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

932 

covered up here but maybe we can find out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate that this is another NDP promise made and another NDP promise 

broken. Their New Deal for People said they would reduce by as much as 25 per cent the rates on auto 

insurance. They did say they would add one cent a gallon on and they haven’t done this either. 

 

When we left the Government there was $10 million surplus in the SGIO. Obviously through 

mismanagement that money has disappeared and they are in trouble. This is the second year in a row 

that they have raised the rates. We’re not sure that we’ve got all the rate increases yet. I’d like to ask 

how much more revenue this will bring in. 

 

He started off his little speech and he said that there will be no increase in the 1955 cars. I got a note 

from John Gardner and he said, "Would you please thank the Minister that he did not raise the rates on 

the 1929 Model As." I’m sure that will be a great relief to all of those people. And all the people driving 

the 1955 cars and older aren’t going to have the rates raised. All the people driving 1962 cars and older 

also won’t be affected. But, for the people driving the rest of the cars, which is 99 per cent of them, the 

Government got a $25 million windfall from the Federal Government last night, $25 million, thanks to 

Otto Lang and Pierre Trudeau — and you socked it to the public today with this increase in automobile 

rates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I think it’s a shame, it’s a disgrace, it’s an example of the way they run their Crown 

corporations, it’s an example of the way they run their business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’m only responsible for one. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, just like that, the way you’re running it. We wrote it all off and I’m just waiting to 

see how bad a mess you got that into this year, but we’ll deal with that later. 

 

I’m wondering if the Minister would tell the House today, the full truth, not like last year where it took 

us about a week or ten days to find out the full truth. How much more money in revenue will this bring 

into SGIO? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I can’t answer that exactly because I don’t have the information with me right 

now. I’m getting the Whip to get the file down to give you. I can tell you it’s based on the basis of the 

accident rate that we are currently in right now. We’re basing the rates on this year. If the accident rate 

maintains itself and the SGIO people advise me that it appears to be levelling but will be maintaining 

itself at that level, on these new rates, that is to say, some increased, some decreased, some unchanged, 

on these new rates and at the same frequency rate, there will be a profit, a modest surplus of 

approximately $250,000 at the end of the next year. That’s the sort of projection for one year. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, just a supplementary question. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

933 

He hasn’t answered the question but I presume he has told the House he will get that information for us. 

When he is getting the information or maybe he could tell us today, the fact that you inherited a $10 

million surplus, how much have you lost since you became the Government in SGIO? What has been 

your loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — With respect to the $10 million surplus, Mr. Speaker, it still is there. It’s not a 

surplus, it is in unappropriated reserves. That’s the thing you are referring to when you are talking about 

the $10 million surplus because Mr. Boldt and the former Government set up a number of categories of 

contingency funds, catastrophe reserves, premium equalization reserves and the like. We set one up last 

year as the result of certain amendments to expand the benefits to the AAIA. Those reserves are still in 

existence. This year, as I have said, we’ve experienced a bad underwriting loss. The report will show 

that in detail in the next couple of days or so. It’s about $2 million on AAIA for the year that is running 

out. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You have a $10 million surplus and you are going to sock the people an extra $2 

million this year. That then is the answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! We can’t debate the financial situation of the SGIO. That can be done in 

Crown corporations. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Three Per Cent Provincial Income Tax Increase 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I could direct a 

question to our provincial Minister of Finance. In view of Finance Minister Turner’s very welcome and 

very expansionist Budget of last night . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — . . . in particular with reference to his announced proposal to increase the equalization 

payment to our province of in the neighborhood of $26 million, and due to the fact that that is intended, 

as I understand it, to go toward alleviating local education costs, I wonder if our Minister of Finance 

here in Saskatchewan (Mr. Cowley) is prepared to forego his proposal of increasing provincial tax rates 

by three per cent to do, in effect, the same thing? And this does it so much better, there is $26 million as 

opposed to $7 million. Would the Minister tell the House if he is prepared to forego that increase and let 

our people enjoy the full increases announced by Mr. Turner last night? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cowley (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that question is ‘no’. I’d like to 

remind the Members opposite that part of the reason for that change was the quiet attendance at a 

federal-provincial 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

934 

meeting some three months ago. I’d also like to remind the Members opposite and I’m sure Mr. Turner 

has it in the back of his mind, that he still has to get that Budget passed. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Just one supplementary question, if I may, Mr. Speaker. In light of the Minister’s 

refusal in this instance, I wonder if he would be prepared then to assure us that he’d give that money to 

our school grants vote to enable the school boards to effectively reduce mill rates from 43 mills to an 

actual 25 mills instead of a fictional one? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — On questions the rules are that the Members could ask the Ministers questions when 

we have oral questions on what is a fait accompli but they can’t ask for a future policy and I think we are 

getting into future policies. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 

 

Return No. 107 

 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 107 showing: 

 

(a) Whether the Saskatchewan Securities Commission made any investigations in the year 1972. (b) If 

so, the number. (c) If so, the names of persons making the statement under oath to the Commission. (d) 

If so, the names of the persons investigated. (e) If so, the action taken by the Securities Commission. 

(f) If action taken, the reasons for the action taken. (g) If no action taken, the reasons for no action 

being taken. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 107, again, a 

problem has arisen with respect to the way the question is worded. We are concerned in our department 

about the matter of revealing the names of persons who made statements under oath to the Commission 

in item (c); and in item (d) the names of the persons investigated. It has been communicated to me by 

my officers that this would be a very dangerous precedent for us to set. In effect, we might very well 

jeopardize some investigations to some extent if we start listing the names of all the people who are 

investigated. One could imagine what ramifications this might have with respect to investigative 

activities of the Securities Commission, and the Attorney General’s department that helps out from time 

to time. So what I should like to do is delete (c) and (e) and make just one or two very brief other 

amendments which again, I don’t believe will ruin the intention of the motion and still will allow the 

Hon. Member to have the information that he seeks. If you could give that to Mr. Lane, please. 

 

I would therefore move, seconded by the Hon. Premier (Mr. Blakeney) that the motion that an Order of 

the Assembly for Return No. 107 be amended as follows: 

 

  (i)  clauses (c) and (d) be deleted; 

  (ii)  clause (e) be renumbered to read clause (c) and the words "and the name of the corporation or   

     person against whom action was taken" be added; 

  (iii) clause (f) be renumbered to read clause (d); 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

935 

 (iv)  clause (g) be renumbered to read clause (e). 

 

Mr. Lane: — Speaking to the amendment, it’s my concern, and I realize the implications, that the 

accused may perhaps be better prepared to face his accuser assuming he knows the situation that exists, 

when a report or statement is made under oath, is made through the relative provisions of The Securities 

Commission Act, I am somewhat concerned that although there may be some wondering what the 

situation or the position of the Government is as to making that information known to the accused who 

has such an oath made against him. Again, I realize, and I don’t want to see the Government or the 

Securities Commission in the position where it can’t take statements or people will be afraid to make 

statements under oath, but I am concerned about the idea that the accused should know who his accuser 

is, and we express some concern on that proposed clause (i) of that amendment. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 108 
 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 108 showing: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Maple Bush No. 224, as of January 25, 1973: (a) the number of 

applications that were received to sell land to the Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of 

contracts or agreements to purchase by the Commission that have been approved; (ii) the number of 

purchases that have actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) and (ii) above, the (a) land number of 

each quarter section; (b) acreage cultivated in each quarter section; (c) acreage of native grass in each 

quarter section; (d) acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter section; (e) assessed value of each quarter 

section and (f) price offered for each quarter section. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again, the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) who has 

direct interest in the Land Bank is not with us today. I should like him to be present to make such 

remarks as he would like to with respect to this motion. Accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make one comment here and I don’t wish to 

get into an argument with the Attorney General. I think we all recognize . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! What motion are you speaking to? 

 

Mr. Guy: — On the one that was just called. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That one is adjourned, you know. The Attorney General asked leave to adjourn the 

debate. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

936 

Mr. MacDonald: — We said ‘no’. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The majority of the House said ‘yes’, so the debate is adjourned. It doesn’t have to be 

unanimous, it’s a majority vote on an adjournment motion. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — On whether or not we shall adjourn? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — There are other motions of the same type which can be discussed at the right time 

before the motion for adjournment is adopted. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 109 

 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 109 showing: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Huron No. 223, as of January 25, 1973: (a) the number of applications 

that were received to sell land to the Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of contracts or 

agreements to purchase by the Commission that have been approved; (ii) the number of purchases that 

have actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) and (ii) above, the (a) land number of each quarter 

section; (b) acreage cultivated in each quarter section; (c) acreage of native grass in each quarter 

section; (d) acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter section; (e) assessed value of each quarter section 

and (f) price offered for each quarter section. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in the earlier one, I don’t wish to get into an argument with the 

Attorney General because as he says there are 45 over there and 15 over here and they can vote 

everyone of these down, we can call for a standing vote and it would take the whole afternoon. But I 

think we recognize that these have been on the Order Paper for some 19 days now, just about almost a 

month, not quite. There has been plenty of time for Members opposite to have their amendments made. 

We had another example this afternoon, I think, which has been very common during the proceedings of 

these questions and Orders for Return. Question 208, 209 and 210 were asked for last Thursday. On 

Thursday the Attorney General stood them, on Friday he stood them, on Monday he stood them, and 

now today he asks to have them made as motions for return. Now surely to goodness, Mr. Speaker, there 

is only one reason for that and that is to delay providing the answers to this Legislature. If he knew 

today that that was a question that should have been made a motion for return, surely he could have 

made it last Thursday when it was on the Order Paper. And we’ve been going through this procedure of 

standing questions and then having them made into orders for return. As I say I don’t think we want to 

get into arguments across the floor in the type of handling of the questions in this Legislature. They have 

never been handled in this way in the past. Why should we handle them this way this year, this is the 

first time that we have gone into that approach. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

937 

As far as these Returns, they have had plenty of time. Because one Minister is away, surely to goodness 

somebody else in the Government can make the necessary amendment so that we can vote on them and 

get them out of the way and get the answers back before the Estimates and the whole thing will speed up 

and improve and accommodate the work of this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, just a comment on what has been said. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the Hon. Member speaks now he closed the debate. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, just a word on the remarks of the Member for Athabasca. 

 

I should like to point out to the Member that this year the Opposition has, according to my records (I 

haven’t done a detailed check) has passed well over 200 questions in the 19 days or so of this Session. A 

lot of those questions have been answered. A lot of those questions involve a tremendous amount of man 

power in terms of preparing for the answers. It is the policy of this Government to answer the questions 

that can be reasonably answered according to the rules as quickly as possible. 

 

According to my record, there are 144 notices of Motions before this House. That adds and compounds 

to the work that the Government has to cope with in order to make sure that these questions are properly 

answered. 

 

I am sure the Member will realize, he having had experience as a Minister of the Crown, that these 

matters do have to involve some consultation with colleagues. We have to receive their views as to 

whether or not the question can be answered in proper form or not or if there is some amendment that is 

necessary in order to get the full answer. As far as I am concerned questions have been handled as 

expeditiously as possible in this House and certainly as expeditiously as they have ever been handled in 

the five years that I have been in this House. That is not to take any credit for myself. It just happens to 

be, I think, the nature of the system that works both ways. 

 

All that I can say to you is that these are very important questions. These are questions that the Minister 

of Agriculture obviously wants to be heard on. There is nothing that I can do to substitute for him in this 

request and, therefore, because he is not here and because he wants to be heard. I have no other choice 

again, Mr. Speaker, but to beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I should like the Members to read the standing orders of 29 to sub (2) which says, all 

Motions including adjournment Motions and Motions until we have second reading in the Committee 

stage of the Bill, all these Motions shall be decided without debate or amendments. So once an 

adjournment motion is made I have to put the Motion and it is decided by the majority of the House. 

 

Now the Attorney General has asked to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

938 

Return No. 110 

 

Mr. Wiebe moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 110 showing: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Enfield No. 194, as of January 25, 1973: (a) the number of applications 

that were received to sell land to The Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of contracts or 

agreements to purchase by the Commission that have been approved; (ii) the number of purchases that 

have actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) above, the (a) land number of each quarter section; (b) 

acreage cultivated in each quarter section; (c) acreage of native grass in each quarter section; (d) 

acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter section; (e) assessed value of each quarter section and (f) 

price offered for each quarter section. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a word. I should like to point out that as of yet we 

have not asked the Government of Saskatchewan to do any work in regard to any question on the Order 

Paper. 

 

First of all until they are passed by this House, no department in the Government of Saskatchewan is 

required to do anything. So there has been absolutely no work required in the 19 days that this Session 

has been in operation or since these questions have been put on the Order Paper. All that has been 

required is the Minister of Agriculture to say yea or nay. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has assured us that information on the Land Bank would 

be made available in this Assembly. To date there isn’t a farmer in Saskatchewan who even knows what 

a lease form looks like. There isn’t a farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan who knows what price for 

agricultural land is being paid by the Government of Saskatchewan and the Land Bank, or what impact 

this price or sale, made by the Land Bank, has upon other agricultural sales in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Just what exactly is the Department of Agriculture, the Land Bank and the Government 

of Saskatchewan attempting to hide in relation to the Land Bank Commission? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I would remind the Hon. Member that on these motions we must keep 

the debate to what the Motion is on the Order Paper. We can’t get into a wide discussion on the principle 

involved. We must stay to the motion before us. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I have been on the Motion if you would care to read it, Sir. 

 

I am talking about the number of contracts, the amount of the acreage, the value of each quarter section, 

the price offered for each. I have been talking about nothing, Sir, but the Motion itself. I should like 

permission to proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that this information, requested in these Orders for Return, be made known 

to the people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the farmers. The NDP and the 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

939 

Land Bank Commission have refused to provide any information. There are farmers waiting to apply for 

leases, there are farmers who have had offers for sale. This is almost like the Gestapo. It is so secret and 

there is absolutely no information made available. We feel that after 19 days, no information nor any 

work has been provided by the Department of Agriculture. The farmers of Saskatchewan have the right 

to have this information and have it immediately. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what more I can do other than to repeat the 

arguments that I did in the earlier debate. 

 

The Provincial Secretary advised us — and these are very rough figures — that something like 223 

questions have been asked and this House has already received the answers to some 117. We have tabled 

something like 26 Orders, 144 Motions for Return not counting the ones we have just passed, still 

remain on Order. And for the life of me I just don’t know what the Opposition is complaining about. 

 

I frankly feel that on Private Members’ day the Liberal Opposition feels that it has some sort of duty to 

raise some form of a ruckus with respect to these Notices of Motions, so that hopefully the Press will 

pick it up. But I can say that with any degree of honest analysis by the journalists, or by this House, or 

by the people of Saskatchewan, one would have to dismiss the arguments advanced by the Member for 

Milestone with respect to this matter. As far as his remarks about the Gestapo and the like as it relates to 

the Land Bank Commission I will say nothing more than to say that they characterize again, the 

well-known position of the Liberal Party with respect to Land Bank Commission and farming policies of 

this Government, policies to help the family farmer and they want to scuttle it. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 111 
 

Mr. Wiebe moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 111 showing: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Moose Jaw No. 161, as of January 25, 1973; (a) the number of 

applications that were received to sell land to the Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of 

contracts or agreements to purchase by the Commission that have been approved; (ii) the number of 

purchases that have actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) and (ii) above, the (a) land number of 

each quarter section; (b) acreage cultivated in each quarter section; (c) acreage of native grass in each 

quarter section; (d) acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter section; (e) assessed value of each quarter 

section and (f) price offered for each quarter section. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — In this Return, Mr. Speaker, we are asking for basic information relating to the Rural 

Municipality of Moose Jaw. This is information that we feel is very vital. It is 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

940 

information that we have been requesting for the past 19 to 21 days. The Minister of Agriculture stated 

that he would be getting this information and that he had no bones about making it available to us. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture also realized yesterday that this was the business that we would be 

conducting today. Now if he was that concerned about answering our questions for us, why wasn’t he 

here, or why didn’t he make arrangements that some explanation could be given as to why he doesn’t 

want to answer these questions. 

 

I might mention as well, Mr. Speaker, that here, again, if an amendment is required and if it is a wording 

amendment, why doesn’t he show the same courtesy to the Members of this side of the House as some 

other Ministers have? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Let’s just debate the Motion. We have to stay right to the Motion, please. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Well, I am speaking to this, Mr. Speaker, because . . . All right, I will try not to stray 

away from it. 

 

But here again getting back to Motion No. 111, if the Government feels that a change of wording is 

necessary why didn’t they notify us. We could have withdrawn the question and the question could have 

been resubmitted and it could have been answered in time. 

 

This information, we feel, is very vital to us. How do we know what is happening in the Land Bank, for 

example, if we don’t ask the question. The Minister tells us that leases are being made available to 

farmers throughout the province, yet we haven’t even seen a copy of the lease agreement that the young 

farmer is required to sign before he is able to acquire this land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the Attorney General to allow these questions to be asked and allow us to get the 

information that we require and not hide it from us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Motion No. 111, speaking to the remarks of the 

Member for Morse, I am advised that the question of pointing out to the Opposition what is wrong, if 

anything, with respect to the wording of any particular Motion so that, if necessary, it would be 

withdrawn, just can’t be done. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the only way that you can’t go ahead with this Motion, is not to move it. 

There might be another procedure I suppose, but not that I know of in any event, Mr. Speaker. So 

basically it involved the Member for Morse not moving it. 

 

May I say that the Minister of Agriculture has publicly (I am not saying in this Legislature) but certainly 

to my knowledge has publicly stated that there is some good public reason why, for example, part (f) of 

the question in No. 111 should not be answered or perhaps should be modified from the present form 

that it is being asked. I don’t want to get involved in any arguments for or against that, but I do know 

that the 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

941 

Minister has expressed some reservations about that. I think that the Hon. Member from Morse knows 

that the Minister of Agriculture has expressed these reservations. 

 

Why shouldn’t the Minister of Agriculture been given an opportunity to express those reservations he 

has, if I am right, with respect to part (f) himself personally? I don’t think it is unreasonable to expect 

this House to wait one day or until the next time around, so that the Minister can offer his views. And 

the Hon. Member for Morse knowing those views, can either debate them or accept them. Now that is 

all that we are asking. We are asking for the adjournment, nothing more, nothing less. I say, again, to the 

Member for Morse that is not an unreasonable request and because the Minister of Agriculture is not 

here, I would again beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 112 

 

Mr. Wiebe moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 112 showing: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Caron No. 162, as of January 25, 1973: (a) the number of applications that 

were received to sell land to the Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of contracts or agreements 

to purchase by the Commission that have been approved; (ii) the number of purchases that have 

actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) and (ii) above, the (a) land number of each quarter section; 

(b) acreage cultivated in each quarter section; (c) acreage of native grass in each quarter section; (d) 

acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter section; (e) assessed value of each quarter section and (f) 

price offered for each quarter section. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — I realize that it is not unreasonable to ask for the Minister’s attendance. I hope the 

Attorney General can assure this House that when these questions next come up next Friday, that the 

Minister of Agriculture will be in attendance and that he won’t use this method of pushing the answering 

of these questions off until the House is adjourned. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — At this time I should like to point out for the benefit of the Members, these will come 

up again quicker if the Hon. Member would just ask them to stand, because then they won’t come to 

adjourned debates. They would keep their sequence on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just to review some of the points made in this and other debates 

on a similar line, if I may. Some of them will be cross-referenced but I want to point out that these were 

questions; in the first instance some long time ago. As an indication of the concern of the Member for 

Morse and other Members here, Mr. Speaker, we asked, I believe, on questions before the Orders of the 

Day, almost at the outset of the opening of this Session as to how, and by what means, we could use to 

gain some information on the operations and the proceedings and so on on the Land Bank. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

942 

So again, I suggest to the Attorney General that there has been ample time. We learned, in a debate that 

he just spoke on a minute or two ago on the previous Motion, we learned of one possible area of concern 

to the Minister and the Government Opposite; (f) the price offered for each quarter section. 

 

This is a very key aspect of the entire operation, Mr. Speaker. I surely hope that when the Minister 

presents himself to the House at a time when we can debate these that he will be prepared to justify any 

possible suggested changes. May I say, too, that the Attorney General mentioned again in the previous 

debate, that he had to go back and look at the amendments and go back to his fellow caucus Members. 

Surely this is not a reason in the first instance whether he does decide to go back, they don’t have to go 

back and by the same token this House will decide whether this information is coming, not his caucus, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I ask him to keep that in mind as they review any possible amendments to these and other similar 

Motions. But surely it is not unreasonable to expect that we should get this information without any 

further delays or hold-ups. Any Member of the Cabinet benches can propose these amendments and 

there is no reason why they shouldn’t be able to do so. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make a suggestion to the 

Government that I put forward in good faith. 

 

There is certainly need, I think, for bringing the Land Bank Commission to the Assembly at a very early 

time. We are now in the stage of being able to bring Estimates before the House and, I think, that I 

should like to suggest at this time that the Government would be wise in bringing the Land Bank 

Commission to the Assembly for discussion at a very early time. The reason I suggest that is because I 

have studied the regulations that have been put forward by the Government and in my humble opinion I 

think that the regulations are easily interpreted in practically any fashion that it is extremely difficult to 

know precisely what the policy of the Government is according to the regulations that have thus far been 

published. 

 

I think that if the Land Bank Commission was brought to the Assembly, where the Minister could give 

information to the Members, where the Opposition has the opportunity to bring up what we consider 

legitimate points that are of concern to farmers, as farmers are now entering into contracts for the leasing 

of land and for the sale of lands. Some has been sold and some has been leased already. They are very 

important matters involving, even as far as the individual farmer is concerned, thousands of dollars. 

 

I would at this time suggest that the Government do everything in its power to bring to the Assembly the 

Land Bank Commission so that it can be discussed and so that the Minister can clear up a number of 

matters that I think are not very clear at this stage. Certainly in studying the regulations I think that the 

regulations leave so much leeway in many instances that it is really impossible until the Minister makes 

a policy statement or until the Government does, to know precisely what the Government’s intention is 

regarding both buying and leasing land. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

943 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just so we don’t prolong the debate, apparently the 

Government is going to request to stand the Motions. We will go along with that proposition, but I 

should like to point out, Sir, the reason that these are important. Had your ruling not come into effect 

today, we would now be debating the Land Bank Bill in this Assembly later on this afternoon. That is 

the reason, precisely, that this information is so important to the Members of this Assembly. We may 

now well be debating it on Friday afternoon. We want this information before this debate and before we 

proceed with our own Bill. 

 

I point this out to indicate why we consider this matter so vital. I certainly agree with my colleague, the 

Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), we will co-operate and stand some of these if my colleague 

from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) will agree, but we would ask that they go back and expedite these questions 

and all information regarding the Land Bank at the earliest opportunity. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, if I may speak to this Motion. We have put a number of questions on the 

Order Paper regarding the Land Bank. I don’t believe there are any greater questions in rural 

Saskatchewan today than what type of transaction is the Land Bank making. The people of this province 

want to know and we as their representatives want to know. 

 

We have asked the Minister how we could get this information and he told us to put questions on the 

Order Paper. And this is what we have done and we should like to put more if we felt that they were 

going to be answered. Up til now the only source of our information has been what we get locally. I 

would be the first to admit that this may not be a completely reliable source. I have many letters on my 

desk and receive them every day of transactions that are taking place. People tell me how much the 

Government has paid for the land; what they have done; who they are leasing it to. All kinds of detail. I 

am reluctant to make these public because I am not sure if they are correct or not. But it is material that 

should be available to the Members of this Legislature. I should like to get the correct material so that 

we could use that. I don’t want to have to refer to information that is sent to me in the mail or 

information that I get around the province from farmers who are involved in these transactions. I would 

hope that the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) would urge the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) to 

supply us with this information. It should be available to the Members of the House, we would then have 

the correct information, we wouldn’t have to rely on the information that we are able to obtain 

throughout the province from the people involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kramer (Minister of Highways): — It seems to me that there is a lot of ragging the puck 

going on here for no particular reason except mischief. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that people who 

want to carry on a transaction with the Land Bank ought to be able to do it in private. It seems to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that it is nobody’s business how that should be conducted. That’s between the buyer, the 

seller, etc. Suffice it to say, Mr. Speaker, there are 364 satisfied customers at the last report. I would 

think the only thing that the gentlemen opposite want to do is to try somehow to sabotage this plan. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

944 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think we are straying too far away from what the motions themselves, 

we are getting into the principle of the whole Bill of the Land Bank. And we must stay to the motions 

and not have a wide-open debate. We must stay to the motions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, just a word or two about the comments made 

by the Members opposite. I can assure the House we will endeavor to provide all the correct information 

or as correct as we think it can be from the Government, once the Return is ordered, subject to any 

human error, but honest human error. I can assure you that we will try to expedite every order that is 

made, so that the answer is in your hands and I can assure you that with respect to any order this 

Government has nothing to hide. It is especially has nothing to hide with respect to its conduct. That is 

what we are here for, to answer to the House. The minister of Agriculture is a very busy person and I 

can give no commitment, of course, that on any given day he will be here, any more than I can give a 

commitment that any other one of my colleagues will be here. The Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) 

said that I wanted to take these motions back to caucus. I want to tell the House that when I said 

colleagues, I meant by that cabinet colleagues. I think that is a fair enough operation because after all 

these are motions that do affect the Government. 

 

And if item (f) is so important as has been suggested then obviously the Members opposite will want the 

Minister of Agriculture to state the reasons if there are reasons on item (f). The Land Bank will be 

discussed in detail I tell the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) at a number of opportunities in 

this Session, not the least of which will be Estimates, which I hope if everything works out well we can 

start on very shortly. There will be very ample opportunity for the Opposition to ask detailed questions 

and if they have some background information from these orders and otherwise I am sure they will be 

satisfied. But as I say again, the Minister of Agriculture is not here, I have no other alternative but to beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 113 

 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 113 showing: 

 

In the Rural Municipality of Wheatlands No. 163, as of January 25, 1973: (a) the number of 

applications that were received to sell land to the Land Bank Commission; (b) (i) the number of 

contracts or agreements to purchase by the Commission that have been approved; (ii) the number of 

purchases that have actually been completed; (c) under (b) (i) and (ii) above, the (a) land number of 

each quarter section; (b) acreage cultivated in each quarter section (c) acreage of native grass in each 

quarter section; (d) acreage of seeded pasture in each quarter section; (e) assessed value of each quarter 

section and (f) price offered for each quarter section. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

945 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) feels that he is qualified enough 

to answer and speak on behalf of the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! We must stay to the Motion. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — I am staying to the Motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I cut the Minister of Highways off on the last Motion and I would ask 

Members not to refer back to the last Motion. We must stay to the Motion before us. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we can’t discuss what another Member said I guess I better stay 

out of it. I might say that the information which we are attempting to derive from these questions is 

Government business, Mr. Speaker. They are not individuals, certainly we must honor the individual’s 

right as far as purchase goes but as an Opposition it is also our right to find out just exactly how much 

money this Government is spending. It is our responsibility as well to find out how much this 

Government is putting the taxpayers of this province into hock by borrowing money to go out and 

purchase this land. And if they are not willing to give us these answers, it means that they have 

something to hide. The Attorney General stated that he couldn’t guarantee whether the Minister of 

Agriculture could be here or not. I might mention that his responsibility, as well as to the people of this 

province, is to this Legislature. If he knows that business like this is coming up, it is his responsibility to 

be here as well. Mr. Speaker, I hope that when the questions that we do stand come up on next Friday 

that the Minister of Agriculture will be here and that he will give us this information. 

 

Mr. MacLeod (Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, this presents the Opposition with a good deal of difficulty 

because the Government has refused to answer this particular question. We certainly don’t want to 

embarrass any civil servant or member of the Land Bank Commission by attempting to obtain 

information from them behind the back of the Government and certainly that is not the kind of thing that 

any Member of this Opposition would do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — But it does seem to me that the Return is a fairly simple one, Mr. Speaker, and 

shouldn’t require a great deal of difficulty. Surely the number of applications that were received to sell 

land to the Land Bank Commission as of a certain date, about a month ago, is not an unreasonable 

request. Secondly, the number of contracts or agreements to purchase that have been approved. Now 

surely there is nothing secretive about that. Surely the Government isn’t going to hide the number of 

contracts or agreements — not that are fully signed at this point — but that have been approved. Then, 

subsequently we want to know those that have actually been completed. Again, we are not asking for 

anything that should in any way be more than statistical and 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

946 

which I would expect them to have a running total of. Now, we do want to know the land number of 

each quarter section, the acreage cultivated in each quarter section and the acreage of native grass. This 

Government is very concerned for the transfer of cultivated acreage to grass acreage and surely to 

goodness and being so, and so involved in the accumulation of statistics, I am sure this one is not past 

their notice. They should have no difficulty at all in presenting that to us. The acreage of seeded pasture 

in each quarter section — Mr. Speaker, surely to goodness they are not going to go around buying land 

without knowing how many acres of pasture there is and how much is under cultivation. I wouldn’t be a 

bit surprised but what they might do that for some special friends of the Government, but generally 

speaking I think they would know the amount of seeded acreage and the pasture in every quarter section. 

Surely to goodness it is not beyond the realm of expectation that they would know the amount of the 

assessment of each quarter section and the price offered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only explanation that I can accept is the one presented to this House by the Hon. 

Minister of Highways and that is that the Government doesn’t intend to give us that information. If that 

is the stated policy of the Government, I wish they would simply say to Return No. 113, "We don’t 

intend to give you the information; we intend to keep it secret. We will not fool around anymore." We 

will then seek our remedy some other way. If the Government is not intending to answer these questions 

then I suggest that they be honest enough, forthright enough, to tell us that they do not intend to present 

us with the answers. Now that isn’t expecting a large amount of courage. Therefore, I assume that they 

will be able to present that kind of an answer if in fact it is the policy of the Government. If it is not the 

stated policy of the Government I trust that either the Hon. Minister of Highways will get up and retract 

what he says or that it will be contradicted by the Hon. Attorney General. 

 

We recognize that the policy of secrecy may well be imposed upon this kind of thing. We got no 

satisfactory answer the first day of the Session when this question was raised with the Hon. Minister. He 

has at no time as far as I know communicated with any Member of the Opposition how we may get 

further and better information relating to the conduct of the Land Bank Commission. As I say, we 

certainly don’t want to undermine the Land Bank Commission. We will do nothing at all to damage it 

because I can assure the Hon. Members that when the Liberals return to power in ’75, we will probably 

continue it but in a greatly improved form. Certainly not in the kind of form that is presently the case. 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I see no reason why we shouldn’t get this order immediately. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, much of what the Member from Albert Park 

(Mr. MacLeod) said I think we could all accept except that last statement about it wasn’t the intention of 

the Liberal Party to undermine the Land Bank. At that stage in the game I almost fell off my chair 

because I thought immediately, when one sees that statement from the Liberals opposite, every other 

statement made by them must be automatically suspect. That is obviously the case as far as the Member 

for Albert Park goes. There is no doubt about it, Mr. Speaker, and the Liberals themselves admit it that 

that is their avowed intention to undermine the Land Bank. The Member from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) is agreeing 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

947 

with me, saying absolutely he is opposed to it, the Member for Albert Park is for it. But that is neither 

here nor there. The point that I say again to the Members of this House, all information that is in the 

public interest and is reasonable in the public interest will be available to the Members of the House. 

The Minister of Agriculture will be here to state the arguments with respect to this Motion, if there are 

any when he is here the next day. I, therefore, beg leave to adjourn the debate on this Motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 119 

 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 119 showing: 

 

(a) The number of fatal accidents that occurred in Saskatchewan during 1972 on Saskatchewan 

highways. (b) The location and date of each fatal accident. (d) The loss of life in each accident. (e) 

Whether this is an increase or decrease over the last three years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, on 119 I have a brief amendment to propose 

to the House, which again does not thwart the intention of the Motion. What it will do is it will strike out 

the word ‘Saskatchewan’ in the second line on Saskatchewan highways. Thus it will make it more legal 

if I can describe it to say on public highways. We will be able to give the statistics then and on the basis 

of that explanation, I move, seconded by the Hon. Premier, that the motion that an order of the 

Assembly for Return No. 119 be amended: 

 

by striking out the work Saskatchewan in the second line of clause (a) and substituting the word 

‘public’. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, before the vote is taken I should just like to say that I am in agreement with 

this amendment. My comment is this – that the criticism that I have had, the reason why this particular 

question was put on the Order of Return debatable was because the question was worded incorrectly, or 

that the right information could not be received. And again I say that had the Ministers had the courtesy 

to point this out to me while it was still a question, I could have withdrawn the question and submitted 

this one. This would have speeded up the answers which we would have received. And I have indicated 

that some of the Ministers have shown this courtesy to Members on this side of the House. I hope that in 

the future to avoid unnecessary time required in the debating of these Motions and this type of thing that 

the Ministers opposite would follow that line of amending these questions other than bringing them up 

into an Order for Return debatable. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

948 

Return No. 120 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 120 showing: 

 

The total number of employees in the public service that were categorized other than permanent 

employees on: (a) July 1, 1971; (b) January 1, 1972; (c) July 1, 1972; (d) January 1, 1973. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, we would be very happy to provide an 

answer. The difficulty lies in the wording of the question and I should like to propose an amendment 

which I think will clarify it and be acceptable to the Hon. Member opposite. As he may be aware for 

example, when he says other than permanent employees, this could also be take to include casuals who, 

occasionally, if a girl is brought in because of another’s sickness for two days, is paid sometimes by 

voucher and, therefore, it is rather difficult to find the answers immediately for him. I will, therefore, 

move, seconded by the Hon. G. Snyder, that Motion for Return No. 120 be amended by: 

 

deleting all the words following the word employee in the first line and substituting therefore the 

following: 

 

temporary and supernumerary, in the Public Service on (a) July 1, 1971; (b) January 1, 1972; (c) July 

1, 1972; (d) January 1, 1973. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, just a comment, I am not sure whether this provides the information that I 

was after or not. I might add that the question that is being amended was originally placed on the paper 

in an identical manner to one that was answered a year ago. 

 

My question was to get all employees, other than permanent. Now we have got temporary and 

supernumerary listed here in the amendment. But what about casual? Does temporary and 

supernumerary include casual? I am not sure, I am not that well versed in the different categories of the 

Public Service Commission. The intent of the resolution was to include every type of employee other 

than permanent which includes casual, temporary, supernumerary and so on. If the Minister can assure 

me that casual is included in these, I would be prepared to accept the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have just had a nodding conversation here with the 

Minister who is in difficulty by reason of the fact that he has already spoken. I think that the frank 

answer to the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) is that the words do not include ‘casual’. I think that’s 

my understanding and it was because of some difficulties in ascertaining just what number of casuals 

there were at any given date that this change was suggested. I’m relaying that information on behalf of 

the 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

949 

Minister. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, seeing my colleague has already participated in the 

debate, I should just like to point out we are most interested in ‘casuals’. The number of people that are 

hired by the Highways Department; the Department of DNR, and there is no difficulty in the Public 

Service because everybody that is hired is hired through the Public Service and the numbers should be 

there. We also know that, for example, temporary employees are being reduced. The number of 

supernumerary programs is being reduced and it’s not going to give an accurate picture of the question 

that we are asking and this question has been answered in its exact form in the past and we would 

request that perhaps the Minister would withdraw his amendment so we could be provided with the 

information we are requesting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether we could adjourn 

debate on that particular Motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 121 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 121 showing: 

 

Under the Public Service Commission, the number of permanent positions that were removed from the 

classified to the unclassified category for the calendar years 1970; 1971 and 1972. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — There is a slight difficulty just in the wording and I 

think this will provide the Member with the information he wants. 

 

The figures are not kept on the basis of a calendar year, but on the basis of the fiscal year and, therefore, 

I would move, seconded by the Minister of Labor (Mr. Snyder) that Motion for Return No. 121 be 

amended by deleting all the words following the word ‘unclassified’ in the second line (as it appears in 

Votes and Proceedings) and substituting therefore the following: 

 

unclassified division for the fiscal years 1970-71; 1971-72. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I will be satisfied to accept this amendment. I might point out that of course 

the fiscal year 1971-72 ended almost a year ago now. I shall be submitting a further question which I 

hope could be answered in the question for that period from April 1 

 

, 1972 until February 1st. 

 

, 1973. Otherwise we’ll accept this as amended. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

950 

Return No. 123 

 

Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 123 

showing: 

 

(a) The total cost of the advertisement by the Occupational Health and Safety Division, Saskatchewan 
Department of Labor of "Health and Safety Requires Action"; (b) The newspapers and the 

television stations where this advertisement was placed; (c) The advertising agency that prepared 

and placed the ad; (d) The purpose of the advertisement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of Labor): — Mr. Speaker, Order for Return No. 123 asks the total cost of 

advertising of "Health and Safety Requires Action", and it presents a very minor problem in that all of 

the bills have not yet been received by the Occupational Health Branch of the Department and 

accordingly in order that the question may be answered, I would move, seconded by Mr. Bowerman 

(Shellbrook) that Return No. 123 be amended by inserting the word "projected" after the word "the" in 

the first line. It will give an indication of total projected costs and this is the intent of the amendment. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Just a question for clarification — you’ve got "projected." Projected 

when? Projected for the next five years, ten years, what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — Well the projected cost, the projected total cost. The series of advertising is 

completed and the Department is awaiting final accounts for payment of all the bills that have been 

incurred. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 1 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue a Return No. 1 showing: 

 

To January 25, 1973, for the Intersessional Legislative Committee on Welfare: (a) the total cost of the 

committee to date; (b) the members of the committee and the remuneration and expenses each member 

has received to date; (c) the number of meetings held by the committee; (d) the location, dates and 

number of the public present at all public hearings or meetings held by this committee; (e) the 

destination, intermediate stops and the costs of all out-of-province trips; (f) the names, qualifications, 

remuneration, expenses and allowances of all secretarial, research, technical and other personnel 

attached to the committee; (g) any and all 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

951 

additional costs paid or estimated for advertising, printing and all other expenses related to this 

committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I’ve consulted with the Clerk on this and I gather that 

there is a problem with respect to paragraph (d). "The location, dates and the number of the public 

present at all public hearings or meetings held by this committee." I’m advised that no records were kept 

of the number of the public present and there was no information on which that could even be 

reasonably estimated. So I am moving that Motion for Return No. 1 be amended by deleting clause (d) 

thereof, where it appears in lines 5 and 6 of the Motion (as it appears in Votes and Proceedings) and that 

the following be substituted therefore: 

 

(d) the location and dates of all public meetings or public hearings held by this committee. 

 

This amendment simply deletes any reference to the number of people present. Otherwise all of the 

information requested is provided for. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly prepared to accept the Premier’s amendment. However, I must 

add that I find it rather strange that committees would travel the length and breadth of the province 

holding public hearings and that a record would not be kept of the number of people who were present 

to attend these meetings. Surely the value of the meetings should be determined by the number of the 

public who take advantage, or take the opportunity to present briefs and to attend at the hearings and to 

think that the Chairman of these committees would not see that recorded numbers are kept of those 

attending is rather difficult and rather hard to believe that this would be the case. It’s certainly not in the 

public interest. I should think, to have these committees and not keep track of the number of public that 

attends. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — May I just remind Hon. Members that the Chairman of all of these committees 

may have kept very . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I close the debate and he moves an amendment and there’s no closing debate on the 

amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — No, well I thought we voted on the amendment and we are . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We voted on the amendment but we are on the Motion as amended, but you have 

already spoken on the Motion as amended when you move your amendment. You spoke on the Motion 

and moved an amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — All right, I’ll accept that. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

952 

Return No. 2 

 

Mr. Guy moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue a Return No. 2 showing: 

 

To January 25, 1973, for the Intersessional Legislature Committee on Small Business Firms: (a) the 

total cost of the committee to date; (b) the members of the committee and the remuneration and 

expenses each member has received to date; (c) the number of meetings held by the committee; (d) the 

location, dates and number of the public present at all public hearings or meetings held by this 

committee; (e) the destination, intermediate stops and the costs of all out-of-province trips; (f) the 

names, qualifications, remuneration, expenses and allowances of all secretarial, research, technical and 

other personnel attached to the committee; (g) any and all additional costs paid or estimated for 

advertising, printing and all other expenses related to this committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move, if I may, the same amendment with respect to Motion No. 

2. May I add that it may well be the Chairman kept very accurate minutes, or even detailed records. That 

is not information which is in the hands of the Government or of the Clerk. If a Member of the House 

wants to keep any records he likes, that is neither the information of the Clerk or of the Government. I 

frankly don’t know whether records were kept. The amendment I move is as with reference to Motion 

No. 1. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 5 

 

Mr. Guy moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue a Return No. 5 showing: 

 

To January 25, 1973, for the Intersessional Legislative Committee on the Review of Liquor 

Regulations: (a) the total cost of the committee to date; (b) the members of the committee and the 

remuneration and expenses each member has received to date; (c) the number of meetings held by the 

committee; (d) the location, dates and number of the public present at all public hearings or meetings 

held by this committee; (e) the destination, intermediate stops and the costs of all out-of-province trips; 

(f) the names, qualifications, remuneration, expenses and allowances of all secretarial, research, 

technical and other personnel attached to the committee; (g) any and all additional costs paid or 

estimated for advertising, printing and all other expenses related to this committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 

(Attorney General) the same amendment to clause (d) as I previously moved. May I call to the attention 

of the House a typographical error in the amendments which I have passed in. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

953 

They say February 2nd, when they should say February 20th. There’s a 2 where there should be a 20. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 8 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 8 showing: 

 

1. Since July 1, 1971, whether any studies were commissioned by the Government of Saskatchewan to 

any of its departments or to any outside agencies, regarding the nationalization of the oil industry or 

the creation of any integrated oil company run as a Crown Corporation; 

2. If so, the names of the persons who did the studies, and whether reports have been submitted to the 

Government; 

3. Copies of any such reports. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — I should like to move an amendment that 

Motion for Return No. 8 be amended by deleting the words: "any of its department or to any outside 

agencies", which words appear in the second and third lines of Section (1), (as it appears in Votes and 

Proceedings) and substituting therefore the words "agencies outside the Government of Saskatchewan." 

Then paragraph (1) will read: 

 

1. Since July 1, 1971, whether any studies were commissioned by the Government of Saskatchewan to 

agencies outside the Government of Saskatchewan regarding the nationalization of the oil industry or 

the creation of any integrated oil company run as a Crown Corporation; 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just say in support of the amendment that it is really impossible to answer in the way the 

Motion was originally worded because of the difficulty of defining what is a ‘report’ really within the 

Government, in a Department or between Departments or within the Cabinet. That could be anything 

from a single page memorandum to a very elaborate memorandum or study that is committed to writing. 

 

Secondly, I say, Mr. Speaker, that while it is not only virtually impossible to answer the question in the 

original form, it is improper for a Government to make public statements about studies it is carrying on 

in the same sense that it is improper for Cabinet Minister to make public statements about discussions 

they are having within Cabinet or studies they are pursuing as Members of Her Majesty’s Executive 

Council. 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Would the Minister reread that amendment before he takes his seat please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — If you will go just to the second line and read up to 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

954 

"Government of Saskatchewan to" and strike out all of the words "any of its departments or to any 

outside agencies" and in that place insert the words "agencies outside the Government of 

Saskatchewan." 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand the Minister’s change and correct me if I am wrong, or 

someone over there can perhaps. The effect of his amendment is to narrow the scope of the question as it 

was originally placed in the Order Paper asking whether or not any studies were commissioned by the 

Government to or of any of these departments as well as any outside agencies. As I understand the 

amendment the Motion will now read: 

 

Since July 1, 1971, have there been any studies commissioned by the Government of Saskatchewan to 

agencies outside the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

No reference made to any study that may have been undertaken at the direction of Cabinet by a 

government department. Is this correct? In other words, Mr. Speaker, this amendment certainly will 

restrict and take away considerably from the original request as it was placed on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, if I might add a few words I think what my colleague from 

Wilkie has said is certainly true, that this amendment does eliminate the thrust of this question. Now, 

obviously, at least I would suspect that obviously there were no outside consultants brought in to do any 

studies on the nationalization or moving into the oil industry. However, I am sure that before the 

Government proceeded with their proposal to go into the exploration business that considerable study 

was done from within the Department by reports of one kind or another. I think that the public of the 

Province of Saskatchewan are entitled to have the benefit of those reports in order to see whether the 

judgment and the decision for the Government to go into the exploration of gas was a sound one, or 

whether it wasn’t. The only way that the people of this province can be assured that the Government has 

made a wise decision in this regard is by knowing on what basis this decision was made. We, in the 

Opposition, and the general public have not the research, have not the material, have no source of 

making the necessary judgments that I am certain the Government made before they embarked on what 

may or may not be a wise scheme. I think that the people of Saskatchewan and this Legislature, and I am 

sure there are Members opposite, that would like to know on what basis the Cabinet Members made the 

decision to go into the oil industry. I don’t agree with the Hon. Member, although I appreciate his 

comments, that we are not entitled to these reports which have obviously been made and presented to 

Cabinet and to the Minister. These should become the property of, and made public, not only to this 

Legislature, but to the people of Saskatchewan so that the people can judge on what basis they have 

made their decision to go into the oil industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, when I send a memo to my Deputy to 

ask his opinion on a certain subject, I am commissioning him to provide for me an answer on that certain 

subject. I would assure you I would be very careful how I worded any such messages to 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

955 

my Deputy if I felt that I was obliged to produce those messages and what he says in return in the 

House. I don’t think you can expect the inter-departmental or the messages between a Minister and his 

Department to be brought into the House and I think this is what is being asked here. If it has to do with 

commissioning a study outside of the Departments well that’s different again but when it comes to 

correspondence between the Government and the departments, I don’t think that that can be expected to 

be made public. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a word on this. One of the reasons that this question 

was asked is because very rarely that you pick up the Leader-Post or StarPhoenix in the last 19 months 

without having some great task force, some great survey, some great thrust force being created. It is 

from the reports of these thrust groups and task forces and you name it survey committees that major 

policy decisions are being made by this Government that affect the lives of every citizen. These are not 

departmental memos, departmental inquiries from the Minister to an individual that we are asking for. 

We are asking for the thrust groups and the surveys and the major studies that they have announced 

publicly and from which major policy decisions have been made which have changed the direction of 

governmental policy in the Province of Saskatchewan. One of the reasons it is so important that this 

information be tabled in this House is that you and I, Sir, and the people of Saskatchewan know the 

extent of the research and how great they like to talk about the lack of research in the Government. Here 

the Government organizes a little survey or a study or a thrust group and from it they make a major 

policy decision. How do we know the calibre of the study, the extent of the research, the quality from 

which major policy decisions are made. I think Sir, that with all due respect that this is a very important 

and fundamental question that the people of Saskatchewan and particularly the Opposition not only have 

a right to expect, but it is their responsibility to ask and demand, Sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to prolong this debate except to say that I 

think it has been recognized, I would have thought without question before this, in the parliamentary 

form of government, that a government was entitled to conduct studies among its own staff, was entitled 

to seek advice from its staff members, seek opinions from its staff members and to get full and frank 

opinions in the full knowledge that those studies and those comments could not be called for in the 

Legislature. It is necessary for a government to have a full and free flow of knowledge from its public 

servants to its elected officials if the process of government, as we know it, is to continue. I simply know 

of no instance where internal studies have been required to be tabled pursuant to an order of the 

Legislature or Parliament. It may well be that a government has on occasion tabled such a study — I am 

not suggesting that that hasn’t happened. I am just saying I know of no instance where an order of the 

Legislature or Parliament has required it. I think that it is a precedent which would be most damaging to 

the conduct of public business. The Order as it stands does indeed ask for any studies that were 

commissioned by the Government to any of its departments and it seems to me that under those 

circumstances we, as the Government, can only do what other governments have done since time 

immemorial. Indeed it is not 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

956 

at all uncommon for governments to commission reports from outside agencies and give them 

instructions that the report will be kept confidential. A government takes responsibility for its decisions. 

If we act on bad advice we certainly can be reprimanded by the electorate and undoubtedly will be 

reprimanded by the electorate. The quality of the advice is a judgment which we have to make. I can 

recall, as I am sure all Hon. Members know, that the feasibility study for the Athabasca Pulp Mill 

project was never tabled in this House and that project was perhaps the largest business venture that a 

government of Saskatchewan ever contemplated undertaking, with a total exposure in the order of $150 

million. Notwithstanding that this feasibility study was done quite outside the Government of 

Saskatchewan, it was never tabled and in fact the tabling of it was voted down by Members opposite. So 

I think the idea that it is appropriate to keep feasibility studies or other reports private even when they 

may be prepared by outside agencies has been established rather firmly in this House, and very 

important reports at that. What we are talking about here, however, is something quite different and 

much more modest. That is the proposition, the long established proposition, that a government can look 

to its public servants for advice, perfectly free and frank advice which shall not be exposed to 

publication without the consent of the Government and not on the order of the Legislature or Parliament. 

 

Mr. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Premier is not being 

entirely frank with this House when he talks about these feasibility studies being made public. We 

recognize that the Government is going to commission a number of studies, we recognize that some of 

these are going to be outside studies and some of these are going to be commissioned from members of 

the civil service. We fully appreciate the Government is going to have to take responsibility for its own 

actions as a result of these studies. However, Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult for the Opposition to judge 

the conduct of the Government without having some of these studies made available to it. Now what the 

Premier was talking about throughout his remarks was the question of whether or not the studies would 

ever be made available. What he should have been talking about is whether or not they will be available 

at any particular time, particularly if he is going to refer to the feasibility studies of the Athabasca Pulp 

Mill. That was a commercial enterprise and because of that there was a timing problem. Mr. Speaker, I 

am responding to the remarks of the Premier and if my remarks are out of order then his remarks are out 

of order and he ought to have been called for being out of order. He was not, so I assume that I will be 

permitted to respond. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, a similar type of study was undertaken with respect to the Prince 

Albert Pulp Mill and that feasibility study was not immediately made available. My information, Mr. 

Speaker, was that after the completion of all the contracts, at a time when competitors could not have 

taken advantage of the feasibility studies, those feasibility studies were in fact made available to this 

House despite the fact that they were made privately for the information of the Government and the 

Government of the day took the decision on its own initiative, took the responsibility for acting with 

respect to those feasibility studies, and will of course always be judged by its own actions with respect 

thereto. Nevertheless, this material was made available in due course and at the proper time to the 

Opposition so that the Opposition of the day could have 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

957 

a full and fair opportunity to judge the conduct of the Government. Now, I see no offer in the remarks of 

the Premier to make this available at some other time. His example just doesn’t fit this case. 

 

Another example of what is going on are these studies along the Churchill River Basin. These studies 

ought properly to be made available to the Opposition the moment they are completed. I understand the 

delays that the Government uses to defer the information, to hold the information back from the 

Opposition, it isn’t forgotten nor will I forget that the Government sat on the Qu’Appelle Basin Study 

from October until the end of January for the purpose deliberately of avoiding taking any action in this 

Legislature. But, Mr. Speaker, if I may say so, the argument on principle is quite frankly wrong. If the 

Premier says that we will defer it and supply it to you at a later time, certainly, being a very reasonable 

Opposition we would take that into consideration. We have not heard anything in this argument which 

indicates that the timing is wrong, just simply that they won’t give it to us and, Mr. Speaker, we can’t 

accept that. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

Return No. 11 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 11 showing: 

 

(1) The amount that has been expended in the fiscal years 1970-71; 1971-72; and 1972-73 to January 

25, 1973, by the Saskatchewan Liquor Board on: (a) radio advertising; (b) television advertising; (c) 

print advertising. (2) the advertising agencies used and amounts paid for each for: (a) radio advertising; 

(b) television advertising; (c) print advertising. (3) the names of the printing companies used and the 

amounts paid to each printing company. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, again on this one I don’t think there will be 

any thwarting of the intention of the question but I should like to propose an amendment which I think 

sets it out more clearly and comprehensively. I should like to move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Wood 

(Minister of Municipal Affairs) that the motion that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 

11 be amended by: 

 

That all the words after the word "showing" be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

(1) The amount of advertising that has been placed in the fiscal years 1970-71, 1971-72 and 1972-73 to 

January 25, 1973, by the Saskatchewan Liquor Board on: 

 

(a) radio advertising, 
(b) television advertising, and 
(c) printed media. 
 

(2) The advertising agencies used to place such 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

958 

advertising. 

 

(3) The persons, companies or firms with which the said advertising was placed and the amount paid to 

each. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 12 

 

Mr. Guy moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 12 showing: 

 

(1) The amount that has been expended in the fiscal years 1970-71; 1971-72 to January 25, 1973; by 
the Human Resources Development Agency on: (a) radio advertising; (b) television advertising; (c) 

print advertising. (2) The advertising agencies used and the amounts paid to each for (a) radio 

advertising; (b) television advertising; (c) print advertising. (3) The names of the printing 

companies used and the amounts paid to each printing company. 

 

Mr. Guy: — If the Minister has a similar amendment which I presume that he has, I wonder if when he 

moves that amendment he would answer a question. Does this include the printing companies to which 

this advertising and particularly the printed media of the advertising there? Will we get the names of the 

printing companies that are involved in this, it is not that clear to me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to move the same amendment. Quite frankly I hadn’t 

thought that aspect of the question out. I assumed that printed media is fairly broad but I am just not 

sure. It just appeared to me that this would be the best wording used. I just can’t give any commitment 

that way to the Member. 

 

I, therefore, move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Wood the same amendment. 

 

That all the words after the word "showing" be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

(1) The amount of advertising that has been placed in the fiscal years 1970-71, 1971-72 and 1972-73 to 

January 25, 1973, by the Saskatchewan Liquor Board on: 

 

(a) radio advertising, 
(b) television advertising, and 
(c) printed media. 
 

(2) The advertising agencies used to place such advertising. 

 

(3) The persons, companies or firms with which the said advertising was placed and the amount paid to 

each. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I am sure that we all sympathize with the Attorney 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

959 

General. I am sure that everybody is aware that there is a need and a desire to find out exactly which 

printing company the government moneys are being paid out to. I, therefore, should like to make a 

subamendment. 

 

That after the tenth line (as indicated in Votes and Proceedings) the following be added: 

 

(4) The names of each printing company used and total amount paid to each printing company in each 

of the fiscal years indicated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Byers (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate on 

this subject. I suggest to the Hon. Member that if he wishes, to stand the others of the same type. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 43 

 

Mr. Guy moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 43 showing: 

 

(1) All printing contracts with their values, given to Service Printing Company, from July 1, 1971 to 

December 31, 1972, by all Departments, Boards, Agencies, Commissions or Crown Corporation of the 

Provincial Government. (2) (a) The above contracts which were tendered and whether the low tender 

was accepted in each case; (b) Where the low tender was not accepted, if any, the low tender, and the 

reason why it was not accepted; (c) Any of the above contracts which were not tendered. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — On this one, I am advised by the Minister of Government Services who is not 

here that the question should be appropriately amended so that we can provide more information to the 

Hon. Member from Athabasca. I am sure that not only would the Hon. Member from Athabasca want to 

know about a company called Service Printing Company, but also would want to know the value of all 

printing contracts given by the Queen’s Printer to all Regina printing firms for a certain period of time. 

If that is acceptable, I should like to move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek): 

 

That all the words after the words "showing" be deleted on Return No. 43 and the following substituted 

therefore: 

 

Total dollar value of all printing contracts given by Queen’s Printer to Regina printing firms for fiscal 

periods 1970-71, 1971-72, 1972-73 up to December 72. 

 

Showing (1) (a) the total amount allotted in each period (b) the total amount tendered in each period 

(2) (a) all instances where low tender was accepted (b) if any, reason why low tender was not accepted. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

960 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the Attorney General being so willing at this stage of the 

afternoon to provide us with additional information. However, as I look at the amendment I am not sure 

that this is really the case. This amendment will be acceptable only on the basis that there is no other 

printing, other than what goes through the Queen’s Printer. If the Attorney General can assure me that 

all printing, and I say all printing, that this Government allocates to printing companies goes through the 

Queen’s Printer, then we will accept the amendment. But if this is not the case, then, of course, he is not 

providing the information that we are asking for and we would not be able to support the amendment. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just to be absolutely certain that this information is 

provided I should like to move the following subamendment: 

 

That the words "Queen’s Printer" in the fourth line (as indicated in Votes and Proceedings) be deleted 

and the words, "Government of Saskatchewan" be substituted therefore. 

 

I should like to make a very brief comment, Mr. Speaker. We have as yet, if I am not mistaken, not 

received this information from over one year ago in this Assembly for a similar question asked. We have 

now watched the gymnastics of the Attorney General on the last 8, 10 or 15 Orders for Return. We have 

watched his gymnastics on this particular Order for Return, asking for information regarding Service 

Printers, which, as you know, is the NDP printing service in the province, and the amount of money that 

is being paid by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to subsidize that particular printing institution and that 

particular political party. I think it is absolutely essential that this Government immediately provide this 

information. After all I think there has been a great deal made about Service Printers in this Assembly 

and I am sure that the NDP would like to clear up any misunderstandings that have been in the minds of 

the people ofSaskatchewan. I know that they would certainly like to assure the people of Saskatchewan 

that there isn’t real patronage, there isn’t anything dishonest about paying taxpayers’ money to a 

government or to a political party and particularly to that political party’s institution or newspaper which 

provides its printing service. I think, Mr. Speaker, that this subamendment should be carried 

wholeheartedly by the Government. I think on top of that they should make every effort to provide this 

information as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think we are getting out of order to some extent and I hate to clamp down too much 

and I will let this go. But I would suggest in a case like this it would be better if the Hon. Member would 

adjourn the debate, because he spoke, then he sat down and then rose to speak again. It does complicate 

the proceedings when we have those things happening. 

 

Debate resumed on the Subamendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Attorney 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

961 

General in his amendment is trying to be fair and reasonable to the Opposition in providing them all the 

information. As the Hon. Member knows, Government printing is awarded through the Queen’s Printer 

and that is the reason for the agency. 

 

He knows full well that is the purpose of the agency and, therefore, Government contracts are awarded 

through the Queen’s Printer. I think he is trying to throw sand in the eyes by amendments of this nature. 

If hereafter he finds that the information he is looking for isn’t sufficient he can place an additional 

Motion. After all the Queen’s Printer has been established for a particular purpose to award contracts 

and the initial amendment will give him that information. 

 

The Hon. Members opposite like somehow to leave the impression that in their years of office that they 

did not indulge in patronage. For a period of seven years, patronage was rampant in this province to the 

extent that we are uncovering, still daily, the kind of patronage that was paid by the Liberal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest the subamendment that was proposed ought to be defeated. So as not to 

becloud the issues, the information will be made available to the Hon. Members on the printing 

companies that received the business, the amounts tendered for and allotted and the amounts of money 

paid. It is intended to provide this House with the complete and full information and it will be provided 

through the Queen’s Printer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the subamendment that was moved be defeated. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I can speak on the subamendment. I think the Hon. Member 

who took his seat knows full well that he is misleading the House. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, no! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Oh, yes, he is. He knows very well that the printing from Crown corporations does not go 

through the Queen’s Printer. The question was not amended to strike out Crown corporations. So in 

order to get the full disclosure that we asked for in this question it has to be other than just through 

Queen’s Printer. It has to be through all the agencies that submit printing by contract to any printing 

company. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, just speaking on the subamendment. I would say in response to 

the Member for Athabasca that he has full opportunities I am sure that he will take in Crown 

corporations to find out all the answers to questions he may raise in Crown corporations respecting any 

contracts that may be given to this company called Service Printing Company. We are prepared, I am 

sure, in Crown corporations to provide that information. 

 

I think the Minister of Health has given a very adequate explanation. Mr. Speaker, there is nothing to 

hide about this and we should reject the subamendment on it. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

962 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, just a word or two on the subamendment. 

 

It is obvious, of course, that the Attorney General’s remarks and those of the Minister of Health that the 

Government just doesn’t want to let the Legislature know how much money has been directed into 

Service Printing coffers. That is most certainly obvious. If they did wish to co-operate we would have 

had last year’s return by now. If they did wish to co-operate this return wouldn’t have been mutilated to 

the extent that it is by the amendment, because it very much restricts the original question and the 

original Motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a question here for the Hon. Attorney General which he might answer in closing 

debate or at some other point, or once we get off the subamendment debate. The amendment proposed 

as I read it, by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank is the total dollar value of all printing contracts. I understand 

this to mean the answer would come back as one definite figure without any breakdown. This is the 

understanding. Is this the intent — one single total figure? Is this the intent of the Motion? But if it is 

broken down into the companies, well that answers my question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say that when I 

just stepped out, I have gotten in contact with one of the officials from the Queen’s Printing division and 

he told me that there is no printing done by the Government, no contracts let, except through the 

Queen’s Printer. 

 

So far as the Government is concerned there is no printing let except through the Queen’s Printer. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I think since the NDP have been elected as 

Government of this province they have been practising one of the most blatant dishonest acts that I can 

imagine. 

 

I think that the people of this province have every right to know every cent that is going to Service 

Printers. And the wording, there is nothing wrong with the wording of the Government of Saskatchewan 

and makes it clear to every citizen of this province who doesn’t know what Queen’s Printer is. I think 

they have a right to know just exactly what the Government of Saskatchewan is passing along to their 

own political coffers. 

 

I think that it is about time that we understood this. 

 

Subamendment negatived on Division. 

 

Amendment agreed to 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

963 

Return No. 55 

 

Mr. Guy moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 55 showing: 

 

(1) The total number of new permanent positions established in the Saskatchewan Land Bank 

Commission since April 1, 1972 to January 25, 1973. (a) The number of these positions that have been 

filed. (3) The names and salaries and whether appointments were made by Order in Council or through 

the Public Service Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — It is moved again by myself, seconded by the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Smishek) the same amendment to No. 55. 

 

That: 

 

(1) In clause (1) the words "excluding the number of permanent positions previously filled in other 

areas of Government and transferred to the said Department" be added after "1973." 

 

(2) A new clause (4) be added to read "The total number of permanent positions deleted in the 

Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission since July 1, 1971, to January 25, 1973, excluding transfers to 

other departments." 

 

(3) A new clause (5) be added to read "the number of vacancies existing in the Saskatchewan Land 

Bank Commission as of January 25, 1973." 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I think I understand what the amendment does in the first part. You are 

referring Mr. Attorney General to transfers from one department to another of a branch. You are not 

including in the Return any of the permanent positions that were in that branch prior to the transfer, but 

would include any additional members in that branch after the transfer has been made to that particular 

department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Perhaps I can answer it this way. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We are getting out of order, but I will permit the Minister to answer. Maybe we can 

facilitate the others but he has already spoken and has lost his right to speak. But if you are asking a 

question before he takes his seat, I can permit it. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Yes, perhaps he could explain what the first part does and may save some time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The way I understand this to work will be as follows, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am using page 15, item 63, Return No. 54 as an example. (See Votes and Proceedings and Orders of 

the Day No. 19). And what we will be showing is the total number of new permanent positions 

established in the MCIC from July 1 to January 25, 1973. 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

964 

But in that number of new positions we would not show those positions, say, that were established in the 

Department of the Attorney General, let’s say as an . . . Analyst IV, if there is such a position in the 

Attorney General’s Department, and then transferred over to MCIC in that period. That is the effect of 

the amendment. 

 

That type of permanent position previously filled in another area of the government, i.e.; the Department 

of the Attorney General would be excluded from the report in the total number of new permanent 

positions in MCIC. The reason for that is simply because in the overall complement of the Government, 

it makes no difference just to transfer from one side to the other side. 

 

Mr. Guy: — It would be counted in the Department from which it came. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, that is right, because you will add a new (4) to that amendment — the 

total number of permanent positions deleted in MCIC, excluding transfers to other departments. We 

would not count the exclusions of transfers from MCIC to say over to the Attorney General’s 

Department, because you would count it there. I don’t know whether I answered your question well 

enough or not. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I know it is highly improper going back and forth across the floor. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Highly improper. 

 

Mr. Guy: — But I might just ask one other question. Now these questions are being asked for every 

department. So that position if you are not going to count in MCIC because of a transfer, would it be 

included in your own department? Would you please provide the answer to that. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out and try to keep this thing in a better semblance of 

order. Maybe the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) could get into the debate and answer my question 

here. 

 

The total number of new permanent positions established in let’s say MCIC. I understand the Attorney 

General, in his amendment, is going to exclude any people or positions that may have been transferred 

in. It is not uncommon for an Admin. Officer 11 or 111 from somewhere else to be moved over or to 

switch his own job. But as I recollect, Mr. Speaker, it is not very frequent that a position as such that is 

set up, let’s say in the Attorney General’s Department, would ever be (the position that is), transferred to 

say Municipal Affairs or Public Health or any other. It will be just left and not filled. If that is the only 

exclusion I can see there would be few and far between — or I would think there would be. Am I correct 

in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think we can clear this rather readily. It’s a position that we’re talking about and 

if I may give an example. The Department of Social Services has just taken over mental 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

965 

retardation (some 680 positions were transferred) and this could have happened in some other 

departments too. So we’re talking about where positions are transferred because of program area 

changes and this is the inclusion that we are intending to get. It gives a more accurate picture of the 

additional positions which are involved and I think this is what the Opposition really wants. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — One further question just to clarify. But at the same time you will also 

include in the Department of Health those 680 positions, eh? So that there is no way in the shift they are 

lost in the Return. That is not in the amendment, though. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, if I may help the Members further. As they 

are aware, there has been a fair bit of Government reorganization. I believe what you are after is the 

complement of staff that are employed in the various departments. For example, the Department of 

Government Services is a new department. It used to be the Department of Public Works. If you said 

new positions, only, all of those employees who worked for the Department of Public Works could be 

considered new employees within the Department of Government Services. The same is true of the 

Department of the Provincial Secretary. A number of positions were transferred to the Department of 

Consumer Affairs because it’s a new department. What we want to do is give you the information of the 

total complement of staff during the periods requested. In the case of the Department of Public Health, 

the Hon. Minister of Social Services has mentioned core services, the additional group that has been 

transferred from the North Battleford Hospital into the Riverside Nursing Home which was established 

and Level III care is provided. Equally, from our Department the Occupational Health people were 

transferred to the Department of Labor. Unless this is done, you would find there would be stacking of 

Civil Service which I’m sure you don’t want and we don’t want to leave the wrong impression with the 

public. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 60 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 60 showing: 

 

(1) The total number of new permanent positions established in the Local Government Board since 
July 1, 1971 to January 25, 1973. (2) The number of these positions that have been filled. (3) The 

names and salaries and whether appointments were made by Order in Council or through the 

Public Service Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, with all deference to the Hon. 

Attorney General, I think the Motion that they substitute the amendment that he is proposing will not 

clarify the situation in regard to this Motion. This Motion for Return asks for the total number of new 

permanent positions established in the Local 



 

February 20, 1973 

 

 

966 

Government Board since July 1. The answer to that would have to be nil because there have been no 

new permanent positions provided. I don’t think nil is quite the answer that the Hon. Member opposite is 

looking for and if the amendment that has been proposed for these others were put in its place it would 

not change the situation. So I am proposing, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Public 

Health (Mr. Smishek) that Motion No. 60 be amended: 

 

That sections 1 and 2 be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

(1) The total number of positions filled in the Local Government Board since May 22, 1964 to January 
25, 1973. 

 

(2) That Section (3) be renumbered Section (2). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


