



















































Hansard: February 22, 1973


1013 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Thursday February 22, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the 

Members of the Legislature, a group of 27 Grade Eight students from the Dover School which is located 

in Regina North East constituency. They are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are accompanied by 

their teacher Mr. Short. Mr. Speaker, I should like to extend a warm welcome to the students, to express 

the hopes that their stay with us this afternoon will be informative and educational, that it will assist 

them in their social studies and that they may be able to remember their visit with us this afternoon for 

many years to come. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to welcome to the Legislature a group of 

Grade Eight students from Broadview who are situated in the east gallery. They are accompanied by 

their teacher Mr. Hritzuk. I hope they enjoy the proceedings and their tour of the city and I hope they 

have a pleasant journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through 

you to the Members of the House, a group of students from College Park School in Saskatoon, 

accompanied by their teachers Mr. Wright and Mr. Ramsden. I trust that the stimulating level of the 

debate in the Session this afternoon will endow them with a rich appreciation of our parliamentary 

institutions. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, through you I should like to welcome to this 

House a group of five ladies that are sitting in the second row of the Speaker’s Gallery. These five ladies 

are representatives of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association. I hope they enjoy their visit here 

today to watch this Legislature in action. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce through you and to this Assembly, 12 

students from the Life Skill’s Course here in Regina, accompanied by Mr. Barseleau and Mr. 

Butterfield. I hope they will find the deliberations here this afternoon of 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1014 

interest, and stimulating to them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, there is an old saying, the best wine is always left until 

the last. Today I don’t have a group of students but I have another group of ladies from the community 

of Yellow Grass in the Milestone constituency. They represent the West Yellow Grass Institute. They 

are accompanied by their driver Harold Lansdell. I want to ask through you and the Members of the 

House to extend a very warm welcome and hope they will enjoy the proceedings this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

Price Increase 1973-74 Crop Year 

 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask permission to 

make a short announcement and also to ask a question of the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). 

 

Just an hour ago, the Hon. Otto Lang, Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board announced 

initial prices and quotas for the 1973-74 crop year. I am informed the initial price of wheat will remain 

the same, while the initial price of barley will be increased to $1.20 a bushel, effective August 1st this 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — This, Mr. Speaker, is a significant 15 cent per bushel increase in the price of 3CW 6-row 

barley. There will also be a 10-cent increase in the initial price of 2CW oats. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — In his statement to the House of Commons, Mr. Lang asks farmers to expand crops in 

general and in particular encouraged expansion of barley, rapeseed and oat crops. In view of the 

thousands of extra dollars that this announcement will mean to Saskatchewan farmers, I would 

respectively suggest that this House heartily commend Mr. Lang for his actions and would ask for the 

Minister of Agriculture’s concurrence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, the statement that was just made is indeed 

one that I think farmers in Saskatchewan will be happy to hear. I am glad after some 12 months when 

we first instigated meetings with Mr. Lang to increase the prices of wheat, barley and oats to 

Saskatchewan farmers, they decided to take our advice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1015 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — The Members opposite may laugh, Mr. Speaker, but about 10 months ago the 

three Ministers of Agriculture from the Prairie provinces set up a meeting with Mr. Lang to be followed 

by several others encouraging him to do so at that time. Had he followed those instructions in the spring 

of 1972, we would not be facing perhaps what might be a barley and feed shortage in Canada today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Returning Officers Appointed 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 

question to the Premier. Order in Council No. 231 dated February 9, 1973 and signed by the Premier, 

appoints 47 returning officers for various constituencies in the province. Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact 

no Chief Electoral Officer is appointed for the province, and in view that a major independent 

reorganization of the constituency boundaries is currently under way, what work does the Premier 

anticipate that these persons will do other than collect the $300 per year stipend attached to the job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think it will be well known that the constituency 

Boundaries Commission has not reported. We must at all times be ready for either general elections or 

by-elections. Certainly there are a good number of constituencies which I am sure would wish that their 

current Member sitting opposite would resign so that they might have effective representation in the 

House. 

 

To answer the question directly, no doubt they will perform the same duties as returning officers did in 

the year 1970 when they were appointed, when there was no election. In fact it is anticipated that there 

may well be some duties for returning officers in connection with the new boundaries when they come 

out. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — We would not hope! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I am sure Members opposite hope that the returning officer, certainly in 

Milestone, has no work to do because if he did, the Member for Milestone would be replaced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I think that the legislation anticipated that there would be standby work, the 

same work that was done when this idea of permanent returning officers was first instituted, not by our 

government, by the one which preceded us. It would be anticipated that these people would in the 

ordinary course of events serve in appropriate instances with respect to time votes, with respect to liquor 

and in respect to any other votes carried on. I would anticipate these returning officers would carry on 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1016 

in precisely the same way that their predecessors did, under the government which preceded us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Requirements in Change of Name Act 

 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, a question of the Hon. Minister of 

Public Health (Mr. Smishek). As the Minister of Public Health he should be aware of Section 10 of The 

Change of Name Act. If I may refer to that to preface my question, Mr. Speaker, every person intending 

to make an application for change of name shall publish a notice in the required form in the Gazette and 

in one issue of a newspaper having general circulation in the district in which he resides. Has the 

Minister of Public Health made any changes in the requirements of that Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — I am not quite sure what the Hon. Member is 

referring to. I have made no changes. The procedures outside of the changes that have been agreed upon 

in the Non-controversial Bills Committee in The Change of Name Act, the provisions have just been 

agreed upon by the House. 

 

Mr. Lane: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. We then have to ask the Hon. Minister when did 

the policy change and when did the Government change the policy of this Act, which now allows an 

individual, and I refer to the Commonwealth of February 14, 1973, where one Joseph Demchuk, also 

known as Joseph Frederick Dempsey, filed the requisite notice required by The Change of Name Act. I 

am advised as of yesterday there had not been advertised, the address given by Mr. Dempsey or 

Demchuk which is Regina. No advertisement has been placed in the Leader-Post at any time. We then 

ask the Minister when was this change in policy which allows the Commonwealth to become the organ 

which will allow public notices and completely controvert the intention of The Change of Name Act? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think the Minister is responsible for actions committed by him. But 

actions of others putting advertisements in papers, the Minister is not responsible for those. Whether it 

was done with or without the Minister’s consent, the Member can find out by discussing privately with 

the Minister. I don’t think this qualifies as questions on Orders of the Day. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I asked him when he changed the policy requiring that Act . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think he should discuss it with the Minister and get it straightened up. If a 

Member wishes to base a question on the statement in the paper it is up to him first to ascertain whether 

that statement is true or not before he poses a question. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1017 

Government in Auto Body Repair Business 

 

Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a very short 

question for the Minister in Charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, the Hon. 

Attorney General. 

 

In a news report last evening it was reported, Mr. Speaker, that the Government is going into the auto 

body repair business. In the past, Mr. Speaker, in the province everyone who drives a car has always 

been allowed a free choice of where they go to get quality repair work performed on their cars and pick 

the auto body man. What I would like to know if this choice will still be available to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make one thing clear. I 

believe the news report said, certainly any official release that we put out, emphasized what we called a 

research centre to look into the costs for the repairs of cars. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — It’s a spy system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The Member for Milestone says, it’s a spy system. I suppose it is a monitor 

system in the sense of making sure that costs for repairs for cars are not out of line. I think the people of 

Saskatchewan would expect us to make sure that the costs that are paid for repairs of cars are in fact the 

fair and honest prices that we are to pay for them. When we talk about a research centre we are not 

necessarily talking about a separate Government run auto body shop. That is not a possibility that we are 

excluding but that is not the nature of the announcement. It may very well be simply a research centre 

within the Department of the SGIO to monitor costs on a day to day basis, look at new ways of repairing 

cars, all designed with a view to keeping costs down with respect to repairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I think the Minister is indicating that the 

auto body men in this province are not honest and that you can’t believe the rates that they are charging. 

This is what he has indicated to this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — If I conveyed that impression I withdraw that categorically. If you got that 

impression, I did not say that nor did I intend to say that. I do not say that auto body men are dishonest. I 

simply say that in order for SGIO to be able to take into account accurately all of the figures of costs 

with respect to these matters we have got to have better access to information. That is what we are 

seeking to do with respect to the research centre. That is what I am saying. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have had a question and a supplementary and that is more than our three usual 

questions today. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1018 

Mr. McPherson: — It is a very short question, Mr. Speaker. Then the Minister is indicating that they 

are going into the automobile repair business, this is what I wanted to know. You are going into the 

business and you will indicate where Joe Doe takes his car or any Minister of the Crown or . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the Member opposite that we have made no 

decision on this matter of going into the auto body business. To answer the question specifically, would 

we be telling where the average motorist should go to repair his car. The obvious answer to that would 

be, no, we will not be telling him where he must or must not have his car repaired, even if we do get 

ourselves involved in this area. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a brief question . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I can’t permit any more questions. We have had five and three is usually the 

limit. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and with the consent of 

Members opposite, I should like to move a motion in respect of the news which we received yesterday 

of the untimely death of the former Member, Thomas Russell MacNutt. I should like, Mr. Speaker, to 

move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former Member of this Assembly 

and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his community, his constituency 

and to this Province. 

 

Thomas Russel MacNutt, who died on February 21, 1973, represented the Constituency of Nipawin 

from 1952 to 1956. He was born in Saltcoats, Saskatchewan in 1895 and was educated in Saltcoats 

public and high schools and attended the College of Agriculture in Saskatoon. He was a farmer and 

later a general merchant. He served in both World Wars and achieved the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel. 

In France, during the First World War, he served with the Third Battalion, Canadian Machine Gun 

Corps and from 1932 to 1938 he was the Commanding Officer of the First Battalion, King’s Own 

Rifles of Canada on the Pacific Coast. He attended the coronation of His Majesty King George VI with 

the Canadian contingent as a member of the King’s mounted escort. He was a member of the Canadian 

Legion and of the Masonic Lodge. In 1949, he was an unsuccessful candidate for the federal election. 

From 1926 to 1947 he was Secretary-Treasurer of the Rural Municipality of Saltcoats and was also a 

councillor of the town of Saltcoats for five years and was a member of the town council of Arborfield 

for one year. 

 

In recording its deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1019 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments. I should like to associate myself 

and other Members of the Opposition with the motion just moved by the Premier. 

 

If here was anything about Russ MacNutt, we can say he was an outstanding example of a Canadian 

who dedicated his life to his community, his province and his country. Russ MacNutt led a very 

complete life. All of us are aware that he sat as a Member of this Legislature. I took the opportunity to 

go back and read some of his speeches and I found that he made an outstanding contribution particularly 

in discussing the agricultural and rural life problems of Saskatchewan. 

 

As a soldier he achieved an outstanding rank which was an indication of the respect and the leadership 

qualities that he had. As a farmer and a businessman he participated in the economic life of 

Saskatchewan. As a Secretary-Treasurer and a Councillor of a small community he also participated in 

local government. I don’t think we could ask any citizen of Saskatchewan to make a greater 

contribution. 

 

I want to say that Members of the Opposition join with the Premier and Members of the Government in 

expressing our sincere condolences to the family and friends. 

 

Mr. Comer (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Premier and the Hon. Member 

from Milestone in extending condolences to the MacNutt family on the death of Thomas MacNutt. 

 

As has been mentioned, T. R. MacNutt represented Nipawin constituency from 1952 until 1956. He was 

the first Member from the newly created seat of Nipawin. Mr. MacNutt, as was mentioned yesterday, 

came from a distinguished family in this province, his father being the first Speaker of this Assembly 

and as well as a Member of the Saskatchewan Legislature. T. R. MacNutt was able to leave his mark on 

government in this province being the Secretary-Treasurer of the R.M. of Saltcoats for 21 years, a 

councillor in the town of Saltcoats for five years, as well as being a councillor in the town of Arborfield 

for one year. He climaxed this active involvement with his membership in this body. 

 

I should like to turn for a few moments and talk about Mr. MacNutt’s activity in the northeastern part of 

this province. He came to Arborfield in 1947 to operate a general store. He was a very active community 

worker. He was always a hard worker for the Legion. He is well remembered for his great interest in 

young people. In Arborfield he was an active promoter of what was called the Arborfield Male 

Quartette. Through his hard work and practice this Quartette of which he was a member became a 

feature at most social events in the Arborfield district. Mr. MacNutt was also an avid fisherman. Any 

reason to go fishing was always accepted. It was through his great interest in fishing that he came to 

appreciate the great tourist potential that there was in northeastern Saskatchewan. As a Member of this 

House, as has been mentioned, Mr. MacNutt was a tireless fighter for Nipawin constituency. He pressed 

for roads and drainage in his constituency. His efforts were appreciated, his 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1020 

requests were necessities. He was also a man who was most interested in the opening up of a road to The 

Pas from Carrot River, a project which was only recently brought to completion. A fighter for the 

northeast, a worker for his community and a credit to this province, he served us well. 

 

I am sure that the qualities which this man displayed must today leave thoughts of gratitude which will 

help to overcome the sadness which his family must endure at this time. I should like to extend on behalf 

of myself and the constituents of Nipawin our deepest words of sympathy to the MacNutt family. 

 

Mr. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I should also like to add a few words of condolence to the 

members of the MacNutt family at this time. As you will know the late Lieutenant-Colonel MacNutt 

was born and raised in the Saltcoats district in my constituency. He served for many years there as the 

treasurer to the rural municipality of Saltcoats. Through those years he served the town and municipality 

well and to the best of his ability. He was an active and enthusiastic contributor to all activities in the 

community. In 1947 he moved to Arborfield where he purchased a business. During his term of service 

in the military forces in the First World War he served with the third Battalion forces CMGC in France 

and was discharged with the rank of Lieutenant. He was active in reserve forces as Officer Commanding 

of the 16th and 22nd Canadian Light Horse during the 1930s. At the outbreak of hostilities in 1939 he 

returned to the active army. He served as an officer in the Regina Rifle Regiment, First Battalion, and as 

Officer Commanding of the King’s Own Rifles of Canada. In 1949, Mr. MacNutt followed family 

tradition and entered into politics. He was defeated in the Federal election in 1947 but in 1952 

successfully contested the Nipawin riding for the Liberal Party and was a Member of the Legislature 

until 1956. 

 

"T.R." as he was affectionately known by his friends and comrades in the Legion, was very active in the 

Royal Canadian Legion and served in many executive positions, including that of Zone Commander of 

the Yorkton district. He was a life member of the Royal Canadian Legion and at the time of his death 

was a member of the Saltcoats branch. 

 

He was predeceased by his wife in 1967 and returned to live with his daughter, Mrs. Cecil Trowell, in 

the Saltcoats area. 

 

I had an opportunity to meet with him during the 1971 election campaign and needless to say I was 

unable to convert him although we spent an interesting hour together. Later that year I again met Mr. 

MacNutt at a Legion Remembrance Day program in Saltcoats and had an interesting evening with him, 

together with a Mr. Bob Kohaly who is a former Conservative Member for Estevan. 

 

Mr. MacNutt is survived by three children, Charles MacNutt who lives in Saltcoats, Mrs. Mary Trowell 

of Saltcoats and Mrs. Lorene Graham of Saskatoon. I am sure the House will join with me in expressing 

our deepest sympathy to the bereaved family. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Member for 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1021 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Member, be communicated to the bereaved family, on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Motion — Rail Line Abandonment 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Blakeney and the proposed 

amendment thereto by Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government that no railway branch line abandonment be 

considered in Saskatchewan before all the alternatives are thoroughly studied and the social and 

economic costs to producers, businesses and communities be ascertained and, further, that no 

abandonments be allowed without the prior agreement of the Government of Saskatchewan and, 

specifically, that no abandonments be authorized until 1980. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Gardner: 

 

That the following words be added to the motion: and further that the railroad companies be obligated 

to: 

1. Provide a high standard of service on present lines. 

2. Provide adequate maintenance and improvement on rail lines and equipment so that a high standard 

of service can be maintained. 

 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, in my remarks prior to my adjourning the debate on this motion, I 

had indicated what the real reason for the introduction of this motion by the Premier, and I wish to 

elaborate on those remarks. 

 

The concern the Premier had for introducing this motion was not for the towns and rural communities 

that would be affected by abandonment, that concern was not for the social and economic costs that 

abandonment would have on a producer, on the businesses, on our communities and on our rural way of 

life, but rather, Mr. Speaker, it was a concern for politics. A concern for the NDP Government and the 

New Democratic Party, a concern for political gain, a concern for the justification of the actions taken 

by the CCF Party of which many Members opposite were a part of. A concern to try and shift the blame 

for the only rail line abandonment that has ever occurred in this province. A concern to take public 

suspicion away from the NDP and place that suspicion on the Federal Liberals. Mr. Speaker, the 

Members opposite just don’t want to admit that the only rail lines that were ever abandoned in this 

province were abandoned when their Party was the Government of Saskatchewan. Many of those 

Members opposite now were sitting in that Government at that time. It is a fact they do not wish to 

accept, it is a fact that it was a Provincial Liberal Government and a Federal Liberal Government that 

called a halt and stopped rail line abandonment in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1022 

Mr. Wiebe: — They are aware and I am sure the people of Saskatchewan are aware that the only time 

that rail lines were torn up and abandoned in this province was when their party and Members opposite 

were the Government. At no time, Mr. Speaker, during that controversy did they rise to the defense of 

these rail lines. At no time did they rise to the defense of the rural communities and farmers who were 

affected by that abandonment. Where was their concern at that time? What constructive alternatives did 

they suggest? What pressure did they put on the then Conservative Government in Ottawa to call a halt 

to this abandonment? The people of Saskatchewan can answer those questions, Mr. Speaker. The 

CCF-NDP Government sat on their hands and did nothing. 

 

They finally became involved in this controversy when they realized the political ramifications of what 

they had allowed to happen. For the past ten years speaker after speaker has tried to shift the blame. 

They don’t want to stand up and admit that it was the NDP that allowed rail lines to be abandoned in this 

province. They don’t want to admit that it was the Liberal Governments in Saskatchewan and Ottawa 

that called a halt to that abandonment. 

 

The interesting part of this entire controversy, Mr. Speaker, is that during the past 10 years and during 

the debate on this motion the NDP have not come up with one positive approach to this question. Not 

once have they put forward any constructive or rational idea or solution to this problem. They have 

decided to leave things the way they are, all the motion calls for is an extension of time to 1980. They 

are content to allow rail lines to deteriorate, they are content to allow the services on our rail lines to 

deteriorate. A number of speakers on their side of the House have already indicated this and have 

declared that they will not support the amendments proposed by Mr. Gardner. Comments made by 

Members opposite throughout this debate have been negative. They are content to run down and to 

ridicule any attempt that has been made by the Federal Government to look into the entire transportation 

system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The Agricultural Minister (Mr. Messer) criticized the progress made by the Grains 

Group, saying that they were studies carried out in the back rooms of Ottawa or in the back rooms of 

Toronto. I am sure that the Minister doesn’t believe this himself. I am sure that he knows that the Grains 

Group carried out or commissioned detailed studies into practically every aspect of grain storage, 

handling and transportation. 

 

The Grains Group realized that they must secure the best advice. They realized that studies must be 

undertaken to fully understand what effect the present system has and what effect changes would have 

one our social and economic way of life for our producers, our businessmen and our communities. 

 

The studies, Mr. Speaker, have been completed. The western Provincial Governments have had an 

opportunity to examine the studies. If the Minister of Agriculture disagrees with some of these studies, 

then it is his responsibility to add constructive criticism and alternatives . . . 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1023 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — . . . not to tear them apart and to refuse to work together with them. Now is the time, Mr. 

Speaker, for co-operation. Now is the time to embark on a public discussion in an effort to determine 

what actions can be taken now and over the long term. Now is the time for the Provincial Government to 

co-operate and to add constructive discussion. Now is the time to co-operate and decide whether further 

studies, if need be, should be undertaken. 

 

Just a small example of the Grain Council’s determination to involve the producer and individuals in our 

rural communities, is the co-sponsoring of a two-day Grain and Handling and Transportation seminar to 

be held in Saskatchewan on March 8th and 9th. It is a Seminar, Mr. Speaker, that is sponsored by the 

University of Saskatchewan and the Canada Grains Council, designed to provide the opportunity for 

interested individuals to take part in the decision-making which may effect the very life of this province. 

 

It is necessary for the various organizations, individual producers, rural governments and, yes, western 

provincial governments to sit down together to assess the fact, to participate in determining the best 

course of action. Mr. Speaker, we must be able to understand each others’ problems. 

 

Where does our responsibility as legislators lie in regard to a question as vital as rail line abandonment 

and the effects that this entire question can have on our rural way of life; its effect on our economy, its 

effect on the future of our many towns and farms in this province. Our responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is not 

destructively to oppose suggestions or ideas, our responsibility is not to refuse to co-operate or to go off 

on a tangent of our own. Our responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is to find answers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, we must make every effort to take this issue out of the narrow range of 

both petty party politics and the interests of railways and elevator companies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — We must be prepared to ask that all western provincial governments, farm organizations 

and most important, the producers, set these petty issues aside and work together with the Federal 

Government to provide alternatives. To come up with solutions that if changes are required that the 

grain producer of our rural communities will get the entire benefit of these changes. 

 

There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that changes will be required. Steps must be taken to increase 

producers’ returns by reducing the cost of transportation, storage and handling. Last year, Mr. Speaker, 

this cost amounted to 18 cents per bushel of wheat sold by the Canadian Wheat Board. Savings must be 

realized in this area and these savings must be passed on to the farmers. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1024 

On top of this must be added the cost of the Federal Government’s subsidy to the railroads. A way must 

be found to put more, if not all, of this money into the pockets of the producers by finding and exploring 

a more economical transportation storage and handling system, one that, again I say, is designed for the 

benefit of the producers. 

 

Our present transportation handling and elevator system in the West, I think, can justly be called one of 

the best in the world. Yet, I do not feel, Mr. Speaker, that we can rest here. We must still be prepared to 

improve upon this system. While it may be the best in the world it is still not the best as far as producers 

are concerned. 

 

What we have today is basically a system that was based on the ability of the farmer to deliver his grain 

with horse and wagon. Because of this, our elevators were spaced six to eight miles apart on closely 

spaced railroad branch lines. 

 

This system, while very effective up to the early ‘50s needs vast improvements to effect a savings to our 

producers today. This can be emphasized by the statement made by Ira Mumford, Wheat Pool General 

Manager, which appeared in the Leader-Post on February 1st of this year, in which he stated that the 

grain elevator system on the Prairies is wearing out. Half of the elevators were more than 40 years old. 

Mr. Mumford also said that the old elevators when they become obsolete, won’t be replaced, but instead, 

will be rebuilt in more central locations. 

 

If we are concerned about the rural communities and the effect that rail line abandonment will have on 

them, we must also be concerned about the effect that the elevator companies are having on our rural 

communities by the amalgamation and closing down of obsolete and worn out elevators. During the last 

10 years, under a Liberal Government in Saskatchewan and a Liberal Government in Ottawa, not one 

inch of railway has been abandoned, while over four per cent of our elevators in Saskatchewan have 

been abandoned in each of these years. By the closing of these elevators there has been the resultant loss 

in jobs and, of course, population. 

 

As I have mentioned earlier, there is no doubt that changes will be required and that the primary 

beneficiaries of any of these changes, again, must be the producer. But, Mr. Speaker, it is just as vital to 

emphasize that the social and economic life of the communities affected by any changes in our elevator 

and rail line system must be considered as well. 

 

This is why, Mr. Speaker, that I emphasize that all levels of government in western Canada, farm 

organizations must put petty politics aside and work together to find those solutions. 

 

Let’s take a positive approach to this question of transportation, grain handling and rail line 

abandonment. Let’s take a positive approach to our rural communities. Let’s look at alternatives. Let’s 

not tie ourselves down until 1980. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must still ensure that if solutions cannot be found that will be acceptable to our 

producers and ensure or improve our social and economic rural life, that we do not allow rail lines to be 

torn up. But let us, as well, leave ourselves enough room that if concrete solutions that are more 

beneficial than what we have now found, that we can implement 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1025 

these solutions and not wait until 1980. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at our low density rail lines. These are branch lines that carry 

relatively few bushels of grain and possibly less than 5 per cent of the commercial freight. 

 

Here is a question that we must ask ourselves: Do we want moneys to continue to be paid to the railway 

companies under the existing Transportation Act to keep a low density rail line? Or do we prefer that 

these moneys be put to better use to serve our rural communities and our producers. 

 

Let me interject at this point, and I hope the Hon. Members will not misunderstand my objective. I say, 

again, that I do not favor wholesale or partial abandonment of rail lines, but if changes are to be made, 

then these changes must be such that our producers and communities will benefit more by that change. 

 

Let me repeat the question that I posed: Do we want moneys to continue to be paid to the railway 

companies under the existing Transportation Act to keep a low density rail line? Or do we prefer that 

these moneys be put to better use to serve our rural communities and our producers? 

 

At present, Mr. Speaker, close to $30 million comes out of our Federal treasury as a direct subsidy to 

railway companies just to keep our low density branch lines open. I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is time 

that we stopped looking at our railway companies and start to look at our farmers. 

 

I suggest that it is time that we started to look at what we, as producers, could do with this $30 million 

and the benefits that our municipalities and communities could as well receive from the $30 million. If it 

became advisable after intensive studies that a particular branch line had to be withdrawn, then the 

savings in subsidies to the railways and the savings in storage and handling by elevators and rail lines be 

transferred to the producer, to the municipalities and the communities involved. 

 

This saving could be used in various ways. Some suggestions that I would like to make are: 

 

The savings, for example, in storage and handling could be passed on to all producers of this province. 

This would be realized in the final grain payment. 

 

The savings realized from the direct government subsidy to railways could be passed on to the producer 

in the form of one-third to one-half cent per bushel per loaded mile. This would adequately pay for 

increased cost accrued by the farmer for lengthier hauls and also a return to the producer for his labor 

and his investment. If all the low density branch lines were affected, the total cost could be slightly over 

$10 million. This money could be realized from the savings of close to $30 million that comes out of our 

federal treasury as a direct subsidy to railway companies, just to keep our low density branch lines open. 

 

One point that must be made here is that if all low density branch lines were affected by rail 

rationalization, then this payment per bushel per loaded mile should be made to all 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1026 

producers in this province. 

 

For the information of Members opposite, the figures which I am quoting are taken from the Report of 

Grain Handling and Transportation Costs in Canada, which was prepared for the Grains Group and the 

Hon. Otto Lang. 

 

This report, I might mention, is not in the Legislative library and I would suggest to the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) and the Premier that they obtain a copy and also make arrangements to have 

one placed in the library. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the balance of the savings realized from the direct government subsidy of $30 

million to railway companies could be passed on to the rural municipalities in the form of grants for the 

construction of superior artery, all-weather, dust-free roads to handle this extra traffic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — As well, Mr. Speaker, maintenance grants should also be made available for the upkeep 

of these roads. 

 

I must mention that these grants should apply only to the main artery roads, as these will be the only 

roads affected by this change. The traffic on feeder roads would remain unchanged, as these are the 

roads that they normally have been using to transport their grain to their original delivery point. This, 

Mr. Speaker, would not be an extra burden on the municipalities or the Department of Highways. 

 

Here again, the bulk of benefits would come back to our producers, our communities, as they will be 

served by much superior roads. A joint program, Mr. Speaker, as well should be undertaken by the 

provincial and federal governments to ensure that there will be no loss of population or economic benefit 

to our viable communities which are affected by any rationalization. Programs could be undertaken to 

attract small industry to these communities or incentives could be provided to further expansion of the 

agricultural industry in that particular district. 

 

These proposals which I have mentioned, Mr. Speaker, are just a few examples of what can be done. 

These are just a few examples to show that if there is a change, that the benefits derived from that 

change can go to the producer, can go to the community and can help enhance the social and economic 

life of Saskatchewan. 

 

I submit as well, Mr. Speaker, that the suggestions I have made deserve and need further examination 

and study. I feel, as well, Mr. Speaker, that just pumping more money into the present system to 

maintain a status quo is wrong. I feel that solutions must be found and that the only way that a true and 

viable solution can be found is by co-operation of this Government with the western provincial 

governments and with the Federal Government. 

 

I urge this Legislature to recommend that we strive constructively to work together with other levels of 

governments, organizations and individuals to find a solution that will be beneficial to our rural 

communities, our producers and our province as a whole. Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1027 

Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, of all the idiotic nonsense I heard is when I listened to my 

hon. friend from Morse in the first few minutes that he was talking. I guess I have to be easy on him as 

he is pretty young. Either that or he has an extremely short memory when he made the statement — and 

I don’t want to misquote him — but I am sure he said the previous government of the first CCF 

Government, prior to 1964, had done nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I happened to have been a Member at that time and active in it, when we had a special 

group under the late Russ Brown. There were meetings held all across this province, district meetings. I 

remember when halls were full of people who were supporting us in our efforts of trying to stop rail line 

abandonment. In fact I remember one special meeting that burned in my memory. It was held in the city 

of Regina, in the Hotel Saskatchewan, I believe on November 22, 1963, when that day word came to 

that meeting that President Jack Kennedy had just been killed. I will never forget that day of the shock 

on the people that were there. We went on and held that meeting for several hours and it was of no use 

because people couldn’t think of anything else. 

 

But to say that the previous government had done nothing is idiotic nonsense. I might go on and say that 

as soon as the Liberal Government was elected in 1964, in this province, one of the first things that 

happened was that group was disbanded and let go. 

 

I could not help but listen to my hon. friend and hear the undertone of accepting anything that Ottawa 

might suggest. I couldn’t help but wonder whether they are already expecting that there will be an 

election — federal election. At that point the Liberal Party will go ahead and listen to its corporate 

bosses and let the railways do what they want. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I support this motion overwhelmingly. As far as the amendment is 

concerned I am going to support it. I am in favor of motherhood and that is really what it is, a 

motherhood motion. 

 

Mr. Guy: — How about the rest of them? 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I don’t talk about the rest of them, I talk for Frank Meakes. 

 

I had thought when this motion was put before the House, that it would go through smoothly, that surely 

for once, politics would not come out of it. Because I think that this Resolution is far too important for 

us to bandy around and accusations one way or another. It wasn’t us really that started it. 

 

I think that this is one of the most important and dangerous issues facing western Canada, and in 

particular in the Province of Saskatchewan, that if nothing is done to stop it it can eliminate hundreds of 

communities. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, of a CPR stub line that you and I 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1028 

know very well, that is the line coming out from Foam Lake through to Wishart. I think that if this were 

to go, and after 1975 it can go, it is one of the tracks that is on the list. When I think of the investment of 

human beings and cash in the village of Wishart, I think of the investment of human beings of their 

whole lives and what could happen if that track comes out. 

 

I think of the social costs that are involved in a place like Wishart. Incidentally Wishart is just 10 miles 

north of where I lived all my life, I know it very well. I might say that the village of Wishart for many 

years delivered more wheat, or there was more wheat grown in that area than any other shipping point in 

district nine of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 

It is a very interesting story, this railway track, because back about 1925 there were plans for the CNR to 

build a railway from Yorkton coming out through the Beaver Hills out to about where Wishart is and on 

through to Bulyea or Nokomis or somewhere down in that area. There was one man known as Charlie 

Dunning, a man well-known in this province, who one time served in this Legislature, who later ran and 

went to Ottawa and became the Minister of Railways. He had grown up around the village of Beaverdale 

just west of Yorkton and the track had got as far as Parkerview in 1925 or 1926, the stub line and it was 

intending to go on. This illustrious gentleman, as Minister of Railways, and I would like to say before I 

come to that, through the area that had got as far as Parkerview, was a very poor farming land, but it 

would have to head out into Westbend and through to the Wishart area and then north of Punnichy. This 

would have been very productive land, but when he was Minister of Railways in Ottawa, he gave 

permission for the CPR to put a spur in from Foam Lake to Wishart, this way stopping a through service 

of railroad from Yorkton on through. 

 

It’s a very interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, that that same Hon. gentleman, Mr. Dunning, after he was 

retired from politics he later became a director of the Canadian Pacific Railway. It’s another interesting 

thing about this gentleman that when you read that book, "Who Owns Canada," one of the 50 men listed 

was Charlie Dunning and when you look at the occupation he was the only one out of 50 who claimed 

his occupation as that of a politician. 

 

For the Hon. Member from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) to have said, "We shouldn’t get politics into this," Mr. 

Speaker, the railway system from the day it was built — the day that John A MacDonald signed an 

agreement to build the railway, railways have been in politics. It’s been a political football. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — When John A. MacDonald signed that historic contract with the CPR and gave away 

large grants of land with it, CPR has made more money out of the land than they have out of the 

railways. For instance they have had many subsidiaries and when you look at Trail, British Columbia, 

Cominco, in which they got this land for nothing, I say that the railroads have not only a legal, but a 

moral, responsibility to the people of Canada, to the people of western Canada and the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I see a real need in Canada for the nationalization of the CPR and to put it into one with the CNR and to 

see then real 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1029 

rationalization. I see places like when you drive west from Saskatoon, you see a CNR and a CPR track 

running in some places only a couple of miles apart, both in competition. This to me is the height of 

stupidity. 

 

I say that we should be nationalizing and making the two railways an efficient system because I will 

agree with my hon. friend from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) that there are some inefficiencies. But I say that 

when we should nationalize the CPR, I don’t mean just the CPR railway, I say the CPR and all its 

subsidies. 

 

All this time, Mr. Speaker, freight rates are rising and I want to put on the records of this House just 

what has happened in my home town in the last few months. These figures were given to me by the 

pharmacist in Lestock, showing his freight increases from October 31 to January 16. He says he can 

substantiate these figures by showing invoices and so, Mr. Speaker, when I am finished I will file this 

paper on the records for anybody to see. I should like to deal with them. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we 

cannot discuss rail abandonment without discussing what has been going on. I think some of their ideas 

were crazy. 

 

I live on the main line of the CNR with one of the best roadbeds there is and going down right alongside 

the railway. On the highway is a CNR truck, and I think that this is a waste of power, of money, of 

everything else. Let me come to these figures. 

 

Referring to parcels of freight that the druggist gets from Saskatoon and it comes by truck freight (I 

won’t read it all, I’ll read just spot figures all the way down to show the increase.) 

 

On October 31st, 1972 he paid $2.25 for 85 pounds; on November 14th he paid $2.25 for 75 pounds, 

plus a heat charge of 23 cents for at that time it was getting pretty cold; November 27, 1972 – 80 

pounds, still $2.25 with a 23 cent heat charge; then we come to December 12, 1972 – 110 pounds (it 

suddenly jumps) from $2.25 to $3.15 plus a heat charge of 32 cents, plus a service charge of 79 cents. 

I’ll deal with this service charge in a minute or two, Mr. Speaker. We go down to January 4, 1973 – 46 

pounds, $3.15, where he had got 85 pounds for $2.25 in October, plus a heat charge of 32 cents, plus a 

service charge of 79 cents and then on January 23rd he had 115 pounds at $3.15, plus the 32 cents heat 

charge, plus the 79 cents service charge. What is this service charge for? He can get a 25 per cent 

reduction if he takes all the risks of these parcels being frozen or broken. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we must ask the Federal Government to stop dead any changes at this time. I 

am not even sure whether 1980 is far enough, but I will accept 1980 for the present. We ask the Federal 

Government and yes, I think provincial governments will have to co-operate with them, in studying the 

problems — really there have been so many studies that I hate to even say that again — but until a 

planned action can be taken to stop the wiping out of any railroads in this province, until all aspects are 

weighted, the aspects of what happens to the investment of — I referred to people in the village of 

Wishart — and what it can do to our roads, to our village of Wishart — and what it can do to our roads, 

to our highways, to our grid roads. Because, certainly if railways go out, Mr. Speaker, trucks will have 

to become bigger. Really 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1030 

none of our roads, especially grid roads, are geared for this kind of truck travel. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say that in the meantime that all short-term and long-term plans should be made so 

that there is need of some real rationalization and that it be done on a detailed plan, not haphazard. Mr. 

Speaker, I certainly will be supporting the Motion and I hope that other Members will see fit to do so 

also. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure every Member in this House must feel obligated to 

enter this particular debate for rail line abandonment affects everyone in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us hope this debate bears fruit. Countless times Members of the NDP Government in 

Ottawa have led vigorous debates on this matter only for it to fall on deaf ears in Parliament. Not only in 

Ottawa have NDP Members of Parliament fought rail line abandonment, but also in provincial 

legislatures and in nearly every election campaign over the past 10 and 15 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, NDP Members of Parliament, MLAs and NDP workers have gone up and down this 

province, election after election, warning the people of Saskatchewan what is in store in terms of rail 

line abandonment. 

 

The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, are aware of Federal Liberal Government’s and are aware of 

Federal Conservative Government’s plans on abandoning rail lines. The people of Saskatchewan are 

aware of recent agricultural policies our Federal Government has imposed on these people year after 

year after year. The people of the province are aware of Task Force reports on agriculture which want to 

remove family farmers off their land in support of corporate farming systems. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, shame on you Liberals! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Finally, the people of this province are aware that on January 1, 1974, if allowed by the 

Canadian Transport Commission to go ahead, 4,156 miles of railway will be abandoned in the Prairie 

provinces, with 2,436 miles of that total to be in Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: —Edgar Benson says, "Go ahead.” 

 

Mr. Gross: — Mr. Speaker, it is very clear where we as a provincial NDP Government stand. Everyone 

knows where our Federal NDP Members stand, but, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know where our friends 

opposite stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, has our friend Mr. Steuart, the Leader of the Opposition, and his 

little bank of merry bootlickers ever made their position clear in this province. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1031 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Never have they marched up and down this province saying that they are totally against 

"Fire Sale Otto," Trudeau and the former John Diefenbaker Government in terms of rail line 

abandonment. Never, Mr. Speaker, have they made a human cry for the salvation of rail lines in 

Saskatchewan so that Saskatchewan does not fall in the hands of a corporate agrarian desert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask Members of this House, where does Mr. Steuart and his band of friends stand? 

 

The Liberals claim . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — In front of the mirror. 

 

Mr. Gross: — . . . they have concerns about rail and freight policies. They have stood up and said 

freight rates are too high in Saskatchewan, and we agree, Mr. Speaker, but the problem just doesn’t stop 

with freight rates. One must look at the total problem. One must also take into consideration the problem 

we are debating here today — probably the most contentious problem that will affect this province’s 

total life style and future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it must be a very touchy position right now being a Provincial Liberal Member. Their 

friends in Ottawa are saying, "remove and destroy two out of three family farms," and that party 

politically has gone along with such nonsense. Then, Mr. Speaker, the ‘Feds’ are asking them to turn 

around and face another dilemma and say, "Remove 2,400 miles of rail line in Saskatchewan.” 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, it must make it very hard for Members opposite having to go to the people 

election after election and tell the people they do have a conscience and they are concerned. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I find it very ironic when one thinks back to the last Federal election campaign. 

Liberal bootlickers running around with little badges and slogans saying, "I care.” If they do care, I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Davey Steuart and his supporters grab the first plane to Ottawa and on bended 

knees plead with their tin gods that no more insane programs be levelled on western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what will be the impact of such a move? Well, costs will increase to the producer for a 

great deal more trucking will be required at the expense of the farmer. Along with increased costs to the 

producer there will be requirements for improved roads and highways, that are existing structures and 

that will have to be restructured. We will soon find that grid roads, oiled surfaces, will be no substitute 

for the paved surfaces that will be required. But, Mr. Speaker, I ask you who will pay for these new 

improved roads and highway facilities that will be required? Will it be the Federal Government? No! 

Will it be the Canadian National or Canadian Pacific? No! I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

people that will be forced to pay for it will be the producers of this province and the producers of the 

Prairie Provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1032 

Mr. Gross: — Another effect, Mr. Speaker, will be a loss of taxation revenue that will be soon 

experienced by towns and rural municipalities due to low assessments on farmland when the railways 

and elevator facilities are closed. There will be no end to bad effects in this agrarian community that 

they will suffer in the days after January 1, 1975. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to bring light to a problem that I have in my own constituency in terms of rail 

line abandonment. If someone was to take out a map of the Province of Saskatchewan and look 

approximately 15 miles southwest of Swift Current, you will find a little town called Burnham. The 

town of Burnham is surrounded by very productive Saskatchewan agricultural land. You will also note 

that at Burnham it is the last point on the Gravelbourg subdivision of the CNR. That little town, Mr. 

Speaker, in the months of November and December had the rails pulled up in front of the two elevators 

at Burnham. It is also interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the subdivision of the CNR is slated for 

closure in 1975. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don McPherson’s fault. 

 

Mr. Gross: — Right! But then, Mr. Speaker, one good question. Why is the line closing in front of the 

elevators? And it is not even January 1, 1975. Well, upon checking with the CNR they tell us that the 

line is now no longer economic and the cost to rejuvenate the line would make it uneconomical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the very strongest terms, I say that this is an abandonment by default. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gross: — Mr. Speaker, when one talks with the people in that area you soon find out the type of 

maintenance that has occurred on that particular section of line from Neidpath. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, a letter from one of the elevator agents from Burnham and I quote: 

 

As far as I know the CNR sectionmen were only in Burnham three times in 1972. 

 

This is the type of maintenance the CNR is famous for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only has this point been left to deteriorate over the years at its own pace, but I note 

with concern, that a train has not come into Burnham since mid-December 1971. Yet, Mr. Speaker, 

grain handlings in that particular area in the crop year 1971-72, totaled 410,000 bushels. But how many 

bushels were those two elevators to handle because of the poor service given them at that point? They 

handled 135,000 bushels, somewhat less than the 410,000 bushels that area was capable of handling. 

This shabby type of service, Mr. Speaker, forced the farmers of that area to haul their grain either to 

Neidpath or to Swift Current. 

 

I have in my hands from the local farmers in that particular area three or four pieces of documentation, 

the amount of dollars more it costs them to haul either to Swift Current or 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1033 

Neidpath. This document, Mr. Speaker, is from Edwin Linklater of Burnham. In the document he points 

out that he is now hauling his grain to Swift Current. He hauls a total of 14,632 bushels annually. His 

truck hauls 200 bushels. Last year he made 73 trips. The number of return miles per load was 28, total 

miles covered was 2,045. Taking 2,045 miles and at a conservative figure of only 10 cents per miles for 

a truck of that size, he comes up with a total handling cost to himself, the producer, of $204.50. But 

when we compare what his costs would have been if he was hauling to Burnham, we find quite a 

different example. His handlings still remain the same at 14,632 bushels, has the same 200 bushel truck 

hauls the same number of loads, 73. What is the difference in the mileage? He looks at only one mile 

hauling to Burnham, whereas he was hauling 28 miles to Swift Current. Total miles, Mr. Speaker, that 

he will haul in a total year, 73, cost per mile 10 cents a bushel, one mile away from his total handling of 

$7.30 — $204.50 versus $7.30. Mr. Speaker, that is the difference in terms of cost to the producer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go further. We can cite cases such as the Middlemisses and the Stolhandskis and 

the Lightfoots and the Lightbodys and so on. They all represent the same type of problems that they are 

now facing at Burnham. Thanks to rail line abandonment. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much . . . 

 

Mr. Gross: — Considerable, $71,000 was their quote. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that they reconsider their 

policy of rail line abandonment. I suggest that Mr. Steuart and his friends at their earliest convenience 

rush down to Ottawa, talk to Otto, advise him of the ill-conceived plan of rail line abandonment. And 

also advise them that they should support this motion when it comes to vote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, in talking about rail line abandonment the Liberals say 

that there was no rail line abandonment when their regime was in power in this province. But I do want 

to point out that they are right; the opposite really happened. I want to zero in on a local situation at 

Allan, where as I said, the very opposite happened. We had a mine go up there which was already served 

by a people’s railway, the CNR, which belongs to everyone. And, of course, the CPR had a line not too 

far away so they made application to the proper authorities and they were granted the privilege of 

putting in a line to the Allan Potash Mines. One that was incidentally already served, as I mentioned, by 

the CNR. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . behind that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway: — Oh, yes certainly, he was behind that. Everyone knows that. We have no 

hesitation in saying that we know that the Provincial Government was behind this deal. That the 

Provincial Government and the CPR, this giant corporation, friends of theirs were in a sort of a plot, 

whereby they duplicated services just so that they could make profit, and for no other reason. So 

gentlemen, yes, you can take credit for the very 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1034 

opposite of rail line abandonment. And it is something that I really figure you should be ashamed of 

because it is really the people of this country who are going to have to pay for that. Taking it away from 

the CNR and giving it to your friends the CPR. 

 

I support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I was filled with amazement by some of the remarks by the 

Hon. Member from Morse (Mr. Wiebe). His suggestion that because the CCF was the Provincial 

Government at the time of the last rail line abandonment made them responsible for that abandonment 

are completely out of accord with the facts. 

 

Even the Member from Morse should know that permission for rail line abandonment comes from the 

Federal Government; that the British North America Act, that is the written constitution of Canada, 

gives railways and transportation to the federal responsibility. It is a federal matter and if he were going 

to be exact in this matter, he would admit that there was, in fact, a Conservative Government at that 

time. Now I know that they don’t want to criticize the Conservatives, their good friends down there in 

Ottawa but this was their responsibility. At this time they want to add an amendment that suggests that 

they are concerned about the maintenance of railways. This is really interesting because the Liberals are 

the Government right now and they have been for the last number of years and they are responsible right 

now to see that the railways are maintained. They haven’t been maintained. We have had example after 

example of this fact. And the Federal Liberals right here and now are responsible for it. The Members 

opposite want to know whether or not we can support the amendment. I suggest the Members on this 

side of the House could, in good conscience, support the amendment, but I suggest that the Members 

opposite could not because it would be strictly hypocritical. 

 

One other point I want to make and that is the Member for Morse suggests that right now we have one 

of the best grain transportation systems in the world. And I think this is true. But I fail to see how we can 

go along with the Federal Liberal Grains Group by suggesting this would be improved by removing 

one-third of the track. The Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) really has led us into great confusion 

on this matter. He mentioned that prior to the last Federal election I had sent to all Members, both sides 

of this House, a map that indicated which lines were going to be abandoned. Now he didn’t know what 

the Ross Report, which this map came from, had to do with Otto Lang. But of course the Ross Report is 

the report done for the Grains Group which was established by Otto Lang. And it’s in the long tradition 

of the Task Force on Agriculture, the LIFT Program and the Grains Group Report on transportation. He 

should know the connection and the people of this province should know the connection. When he 

receives this map, what does he do? He studies it and he comes up with what amounts to a defence of 

this proposal. He says, "Look, the town in which I live was a town which was abandoned some years 

ago.” His major point is that it really hasn’t harmed us at all. I am not surprised that he should say that 

because one of the 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1035 

sub-studies of the Ross Report for the Grains Group did a study of that very line. And they said the same 

thing he did, that is that the towns along that line hadn’t been harmed any too much. Now if you know 

which line that is and how far it was between that line and the presently existing lines you can see why. 

Some of those farmers might have to haul three or four miles farther. Some of them might not have to 

haul farther at all. 

 

But I say whether the Member for Moosomin intended it or not, he is suggesting to the people of this 

province, he is suggesting to the people in Ottawa, go right ahead with this rail line abandonment. That’s 

his suggestion. And if the people of this province are confused as to the attitude of the Members 

opposite, I suggest that they should look to this year’s agriculture critic. I don’t know what last year’s 

agriculture critic would say, I don’t know what next year’s agriculture critic would say. But I know the 

Member for Moosomin has led the people of this province to think that he is suggesting that rail line 

abandonment is all right. 

 

Well, I have done a little study on what rail line abandonment would do to people in my constituency. 

And I want to tell you the prospects are not good if this goes ahead. The Grains Group proposal which 

suggests that lines should be abandoned right up that line running all the way from Dilke up through 

Simpson, up through Watrous and so on, now this would result in a financial disaster for the people of 

this area. It would cost the farmers in the one Rural Municipality of Big Arm over $1 million in lost land 

values. In fact, as some of these farmers would have to haul from 30 to 40 miles, it would decrease the 

value of their land. The loss of assessment has been calculated in that one RM of Big Arm to be over 

$213,000. And at a very conservative estimate of the kind of land values that reflects, the loss would be 

over $1 million in that one rural municipality. Not only that but the citizens of that RM would have to 

pay an extra $16,000 in taxes every year due to the loss of elevator and railway assessment. Not only are 

they forced to carry an extra burden of costs, but they have these extra taxes laid on their back at the 

same time. In addition they would have to share in building a new heavy duty grid road system. And 

then they would have to buy either new larger trucks or pay for haulage at increased rates. They would 

have to pay those increased rates because when the rail line is taken out the element of competition 

between rail and trucking is removed and the trucking rates could go up very easily and very quickly. In 

other words the local farmers would bear the share of the saving that was to be made by the CPR. I don’t 

think that farmers of my district owe the CPR anything. But I think the CPR owes the people of this 

province a great deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Faris: — It was many years ago that they were given some $25 million and some 25 million acres 

of choice land to build this railroad. And out of those gifts the CPR has built a financial empire. I want 

to suggest that if the CPR now wants to give up the service, the rail service that they have promised, it 

should also at the same time give up that financial empire. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1036 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, there is much more I would like to say in regard to this matter. I beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Thorson that Bill 

No. 3 — An Act to amend The Industrial Development Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, the other day when I was speaking on this Bill I 

made mention of the fact that the Board of SEDCO had served a very useful purpose in its role as a 

money lender in this province. And under The Industrial Development Act one of its other roles was that 

of making grants to manufacturing industries. I can’t just recall to what extent that role was filled but in 

any event in 1970 there was a further Bill passed known as The Industry Incentives Act, which extended 

the assistance to manufacturing industries to smaller centres of under 35,000. The amount was tied in 

with the number of jobs created and there is a forgiveness feature in that Act. Since then the reference in 

that Act to manufacturing has been removed and last year we had The Industry and Commerce 

Development Act passed. Under this particular Act there is a very wide definition of business. And 

almost any kind of business would qualify for a grant. Also in this particular Act, there is provision for 

the making of loans and this would be administered by the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation and then there is provision for grants. But it seems that the only grants that are provided for 

are those related to tourist promotion and the likes of that. 

 

There are restrictions under the regulations of this particular Act that the services under the Act shall not 

be authorized to a business enterprise relocating within Saskatchewan unless the enterprise is expanding 

and can demonstrate that it cannot expand or continue to operate successfully in its present location. 

Also the services of the Act shall not be authorized to a business enterprise where adequate facilities or 

services already exist in the market area or where the services may result in a deleterious economic 

effect upon competing Saskatchewan enterprises. I might say that with the passage of the amendment 

proposed to The Industrial Development Act, the only provision for grants will be under The Industry 

and Commerce Development Act. And the reservations just cited, I think, calls for the collaboration with 

a group such as the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation. I am not sure of the makeup of 

the corporation now but in past years it has been composed of businessmen, successful businessmen, 

and their advice in my opinion is most important. The amendment proposed, I don’t think, can be 

opposed by the Opposition because all other authority under this particular Act has been removed and it 

really is a tidying up amendment. Nevertheless it removes any reference in any act to using the 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation in any respect except for the making of loans. 

 

I can visualize a situation where the Minister would decide 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1037 

to make a grant to the business and ultimately the business might become involved with the 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation through an application for a loan. It seems to me 

that there is some considerable advantage involving SEDCO in screening and assessing these grants so 

that a determination can be made as to whether a grant is in order or whether a loan would probably be 

more appropriate. The complete authority is left in the hands of the Minister to make these grants, and I 

for one, am suspicious of the judgment of all Ministers when not using the services of advisory groups 

such as SEDCO and particularly if civil servants are advising the Minister on the pros and cons of 

accepting or rejecting a grant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the Minister would give some consideration — I am sorry he is not here 

today — give some consideration to incorporating some device into The Industry and Commerce 

Development Act so that the services of SEDCO can be used in the determination of making grants. As I 

said the particular amendment is merely a tidying up one and there is no point in us opposing it because 

it is not going to develop my contention any further. So with those reservations we will be supporting 

the amendment. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 19 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I only want to reiterate two observations that we made 

the other afternoon when this second reading was before us. One was the manner in which the 

Government unceremoniously served notice on several crop insurance agents in the province and we felt 

that their work for the Crop Insurance Board deserved somewhat better treatment. The other point that I 

wish to reiterate that was made the other afternoon was simply, Mr. Speaker, that we feel that the type of 

plan that we are going into now will obviously be much more expensive than had been the previous plan 

and we exhibit some concern about the move toward full time salesmen working for the Government 

rather than the old traditional role of having various people around the province that live right in the 

community serving various farmers with crop insurance. Mr. Speaker, we do not wish to hold this matter 

before the House to any great length. 

 

We did have one other person that would have made a few comments but considering the fact that the 

Minister is here this afternoon, I think we are willing for him to go ahead and make his concluding 

remarks, unless there is someone else. I am only speaking for our side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few remarks concerning the 

crop insurance program. Now I am particularly concerned about wildlife damage, particularly the 

damage caused by migratory fowl. Now I realize that farmers can get this sort of insurance through 

SGIO or this Crop Insurance Board, and I also realize that there is Federal Government participation to a 

certain extent here. But it is just my suggestion, and I know that it’s echoed by many of my constituents 

in Hanley 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1038 

constituency, that quite possibly anything to do with crop depredation, the whole gamut of that area, 

come under the influence of the Crop Insurance Board and that eventually certain adjustments are made 

so that they can have all the coverage that they want and not limited coverage such as the case is now. 

 

The reason that I say that is that the Crop Insurance Agency which is now looking after that or part of 

that, can handle it better. They have the facilities, they’ve got the administrative personnel and they’ve 

also got the field men as opposed to insurance agents who, for the most part, live in communities small 

and large. It has the field men who are a lot closer to the farmers, they are very often farmers 

themselves, they can visit, they know one another. I think for that reason it can be a better program. 

 

Also, I think if things of that nature could be handled through one agent it would avoid a farmer having 

to go to the field man for some insurance, going to the SGIO agent for another type of insurance. I think 

it would be handier for the farmer. And, of course, under the Department of Agriculture where they 

could co-ordinate things, it would be better. 

 

For that, Mr. Speaker, I should like to urge the Minister and Government to ask the Federal Government 

for more financial participation particularly insofar as migratory wild fowl are concerned because it is a 

federal responsibility. And in the past is seems to me a lot of farmers have really been taken to the 

cleaners on this account. 

 

I’d also like to mention that I think it might be a good idea for this Government, particularly the 

Department, the Crop Insurance Board, or Government in general, to explore the possibility of inviting 

Ducks Unlimited to participate to a certain extent in such a program. If you go out to the areas where 

they have been active you will hear some comments from farmers and the comments seem to say that 

they should be participating one way or another insofar as damage is concerned. 

 

I heartily agree to the motion and support it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in closing debate on the amendments to 

The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Act, I should just like to make some brief response to some of the 

statements, or probably more accurately, some of the accusations that were made by some of the 

Members opposite in regard to the Government’s decision to change the operation of the Crop Insurance 

system as it was operating in Saskatchewan. 

 

As they well know, crop insurance in the past was sold by agents in the province in the areas the 

previous government had extended crop insurance to. And, in fact, as was pointed out by Mr. 

Weatherald, some of those agents did a very good job of selling crop insurance. I think he noted that he 

knew of agents who had sold 104 contracts, another that had sold five contracts. I don’t know whether 

that was done in one year or whether that was the total contracts that he had sold as an agent under the 

crop insurance program. But I can assure him that I can give him many agents and probably three and 

four times as many as he can come up with who have sold literally no contracts or one or two or three or 

four or a half a dozen. They were in no way 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1039 

attempting to canvass farmers or bring to the attention of the farmers the benefits of the Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Program. In most instances all of those agents were taking on another side line to a 

business they had already established in a community, hoping that it would bring them in some more 

income. I don’t criticize them for that but even though the Crop Insurance Board continued to impress 

upon them that there was need to get out and advertise and promote crop insurance, in many instances it 

was never done and fortunately it was never done at the expense of the farmer because he didn’t really 

realize what the benefits of crop insurance really were. 

 

Now we have undertaken some tremendous programs of change in the Crop Insurance Program. The 

Members opposite are aware of them and I think in most instances they agree with them, the fact that it 

is extended to all areas of the province now. The fact that it covers nearly all crops in the province with 

the exception of some limited specialty crops and we will be including those in the next few years. The 

fact that the coverage has been increased, the fact that we now include quality as well as quantity; the 

fact that we also have included spot loss for hail this year. This means that we have a program that we 

think is of benefit to every farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan and we think that there should be 

people, representatives of that Crop Insurance Program discussing this with farmers out on their farms, 

in their kitchens, over their kitchen tables, rather than having farmers come to an agent in some 

centralized centre in Saskatchewan. The only way that we are able to do that is by appointing field men 

to carry out those duties and those tasks. 

 

Other provinces have tried it. Manitoba, I think, is a significant example. The United States crop 

insurance program has used the field man system and has used it most successfully. We, recognizing 

that there are merits in doing this and also recognizing that it has been attempted by other people, have 

decided to convert a large area that is now serviced by crop insurance to a field man system. 

 

Agents were not fired in wholesale manner by the Government. We simply told the agents what our 

intentions were in order to provide a better and more improved method of moving crop insurance to 

farmers and that if they wished to participate they could apply for a field man position and if they were 

the kind of agents that the Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) had referred to, who had been 

aggressive and had sold crop insurance and believed in it, they would then be accepted in the field man 

position. If, on the other hand, they were the kind of agents that hadn’t sold any policies or only sold 

three or four a year and, in fact, had not shown any evidence of being aggressive about the selling 

policies of crop insurance, it would be highly probable that they would not be appointed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) has brought to our attention the 

possibility of including wild life under the present crop insurance program. To a limited extent we are 

doing that now. We have had some discussion with the Federal Government with regard to co-ordinating 

the programs that the Federal Government is involved in, programs that the Department of Natural 

Resources used to be involved in, in regard to crop loss through water fowl and the like of that. I think 

we are not all that far away from also integrating into the crop insurance program coverage in those 

areas. All in all I think we have made some tremendous progress in improving the crop 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1040 

insurance program and I think that in the next year or two we shall see the majority of the farmers in 

Saskatchewan participating in the program and I think receiving direct benefits from it. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend 

The Watershed Associations Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The Watershed 

Associations Act, I believe that it is necessary to quickly review the concept of this legislation and to 

focus on the deficiency which gives rise to the need for this amendment. 

 

The Watershed Associations Act provides a legal basis for co-operation of two or more agencies with 

mutual interests in the conservation and use of the water resource of a single watershed. The objective of 

the legislation is to permit agencies to co-operate in the conservation, maintenance and development of 

water resource to the benefit of the agencies and the people that those agencies represent. Three 

watershed associations have been formed under the Act. These associations are known as, 1. Jackfish 

Lake Watershed Association; 2. Moose Jaw Creek Watershed Association; 3. Nut Lake Watershed 

Association. 

 

While the term "agency” is defined rather broadly in the Act, in actual practice agencies have included 

corporate bodies with taxing authority such as cities, towns, villages rural municipalities and other 

functional organizations such as irrigation districts and conservation and development area authorities. 

The agencies constituting a watershed association appoint members to the board of directors of the 

association. The board of directors is in turn charged with the responsibility of levying an annual charge 

against the member agencies to raise funds for projects and programs to be carried out by the watershed 

association. The Act provides that upon application of a board of a watershed association and with 

approval of the agency concerned, the Minister may recommend to the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council 

that the membership of the association be altered in accordance with the application by the addition or 

withdrawal of the agency as the case may be. 

 

The principle of the legislation is good but it does not provide for the possibility of an agency wishing to 

become a member of a watershed association and having a legitimate right to become a member of a 

watershed association to appeal a decision of the board of the association if the applicant is to become a 

member or withdraw as a member whichever the case may be. In other words, there is now no provision 

for an appeal procedure. And this is a significant deficiency in the existing legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 30 to amend The Watershed Associations Act provides the required appeal 

procedures. Under this amendment an agency which has been refused permission to join or withdraw 

from an association may appeal to the Minister and on recommendation of the Minister to the Lieutenant 

Governor in 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1041 

Council. The Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council may uphold the decision of the watershed association 

board or may, in fact, instruct the board to admit or permit the withdrawal of the agency concerned as 

the case may be. An appeal procedure is considered essential to take into account changing local 

circumstances in local government and community organization in a watershed and also to take into 

account changing patterns and needs in regard to the use and conservation of the water resource of a 

watershed. It is entirely reasonable to expect that new agencies may be formed in a watershed which is 

controlled by a watershed association and these new agencies may wish membership in the association 

and representation on the board. Certain circumstances could exist where the existing membership of the 

board for a variety of reasons may not be entirely justified in refusing either admittance to or withdrawal 

from membership in the association. Under these circumstances in the interest of fair and just local 

administration of the water in a watershed it’s absolutely essential to provide for an appeal procedure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I have given, I recommend that the Bill before the Legislature be 

approved and second reading by given. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is rather complicated and I believe I am going 

to need a little time to study the Minister’s remarks. 

 

One or two points that I would bring up at this time are that it does appear that certain powers are being 

given to the Minister. While I want to consider it in some length, I would at this time simply comment 

that it does appear that powers being given to the Minister to have a group go into the watershed 

association against their will and this could also well involve a certain amount of financial contribution 

or financial involvement on their part which may or may not be to their liking at that particular time. It is 

because of this possibility, and I outline it as a possibility, because I haven’t really studied his remarks 

this afternoon because I believe this is a fairly complex matter. Because of that, I beg leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 32 – An Act for the 

Prevention and Suppression of Disease among Bees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 32 now before us repeals the old Apiaries Act. The new Act 

represents a more logical structure of the provisions retained from the former legislation and includes 

additional provisions to take into account new technology in the apiary industry and the need for 

increased attention to the production of a uniformly high quality product which will meet with the 

approval of the consumer. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that care must be taken not to over look the increasing 

role to be played by the honey production industry in Saskatchewan and in its economy today. 

 

Saskatchewan has approximately 1,200 registered bee keepers who in 1972 produced approximately 8.5 

million pounds of honey valued at about $2.5 million. Due to the increasing demand for 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1042 

honey on the world market, the price of honey has risen from 20 cents per pound in 1971 to 30 cents per 

pound in 1972. It is anticipated that 40,000 additional pounds of honey will be needed over the next 

12-month period. 

 

For the past two years we have been effectively selling honey on the world market. Japan has been one 

of our major customers. The market for honey in Japan has expanded rapidly during the past two years 

and it would appear that this increasing demand will continue for some time in the future. Saskatchewan 

produces an extremely high quality of honey and is in the position to capture a large share of the 

increasing markets if quality and quantity of production can be maintained. All of the honey produced 

last year in Saskatchewan I am told has now been sold. 

 

At the present time Saskatchewan is experiencing an expansion in the beekeeping industry. The increase 

in rapeseed and forage crop production which is taking place provides the industry with excellent honey 

production conditions. The abundance of these crops has brought an influx of beekeepers from other 

parts of Canada and even the United States. However, adequate legislation is necessary to protect both 

new segments of the industry from the spread of disease which can materially reduce production 

efficiency. Now techniques and new management practices which affect the control of disease place 

emphasis on the importance and urgency of new disease control provisions in this legislation. The 

increased mobility of beekeepers with the province and into the province from other regions of Canada 

and the United States emphasized the importance of more substantial measures to ensure that bee 

diseases are not imported into the province and that they are not spread from one apiary to another 

within the province. Certain bee diseases spread rapidly throughout a region if uncontrolled and can in 

fact bring economic disaster to producers who are involved in that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to note that the new Act also provides minimum standards of sanitation in 

premises where honey is extracted, handled, packed or stored for sale and the like. Up to this time, no 

regulations existed requiring minimum standards of sanitation in premises where honey was being 

processed for direct sale to consumers. Regulations made under The Vegetable and Honey Sales Act 

apply under circumstances where honey is being sold through commercial channels. However these 

regulations under The Vegetable and Honey Sales Act do not apply in instances where producers are 

selling direct to the consumer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is therefore necessary to provide for the enforcement of minimum standards 

of sanitation in the beekeeping industry to protect the consumer from the sale of inferior products. The 

legislation being introduced at this time will provide for the enforcement of such minimum standards. 

The content of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, has been thoroughly discussed with the Saskatchewan 

Beekeepers Association and the members of this Association are wholeheartedly in support of the 

provisions of this Act. Saskatchewan beekeepers are clearly of the opinion that these measures are 

necessary for the protection of themselves and for the protection of their industry. They understand the 

relevancy of these measures to the expansion of both the domestic and export markets for honey. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1043 

I feel obliged, Mr. Speaker, to add a few comments to illustrate that further development of the 

Saskatchewan honey industry is consistent with our department’s objective of intensification for 

Saskatchewan agriculture. Of great importance to the farmers of this province and to our rural 

communities is the fact that the production of honey utilizes very little of our land resources but adds 

very significantly to the overall returns per acre. Honey production is the icing on the cake in many parts 

of the province and as I have mentioned, it contributes significantly to the economic well-being of large 

numbers of producers, a significant number of urban centres and the rural community in general. I, 

therefore suggest, Mr. Speaker, that while the honey production is not a major segment of our 

agricultural industry, it is nevertheless a very significant contributor to the livelihood of many 

Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, this new Apiaries Act is worthy of the unanimous support of the 

Members of this Legislature. 

 

Having said these brief few words, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I might say at the outset I tried to get the Hon. Member for 

Moose Jaw, Mr. MacDonald to handle this Bill because it deals with diseases and he is the health critic 

and it deals with bees and he is a veterinarian. He felt that it was of such complexity that I should look 

after it myself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — We know that many of the people in Saskatchewan are interested in Bill 32 because a 

lot of them have been stung by the NDP. Not only that they are a foul brood. 

 

We have examined this Bill and we agree that a new Act is needed and overdue and we have no 

objection to the provisions of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments with 

respect to the Bill and recommend support from the Opposition, obviously it is a honey of a Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of Labor) moved second reading of Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The 

Radiation Health and Safety Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, as part of the move which involved the integration into the 

Department of Labor of the Occupational Health Branch, formerly in the Department of Public Health, 

responsibility for The Radiation Health and Safety Act was transferred to the Department of Labor last 

year. When this statute was first introduced as The Radiological Health Act, it attracted relatively little 

attention and seemed to be regarded as a piece of legislation directed towards the needs of the future. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1044 

Within the context of the provisions of the Act, however, the future in the form of a technologically 

oriented society has assuredly arrived. The significance of The Radiation Health and Safety Act today 

can be measured in terms of a marked increase in the number of potential radiation hazards in the light 

of the multiplicity of uses of radiation equipment that have been developed over the last number of 

years. Somewhat paradoxically, however, this fact has tended to cause public alertness to the dangers of 

radiation to become less sharp as exposure to radioactive materials and situations become more and 

more commonplace. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that this is just another reflection of the age old adage that 

familiarity breeds contempt. In any event this kind of reaction points out the obligation of government to 

take action designed to ensure that legislative mechanisms operative in the field of radiation health and 

safety afford a maximum possible to persons who work in occupations involving contact with radiation 

and to the public at large also. 

 

The purpose of this Statute is to extend a measure of health protection to persons exposed to radiation. It 

also makes provision for the safety of persons in connection with the operation and the use of electrical 

and mechanical components of radiation producing equipment and associated apparatus. The Act 

stipulates that all radiation equipment shall be manufactured, used, handled and tested in a manner 

which will prevent unnecessary exposure to radiation. It specifies that only qualified operators shall be 

in control of radiation equipment and provision is made for government consultative services with 

respect to radiation installations and for a radiation health and safety committee to advise the 

Government with respect to radiation health safety measures and codes of recommended practice. In 

addition, the Act deals with the minimum age at which a person may be employed in particular 

occupations and conditions under which pregnant women and those in the reproductive age group may 

be employed. 

 

In absolute terms, Mr. Speaker, the amendments represented by Bill 24 which is before us are rather 

minor in their nature, but its implication, I think, is quite far-reaching with regard to the involvement of 

a hazard prevention program to keep pace with the emerging health and safety requirements of the latter 

part of the 20th Century. One result of the passage of the amendment which is before us will simply be 

to complete officially the transfer of responsibility for The Radiation Health and Safety Act to the 

Department of Labor. At the 1972 session of the Legislature, the Act was included in a list of statutes 

recorded in The Department of Labor Act to be administered by the Department of Labor, but the 

requisite amendments were not made in The Radiation Health and Safety Act itself in order that that 

change might be accomplished. Since the Act deals partly with the health and safety of persons engaged 

in occupations relating to the use of radiation equipment it is properly the concern of the Occupational 

Health and Safety division of the Department of Labor. 

 

A second change in the Act will have the effect of requiring hospitals to have plans of X-ray facilities 

approved by the Department of Labor in the same way that industrial radiological facilities are required 

to receive prior approval. One section of the present Act stipulates that no person shall establish or alter 

radiation installations used for industrial purposes without having submitted plans to the approval of the 

Minister. Such approval will be granted only if the installation is deemed 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1045 

not to constitute a danger to the health of any person. The amendment then that is before us will remove 

the specific reference to industrial installations thereby making the provision universally applicable. 

Under the proposed amendment then architects’ plans and equipment layout diagrams covering new 

installations or major alterations will henceforth be reviewed by officers of the Department of Labor for 

radiation health features. Suggestions for improvements can be made before construction is commenced 

and in this way, Mr. Speaker, costly and time consuming alterations can be avoided. In the past when 

plans have not been submitted in advance it has been necessary for some modifications to be ordered in 

hospitals following on-site radiation surveys of new installations resulting in waste of effort, waste of 

material and waste of money. It should be pointed out in this connection that the amendment will assist 

the establishment of a computerized information system being developed for radiation surveys which 

people in the Department tell me will then provide that base reports will be registered for approved plans 

of installations and radiation placement equipment. This will eliminate the need for detailed and 

repetitive verbal description. 

 

The third feature of this Bill before this Assembly involves a device to make available to the Minister 

the necessary advisory expertise indicated by the enlarged responsibility which is implied by the Act. 

The legislation presently assigns to the Minister the power to appoint a radiation health and safety 

committee whose function it is to provide expert advice on all matters falling within the review of the 

Act. The committee’s membership currently consists of: two diagnostic radiologists nominated by the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons; a therapeutic radiologist nominated by the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons; a medical practitioner specializing in pathology or internal medicine, nominated by the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons; a physicist experienced in radiation physics and two officials of the 

Department of Labor. It is now proposed that the Act be altered slightly to reduce the number of 

diagnostic radiologists on the committee from two to one, as was originally the case. At the same time 

the amendment empowers the Minister to appoint additional members who could contribute expert 

advice on such areas as non-ionizing radiation which would include, laser beam microwaves and the 

like, as well as the practical handling of radiation equipment. This measure which has been agreed to by 

the Radiation Health and Safety Committee itself would allow for the introduction of other fields of 

expertise on the committee and would preserve a better balance between the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, membership and others while avoiding the committee becoming overly large and unwieldy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the result of this amendment can be termed I believe as a tightening up of the legislation 

which will facilitate the more efficient administration of the provisions aimed at safeguarding the public 

welfare. Moreover it is hoped that it will be instrumental in the development of new solutions to the 

problems presented in the escalating use of radiation equipment. Needless to say, the application of 

these legislative tools can only be truly effective with the recognition by all of our citizens that the 

promotion of safety and health must be taken seriously. 

 

Accordingly, I would earnestly solicit the wholehearted co-operation of Saskatchewan people in the 

fight to come to 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1046 

grips with the multiplying health and safety risks inherent in the modern technological setting. I move 

second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, may I first say that we on this side of the House 

agree totally with the principle of The Radiation and Health and Safety Act. 

 

I think we have demonstrated this fact over the years by amending, enlarging and strengthening this Act. 

It was a Liberal Government that brought the administration of the Act under the Occupational Health 

Branch. 

 

It has been only in recent times that we have become aware of the real dangers inherent in the use of 

radiological equipment and radioactive substances. The public’s awareness is shared by members of the 

various health professions and by other professionals involved with the use of radiation. Committees of 

these professions have long been involved with studying the problem and have made recommendations 

regarding the safety of the public. I would add that through my profession I am intimately involved with 

radiation in a practical sense. I assure you that I am very aware of the effects of abusing radiation 

equipment. Therefore, I repeat that I am totally in agreement with the principle involved in The 

Radiation and Health Safety Act. 

 

However, a proposed change in this Act as outlined in Bill 24 disturbs me. There is now the Radiation 

Health Safety Committee, this Committee must now consist of five experts and two departmental 

people. These five experts must truly be experts and criteria for judging their expertise is stated clearly 

in Section 10, as the Minister has read. As a matter of fact, the physicians must not only be duly 

qualified as specialists, but they must then be recommended as qualified by the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons. These provisions for establishing the Health and Safety Committee assure us that such a 

Committee is truly qualified to carry out its duties as outlined in this Act. 

 

Amendments presented in Bill No. 24 reduce the number of experts in the Committee from five to four. 

However, the amendment will give the Minister of Labor the right to add one or more members to the 

Committee. The problem is that there are absolutely no criteria included in this proposed amendment as 

to what the qualifications of these ministerial appointments should be. It simply states that the 

appointments must be persons. There is also no limit to the number of people who may be appointed. 

 

Explanatory notes state, and the Minister just said that this amendment allows the Minister to appoint 

other experts, so that other fields of expertise can be on this Committee. I think that if the Minister feels 

that other fields of expertise should be included in the Committee, then he should provide us with 

legislation that would provide for his appointing of certain specified experts. 

 

This legislation should be specific. If it is not specific then I suggest that the criteria for choosing the 

other five 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1047 

experts should be deleted. It seems to be bit of a farce to have specified qualifications for five members 

on the Committee and then open up membership on the Committee to anyone the Minister decides 

should be on it, or might enjoy an appointment to the government Committee. 

 

It should be remembered that among other detailed duties and privileges that this Committee now have, 

they also have the duty of dealing with any matters relating to radiation health as the Minister may 

decide. This Committee does have power and the responsibility. As I stated I am very aware of the 

problem and I respect the responsibility that is entrusted in the Radiation Health and Safety Committee. 

 

For this reason I am not prepared to see expertise diluted as could be the case at the whim of the 

Minister. The Minister of Labor has assured us that his amendment will allow for the appointment of 

experts in other fields. However, assurances are really not good enough. 

 

First of all the Minister is not necessarily qualified to judge the expertise of professionals. 2. The 

Minister has not made it clear that the so-called experts are even to be in the field of radiation health. 3. I 

think, we in the Opposition, can be forgiven for not relying on ministerial assurances when they 

introduce bills. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) gave us assurances last year when he introduced The Natural 

Products Marketing Act and that Minister did not live up to his word. Therefore, in the future and 

properly so, I think that we should be assured only with what is written into the legislation, that we will 

ask the Government to write their intentions into the Bill. 

 

As written, Bill No. 24 could lead to abuse by political appointment by the Minister. In fact, the five 

specified experts on the Committee could find themselves outnumbered by political appointments. I 

don’t believe this to be the purpose of the amendment, but I think that specific legislation is much better 

than legislation that simply gives the Minister the power to act as he sees fit. 

 

It is possible that the people whom the Minister wants to add to the Committee are lay people. I don’t 

feel that lay people should be representatives on this Committee. The Minister has the opportunity to 

appoint lay people to the Occupational Health Council. If the Minister wants lay people to investigate 

Radiation Health and Safety he can instruct the Occupational Health Council to look into this matter and 

to deal with it. This Council affords lay people the opportunity to become involved with radiation health 

and safety. 

 

There is some argument, of course, in favor of placing all industrial safety provisions and programs 

under one department. Of course, this has been done under the umbrella of the Occupational Health Act. 

This very Act has the power to enquire into radiation health and safety. If the Minister so desires he can 

make the old Radiation Health and Safety Act, a rather redundant exercise by simply handling over 

responsibility to the Occupational Health Council. 

 

However, I should rather think that radiation health and safety is a special case and it is a little different 

and 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1048 

broader in implication than other industrial health and safety problems. 

 

I think that last year when we dealt with The Department of Labor Act, we included this Act under the 

Department of Labor. I think, possibly we should have second thoughts about this. I think the rationale 

for placing the Act under the Department of Labor is a little less obvious. 

 

The understanding of the effects of radiation and the hazards of radiation are of a special kind. This 

matter should not be lumped in with all other kinds of industrial hazards. The problem of radiation 

deserves special attention and, therefore, I think we might consider that The Radiation Health and Safety 

Act should be left with the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Bill stands I will oppose it, but in opposing it I want to make it clear that I do agree 

with broadening the representation on the Committee. I hope that the Minister will consider this when 

we are in Third Reading and possibly bring in some amendments to be a little more specific. If there are 

specific criteria laid down in this Bill, for the new positions, then I will support it. I suggest that if 

specific criteria are not established for all members of the Committee then the existing criteria in the Bill 

would become a farce. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief comments in closing debate on this particular Bill. I 

can’t help but think that the Member for Moose Jaw North is tilting at windmills a bit when he suggests 

— if I am quoting him properly — “Political appointments to this particular Committee.” 

 

First of all I don’t see the Committee as being one which will have attached to it any amount of 

remuneration of great significance. And, secondly, I don’t see it as a prestige appointment in any way. 

What I see is the gathering about the Department of some people with some real expertise in a variety of 

fields and the adjustment that was made to the Committee was done with that idea in mind, and with that 

idea only. I think it unfair for the Member to suggest that there are some ulterior motives in the 

establishing of a committee and reducing, for instance, the number of diagnostic radiologists from two 

to one. 

 

Frankly, the only reason and the simple reason for this reduction, of one diagnostic radiologist was 

because the Committee felt that with two diagnostic radiologists on the Committee one was duplicating 

services of the other. It was thought to be beneficial to the functioning of the Committee to have a 

broader base and to provide the opportunity to bring more expertise to the Committee than was presently 

available as it was constituted in the past. 

 

For the Member to suggest that we should lay down in the Act some specific criteria related to the future 

appointments, I think is really an unfair suggestion in light of the fact that it is unreasonable to expect 

that we will know of all our future requirements. He has intimated in his own remarks that times and 

circumstances cause the manner in which we operate, to change significantly from time to time. The 

only reason that 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1049 

can be applied in this particular instance for leaving it rather open-ended is to provide for that kind of 

running room in order that when new circumstances arise that may require some expertise in a certain 

field, there will be an opportunity for those kinds of appointments to be made. 

 

With those few remarks and with the assurance that there is no ulterior motive in leaving it open-ended 

to that degree, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all Members to support the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of Labor) moved second reading of Bill No. 26 – An Act to amend The 

Fire Departments Platoons Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill before this Assembly represents an amendment to The Fire 

Departments Platoons Act, the responsibility for which was transferred to the Department of Labor from 

the Department of Municipal Affairs on January 7, 1972. 

 

The reason for the transfer centres on the fact that the Act in question deals in large measure with the 

collective bargaining procedures and working conditions which are applicable to Saskatchewan’s 

firefighters. It therefore more logically falls within the jurisdiction of the Department of Labor where it 

can be integrated in departmental activities associated with the Trade Union and The Labor Standards 

Act. 

 

It is an important statute, Mr. Speaker, in that it applies to a group of working people who are engaged 

in the provision of a very vital service to the Saskatchewan community. The presence of a well-trained 

and properly equipped firefighting force continues to be essential to the welfare of communities 

everywhere. 

 

The existence of The Fire Departments Platoons Act is an acknowledgment of the need for special 

legislation, both to ensure appropriate working conditions for members of the fire department and also to 

afford the public an acceptable level of fire protection services. 

 

The Act regulates the hours of work, the weekly rest periods and the final collective bargaining 

procedures of full time firefighters in every city in Saskatchewan of 10,000 population or over. The Act 

has not been amended for some years, Mr. Speaker, and it has become outdated, unrealistic and 

inappropriate when measured against the changes in equipment and conditions produced by modern 

technology. 

 

A number of complaints about the weakness in the legislation have been received by the Government 

from individuals and from individual fire departments. In addition, the Saskatchewan Firefighters 

Association has made representation on a number of occasions to have certain key clauses of the Act 

changed. 

 

Before drawing up this amendment, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Labor arranged for special 

consultation with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon and as well, the Firefighters Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government has made very effort to make certain that the amendment will meet the 

needs of the groups who 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1050 

are governed by the legislation that are affected by it. 

 

One clause of the amendment which is before us removes all reference to the three platoon system. This 

measure, which has the unanimous agreement of the Saskatchewan Firefighters Association, the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, is intended to bring the Act up to date with current 

practices. All of the city fire departments in Saskatchewan, in common with those across the country, 

have established their operations on the basis of the two platoon system. 

 

The latter system is said to be preferable in terms of the encouragement of greater efficiency in 

firefighting operations, inasmuch as it facilitates a more cohesive and integrated fire department. This is 

because the existence of only two platoons allows firefighters to work and to train together to a much 

greater extent. The increased morale, the development of more effective training methods, the reduction 

of absenteeism and the improvement of fire protection facilities at reduced costs, have all been attributed 

to the introduction of the two platoon method. 

 

Accordingly, the amendment will have the effect of establishing the two platoon arrangement as a 

universal standard throughout the province. It will also legalize the situation under which fire 

departments have changed from the three platoon system to a two platoon system by the collective 

bargaining agreement without referral to the electorate as was technically required by existing 

legislation. 

 

Another proposed change in the Bill involves the hours of work of the members of the city firefighting 

forces. The present Act strictly limits the hours within a 24-hour period and leaves no room for 

negotiation. The amendment would introduce some flexibility with regard to daily hours, while at the 

same time protecting the firefighters by specifying the maximum length of a shift and the maximum 

average work week. 

 

Under the amendment one platoon shall be on day duty for a maximum of 10 consecutive hours in each 

24-hour period and the other shall be on duty for night work for a maximum of 14 consecutive hours in 

each 24 hours, with the weekly maximum not to exceed an average of 42 hours per week. 

 

In this connection, I might point out, there is a general acceptance of the fact that the shift system 

presently in use makes it impractical to establish the 40-hour week for firemen and they are accordingly 

exempt from the Labor Standards provision and have been for some time. 

 

The third major feature of Bill No. 26 is the addition of a new clause to come to grips with the kind of 

situation under which firefighters are assigned additional duties which are not directly associated with 

the suppression of fires. One of the most significant clauses of The Fire Departments Act is one which 

provides for arbitration proceedings to settle collective bargaining disputes between a city and its fire 

department. 

 

Under the terms of the Act, however, this provision was applicable to full time firefighters assigned 

exclusively to fire protection duties. The members of one fire department in Saskatchewan, namely, 

Yorkton, were denied the right to arbitration under the Act because under the terms of collective 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1051 

bargaining agreement they had accepted additional duties which were unrelated to their primary 

firefighting function. 

 

The amendment will restore the protection of the arbitration clause of the legislation to all cities and 

their fire departments, specifying that the relevant section will apply to departments which have 

heretofore been assigned additional duties. This is only fair, Mr. Speaker, when one considers that the 

firefighters have voluntarily given up their right to strike in their local union constitution in return for 

the right for having access to this kind of binding arbitration to resolve their disputes. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the only attempted solution to deal with the problem that the amendment 

has put before us, which was conceived by the previous administration, was the imposition of Bill No. 2 

which was used to head off the threat of work stoppages by firefighters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t need a Bill 2 and this amendment really demonstrates the availability of effective 

alternatives with the application of a little common sense. It is our belief that the amended Act will 

represent a streamlined piece of legislation, which will serve to preserve the legitimate bargaining and 

arbitration and, which at the same time, will make adequate and appropriate provision for the protection 

and safety from the ravages of fire. 

 

I would move second reading of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Carlson (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I enter this debate in support of 

the amendment to The Fire Departments Platoon Act. 

 

The reason that I am particularly interested is that this legislation is largely as a result of the situation 

that presently exists in the city of Yorkton and more specifically of the assignment of extra duties to 

firefighters, which has in the past, denied them the right to arbitration. 

 

At the present time the firefighters in Yorkton are not covered by the Act simply because they have 

agreed to take on some extra responsibilities other than firefighting. These extra duties are mutually 

agreed to prior to the time that the city reached a population of 10,000 people and, therefore, the Act did 

not apply at that time. 

 

The firefighters do not complain about performing these extra duties such as repairing parking meters or 

water meters, collecting money from the parking meters and selling bicycle licenses. 

 

They do, however, object to the fact that they are not governed by the arbitration section, which only 

applies to firefighters whose duties are exclusively concerned with fire protection and fire prevention. 

 

I should like to make a few comments about the assignment of extra duties for firefighters. 

 

First of all, a firefighter’s primary responsibility must 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1052 

be fire protection and fire prevention. The taxpayers of our cities are paying for fire protection and they 

deserve the best possible. If other duties are included they must not interfere with the fire departments’ 

ability to provide good fire protection for our citizens. 

 

If extra duties are to be assigned to firefighters, that would require them to be far removed from the fire 

hall, for long periods of time, then we may as well revert to the old system of a volunteer fire brigade. 

The men would not be ready and prepared to get to a fire in a hurry. And I just want to say that in most 

cases the first 10 or 15 minutes are crucial. If there are people trapped in a burning building, it is most 

important to get there before they are overcome by smoke inhalation, or before the fire has progressed to 

the point where it is a high risk or impossible for the firefighters to get in to save people involved. 

 

The second reason why it is imperative to have men and equipment on the scene as soon as possible, is 

that it is quite often possible to confine a fire and extinguish it, if caught in time. Far too often by the 

time the men are at the fire it has progressed to a stage where the firefighters must direct all their 

energies and attention towards protecting adjoining buildings. 

 

The suggestion has been made, Mr. Speaker, that firefighters could double as law enforcement officers. 

Let me start off by saying I am totally opposed to this suggestion. The old saying, “If you give them an 

inch, they will take a mile,” I am sure would hold true if this were started. Before long, we would see a 

totally integrated force of firemen and police officers. I am sure that the problems that would arise are 

obvious. If somebody wanted to rob a bank they could first start a major fire in the opposite end of town 

to draw the attention of the integrated force, then proceed with their job, with highly increased chances 

of success. 

 

The point I am making is that we must have full time firefighters available at all times. Other duties 

assigned to firemen must not interfere with their duties as firefighters. 

 

This legislation will allow those departments which are not doing other duties to continue but still be 

included under the Act. This is the intention of adding subsection 16 to Section 10, but at the same time 

it doesn’t open up for the assignment of other duties for other fire departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill is a good indication that the Minister of Labor and indeed this Government 

is responsive to the needs of minority groups in Saskatchewan. I will indeed support this legislation. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Minister I am going to support 

this Bill. I realize that the two platoon system is in use by all the fire departments in Saskatchewan, in 

Saskatchewan cities over 10,000 population. The system is well accepted and quite effective. Provisions 

in this Bill therefore are to update the legislation in light of today’s common practice. 

 

I do find some inconsistency from the Minister of Labor in 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1053 

his explanatory notes in dealing with Section 4. He states that the amendment provides some flexibility 

while protecting firefighters by specifying maximum shifts and providing that the maximum average 

hours per week can’t exceed 42. The shift system presently in use makes it impractical to reduce the 

hours per week to 40. I agree it is impractical. But those of us on the Business Committee, I think the 

Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross), will tell you this, have been told by people in every town and 

city that we have visited, that the 40-hour week is not always practical. When the Minister of Labor (Mr. 

Snyder) implemented the rigid 40-hour week last year, he was told of a good many cases where the 

40-hour week would not only be impractical but would prove to be a real hardship. Now the Minister 

says that the 40-hour week is impractical. So he won’t enforce it on the fire departments. Well I agree 

but I would suggest that the Minister take a look at a number of other instances where he has imposed 

the rigid 40-hour week requirements and that they are proving very impractical also. 

 

Why should fire department workers be treated differently than many other workers. Why should the 

employer in the case of the municipal government be treated differently than many other employers. 

This attitude of the Minister is rather contradictory. I would suggest that any business establishment that 

operates seven days a week, 24 hours a day, or any agency that provides seven day, 24 hour a day 

service, finds that 40 hours a week are impractical and a hardship. Other services such as city transit also 

would find it very convenient to work 42 hour weeks. I just hope that this sentence in the explanatory 

notes represents a change of attitude of the Minister from the rigid stance that we have seen over the last 

couple of years. 

 

I do have some reservations, Mr. Minister, about including management personnel in the bargaining 

unit. It is my understanding that the chief and the deputy chief will be eligible for membership in the 

bargaining unit. This would seem to be a little contradictory to the accepted practice, by having 

management people in an employee association or an employees’ union. This provision can receive 

some further study when we deal with it in the Committee of the Whole. At this time I would support 

the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — Just a word or two. I rather think, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Moose Jaw 

North (Mr. MacDonald) was out of order when he was referring to the application of the 40-hour week 

in various communities about the province. I really don’t believe it can be closely associated with the 

Bill that is before us. But I should like to comment very briefly in reply to his suggestion in the event 

that it requires a reply. 

 

I would point out to him initially, Mr. Speaker, and to the House, that the Department of Labor has been 

flexible in the application of the 40-hour week and has issued a number of ministerial permits which 

have provided for the averaging of hours under special circumstances. I think the Member knows that 

we have provided ministerial permits on a number of occasions to a number of business establishments 

which provide for the averaging of the hours of work over a 4-week period amounting to not in excess 

of 160 hours. Another set of permits provide for the averaging of 80 hours over two weeks or 120 hours 

over 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1054 

a three-week period. In addition it will be known that because of the particular and critical nature of the 

work and/or the service provided by the implement dealers throughout the province we have provided 

for an averaging of hours in order that the total number of weeks worked multiplied by 40 shall be 

averaged throughout the year and in this way, I believe that the rural community and the business 

community generally have adapted to new conditions and new circumstances with a minimum of 

problems. 

 

I am somewhat at a loss to know what the Member draws attention to when he is talking in terms of 

enlarging the collective bargaining unit by including managerial people. I am sure that is not the intent 

of the Act. I should be pleased to discuss it with him after. I believe that was a reference that was made 

when he spoke on second reading. If there is some controversy or misunderstanding in that connection I 

should be pleased to discuss it with him. 

 

I think it is a good Bill. It is one that has been in the wings for some time. It is one that has caused 

concern to urban municipalities in particular and the Firefighters’ Association and we think that the 

legislation goes a long way to clearing up difficulties that have been inherent in the Act for some years. I 

would ask all Members to support it. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of Labor) moved second reading of Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The 

Fire Prevention Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — In general terms, Mr. Speaker, this Bill can be described as a housekeeping 

amendment but at the same time it must be recognized that it will form a significant part of an important 

piece of legislation, The Fire Prevention Act. 

 

This legislation is designed to promote safety as it relates to human life and property. It also regulates 

the storage and the handling of flammable liquids and governs the approval, the sale, installation and 

maintenance of oil burners, oil burning equipment and appliances using inflammable liquids as fuel. The 

programs administered under the Act by the Fire Commissioner’s office of the Department of Labor 

include a program of fire inspection, of various classes of buildings, a program of licensing wholesalers, 

distributors, installers and servicers of oil burners, the preparation and education and practical 

programming in fire prevention and fire protection, the training of volunteer firefighters in the province, 

fire and arson investigation, the approval of plans and specifications of public buildings and the 

recording of information on fires in the province. 

 

Let me take a moment then briefly to run over the amendment, Mr. Speaker, to provide a little of the 

rationale and background for the amendment. 

 

The Fire Prevention Act specifies that certain installations and equipment must meet with the approval 

of specific approval agencies, such as the National Research Council, the Canadian Standards 

Association, the Underwriters Laboratories of Canada and so on. One minor wording change in this 

connection has been made necessary by reason of the fact that the organization formerly known as the 

Factory Mutual Fire 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1055 

Insurance Companies is now known as the Factory Mutual System. The list of agencies included in the 

definition of and term approved in the Act will be open-ended in the proposed amendment to include 

any testing laboratory acceptable to the Fire Commissioner. Since this definition was first included in 

the Act other laboratories have been established or may be set up in the future which will have the 

capability of making tests which are equally suitable to those carried on by organizations specifically 

included in the legislation at this time. 

 

The amendment would accordingly assign to the Fire Commissioner the power to designate approved 

laboratories without the need to amend The Fire Protection Act each time a new agency measured up to 

our standards. 

 

Another clause of this Bill clarifies the power of the Deputy Fire Commissioner when the office of the 

Fire Commissioner is vacant or when the Fire Commissioner is absent. Two years ago it may be 

remembered that the previous Fire Commissioner passed away and his deputy was appointed as an 

acting Fire Commissioner. Because the Act didn’t cover this kind of a situation, the authority of the 

acting Fire Commissioner to accept appeals and to conduct a fire commissioner’s inquiry was 

questioned at that time. 

 

The Act will now contain a clause similar to that in effect in other provinces which spells out that the 

Deputy Fire Commissioner may act in the place of the Fire Commissioner when the latter is absent from 

his office for any reason, such as illness, holidays, attendance at meetings and so on, or when the 

position of Fire Commissioner becomes vacant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Fire Prevention Act presently includes a section dealing with the power of the Fire 

Commissioner to investigate the cause, the origin and circumstances of any fire in which property has 

been destroyed or damaged. Under this section in practice, general investigations are carried on and in 

addition in certain circumstances a Fire Commissioner’s inquiry is held. 

 

Some confusion has arisen with regard to the distinction which is to be made between an investigation 

and an inquiry. As a result it has been posed that one section of the Act concern itself with fire 

investigations and a new and separate section be added dealing with inquiries. This should eliminate 

ambiguities and doubt which have been raised with respect to the intent of the present section. 

 

The procedures associated with the calling of a Fire Commissioner’s inquiry are described in the Act. 

The right to be represented by counsel was also added to the inquiry section to protect the rights of 

individuals testifying at an inquiry. The Fire Commissioner will be empowered to appoint a competent 

person residing in any area to conduct an inquiry. 

 

Another change incorporated in Bill No. 25 involves the type of receptacle permitted to be used for the 

storage and handling of up to 10 gallons of gasoline or other flammable liquid. The receptacle is 

presently required to be of metal construction, colored red, capable of being tightly closed by use of a 

screw cap. Saskatchewan, I am afraid, is one of the few existing provinces which prohibits the placing of 

small quantities of gasoline in approved plastic containers. The 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

1056 

legislative restriction to the use of metal receptacles only has prompted a number of complaints from 

wholesalers and retailers and the travelling public. It has now been determined that approved plastic 

receptacles can be just as sturdy and safe as metal containers and the amendment will accordingly allow 

the use of tested and approved plastic receptacles. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendment is intended to correct an oversight which occurred when The Fire 

Prevention Act was amended in 1968 to authorize fire inspectors and local assistants to issue correction 

orders to oil burner installers who have installed faulty heating equipment or appliances. At that time no 

provision was made for a penalty against the installers who failed to comply with such orders. This is 

rectified in the penalty section. 

 

I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that The Fire Prevention Act will now be more consistent with new 

requirements of present day fire protection and investigation services. In addition some of the 

ambiguities preventing the effective enforcement in administration of the Act have been eliminated. I 

would move second reading. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to lend my support for what appears 

to be a very good Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — We have a couple of questions which can certainly be dealt with in Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of Labor) moved second reading of Bill No. 07 – An Act to amend The 

Department of Labor Act, 1972. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill represents a minor amendment to correct an oversight in 

The Department of Labor Act. I think it will be known that in virtually all of the departmental acts, 

provision is made for the appointment and the payment of advisors and consultants. However there has 

been no legislative authority in existence in the present Department of Labor Act and the amendment 

which is proposed rectifies this oversight. 

 

Additionally the proposed amendment provides for the appointment of mediators from outside of the 

department for payment of their services and expenses in connection with services which they provide 

and special duties which they perform related to industrial disputes. It will be remembered that last 

summer during the construction difficulties that Dr. Ken Pugh from Alberta was engaged by the 

Department and in addition Mr. Gib Eamer from Saskatoon was also used as a special mediator. Under 

those circumstances it wasn’t possible to pay for their services out of the departmental budget, instead a 

special warrant was required. This corrects the difficulty which is involved in this connection. This is a 

minor housekeeping amendment which will bring into force the provision which will make more 

convenient the provisions of The Department of Labor Act and I would move second reading. 



 
February 22, 1973 

 

 

 

1057 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say that this amendment will 

allow, of course, for the hiring of people by the Department and I hope that it will provide for hiring of 

people who can mediate during the closed period of a collective agreement and help prevent disputes. Of 

course, this is going to have to be done by people who are accepted by both management and labor. 

These people can be of no value unless they have the complete trust of both sides in a dispute and I hope 

that some of the people that the Minister will hire will fall into this category. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The 

Marriage Act. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, there are two amendments in this Bill, both of which are concerned with 

marriage licences. The Act, Mr. Speaker, presently authorizes the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to 

appoint marriage licence issuers. There are approximately 30 marriage licence issuers appointed each 

year requiring an Order in Council to be made, as licence issuers are appointed or cancelled. It is 

believed that this is a function that could be carried out quite properly by the Department and by the 

Minister of Public Health without requiring the orders to be made by the Executive Council. It is, 

therefore, proposed that for the future the appointments be made by the Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act also provides each licence issuer will pay the Director of Vital Statistics $4 for 

each marriage licence form he receives from the Director. He may then charge $5 for each form he 

issues. The end result is that the marriage licence issuer receives only $1 for each form that he issues and 

considering the fact that he has to send it in to the Department and pay 8 cents postage that leaves him a 

net of 92 cents. From time to time individual licence issuers have complained, and I think properly, that 

the remuneration they receive for issuing licences is far from adequate. It is agreed that this is the case 

and I intend to take appropriate action to have their remuneration increased. The proposed amendment in 

this regard provides for the amount payable by the issuer to the director for each form and the fee that 

the issuer may charge for each licence issued be fixed by regulation made by the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. This kind of provision is advantageous and provides more flexibility 

than the existing provision which is in the statute. At present there is a $5 limit on fees. By enacting this 

amendment as the costs go up it will not be necessary to amend the Act. Changes in fees can be made by 

regulation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition I can’t see any reason whatsoever 

why I am speaking on this, being the only single Member over here and secondly, we certainly cannot 

oppose the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o’clock p.m. 


