




















































Hansard: February 09, 1973


519 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

12th Day 

 

Friday, February 9, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and 

through you a class from Glen Elm School located in Regina North East constituency. They are 

accompanied by their teacher John Harvey. I extend to them a very warm welcome for this afternoon 

sitting. Since this is a very important and exciting day in the Legislature, I do hope that the students will 

be able to get the meaning of the Budget that is going to be presented. I do believe that they will have an 

educational and a pleasant experience. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

TEACHER-TRUSTEE NEGOTIATIONS 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct 

a question to the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). In view of the almost inevitable 

confrontation that seems to be heading between teachers and trustees in the Province of Saskatchewan 

with only the students who are going to suffer. In view of the Minister’s complete failure to arrive at any 

kind of an acceptable solution between either of the two confronting parties, is the Minister willing to 

defer any legislation until such time as teachers and trustees can sit down by themselves without 

government interference and come up with the kind of legislation that will be acceptable to both sides? 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the question from the 

Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) may I say that we are committed in the Speech from the 

Throne to bring forward legislation on Teacher Contract Bargaining in this Session. I, as Minister, 

intend to fulfil that commitment. There will be opportunities for teachers and trustees, in fact, to sit 

down together. As I indicated earlier in the week, a meeting is planned with teachers and trustees for 

next Monday, a week from Monday. We have moved that ahead to a week from today. We intend that 

meeting to take as long as is necessary. If Friday isn’t enough, Saturday then. If it requires a further 

meeting or meetings, we are prepared to do that as well. 

  

Mr. MacDonald: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister telling the House and the 

people of Saskatchewan that if he cannot come to an acceptable agreement that he is willing to 

precipitate the confrontation that will damage the educational opportunities in Saskatchewan whether or 

not this agreement makes 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

520 

 

sense or not? 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I am making every effort, this Government is making every effort to 

seek a solution, to seek an acceptable approach to this issue. Certainly words and comments by the 

Member opposite are not going to help. 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The Lieutenant-Governor transmits estimates of certain sums required for the service 

of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1974, the Supplementary Estimates of certain sums 

required for the service of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1973, and recommends the 

same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. E.L. Cowley (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Premier: 

 

That His Honour’s message, the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates be referred to the Committee 

of Finance. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

Hon. E.L. Cowley (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to present to you and to 

Members of this House, the second Budget of this New Democratic Government and my first Budget as 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — I might say that one of the more difficult aspects of preparing the Budget was a 

tradition that was established a long time ago in this Legislature of wearing a special tie. The preparation 

of the Estimates, the writing of the Speech and the printing of the Speech, were nothing compared to this 

task. And as with all difficult tasks, I turned it over to my wife. I am pleased to say that she, with the 

capable assistance of the Department of Industry and Commerce, was able to come up with a solution. I 

should like to say thanks to both the Department and to Delores for making that effort and getting me 

here today with a tie. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign of 1971, the New Democratic Party 

presented to the people of Saskatchewan a positive program to make the government of this province 

more responsive to the needs of the people. 

 

The Budget which was presented in this House one year ago included a number of major steps to 

implement that program. Every segment of the population — our sick and our senior citizens, our 

working people, our students and our young people, our farmers and our small businessmen received 

direct benefit 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

521 

from that Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — But we realized, Mr. Speaker, that our program could not be totally implemented in one 

year. After all, one can hardly expect to reverse within twelve short months the effects of seven lean 

years of Liberal mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — In presenting the Budget one year ago, Premier Blakeney stated: 

 

This Budget does not cover our full four-year program — naturally enough. If it did so, it would 

suggest that we would be after one year a stand-pat government and this we will not be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, the Budget that I am introducing today represents the second chapter in 

the continuing story of fulfilment by this Government of our pledges to the electorate. 

 

It should be viewed in the context of our platform of 1971 and our record of accomplishment in 1972. 

 

It is a responsible Budget, resting firmly on the foundations that were laid during our first year in office. 

It is a Budget that is consistent with the principles which we enunciated in the 1971 campaign and on the 

basis of which we were elected with a large majority as the Government of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, before commencing a detailed review of the province’s current fiscal 

position and our expenditure proposals for the coming year, I should like to mention that Estimates of 

Revenues and Expenditures are for the first time presented on a gross basis in 1973-74. 

 

To enable all the Members of the Assembly, the public and the Press to become familiar with the new 

format, we announced several weeks ago that we would be converting to gross budgeting. A second 

major change which we announced at that time was the adoption of long-term fiscal accounting. Under 

the new concept, deficits or surpluses will be reported and charged to net assets over a period which 

coincides with an extended economic cycle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to comment briefly on the 1971-72 fiscal year and changes which have 

occurred in the current budget year. 

 

The 1971,72 Public Accounts, which will be reviewed at this Session, show expenditures of $461.2 

million and revenues of over $471.2 million, producing a $10 million surplus for the 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

522 

 

1971-72 fiscal period. 

 

Total revenues exceeded the estimated level by $20 million while expenditures exceeded the original 

estimates by more than $10 million. 

 

A number of factors contributed to the increase in revenues. Transfer payments from the Federal 

Government in the form of equalization payments were $36.7 million above the estimated amount. The 

acceleration in collection of the Education and Health Tax plus significantly increased retail trade in the 

last half of the year, produced revenues $7.3 million above the estimate. 

 

On the other hand, personal and corporate income tax receipts were below the estimate by a combined 

amount of $22 million due to downward adjustments on account of overpayments in previous years. 

 

The 1971-72 expenditures of $461.2 million increased over the previous year by $56.5 million. Total 

expenditures included $62.6 million in capital and almost $400 million in ordinary expenditures. Health, 

Education and Welfare were the program areas which received much of this increase in accordance with 

policies announced by our Government before it took office. Treasury also experienced an over 

expenditure of some $8.1 million, part of which was due to payments made to Parsons and Whittemore 

Incorporated in terminating the Athabasca Pulp Mill project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — A year ago this Government brought forward a Budget calling for expenditures of 

$513.2 million. It was aimed at problems which existed in the Human Resources, Education and Social 

Services areas. 

 

Since that Budget was approved, some additional expenditure proposals have been introduced and will 

come up for approval as supplementary estimates during this Session. It appears that expenditures will 

rise to $518 million. 

 

The major additions to the 1972-73 budgetary proposals which you will be asked to approve in the 

supplementary estimates include: 

 

- a grant by the Department of Agriculture of $420,000 to be used for construction of a facility in 

Regina to house the Western Agribition; 

 

- $1.3 million which was added to the original allocation for the Provincial Employment Program to 

meet the expanded needs of student employment; 

 

- almost $500,000 which was remitted by the Department of Finance under the Education and Health 

Tax Act to farmers constructing grain storage facilities; 

 

- $1.86 million which was added to the funds originally provided for grants to special care homes; 

 

- expenditure increases by the Department of Northern 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

523 

Saskatchewan for the people of the North. 

 

Budgetary revenues in the current year are expected to reach $519 million compared to the estimate of 

$513 million. Most of the consumption taxes will exceed the estimates as will receipts under the Tax 

Collection Agreements and the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act. 

 

In addition to these revenues, we propose to transfer suspense account funds, which had been set aside 

for the Saskatchewan Base Hospital and the University Hospital at Saskatoon, back into the 

Consolidated Fund. $6.5 million rests in these accounts. Thus, our total budgetary revenues in 1972-73 

will reach $525.5 million, leaving us with an estimated cumulative cash carry-forward of $7.5 million. 

 

During the calendar year 1972, the Province borrowed $45.6 million, an increase of $1.9 million over 

the previous year. 

 

Once again we took advantage of favorable interest rates by issuing debentures totalling $42.8 million to 

the Canada Pension Plan. All of this debt was self-liquidating with funds being advanced to the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Saskatchewan Telecommunications. 

 

An additional $2.8 million was borrowed from the Federal Government under the terms of the 

Federal-Provincial Employment Loans Program. These funds were advanced to municipalities for winter 

works projects. 

 

Hon. Members may be interested to know that early in 1973 the province went to the Canadian market, 

and borrowed $30 million to meet the capital requirements of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the manner in which this issue was taken up by investors and the rate at which we were 

able to acquire the money are positive indications of the confidence which the financial community has 

in this Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — As a matter of fact, the cost of this money was approximately the same as that at which 

Ontario Hydro was able to borrow. 

 

The total amount of debt redeemed during 1972 amounted to $72.5 million, of which the cancellation of 

Saskatchewan debentures held in sinking funds accounted for some 87 per cent. 

 

Sinking fund contributions in 1972 amounted to $23.7 million, bringing the total assets held in sinking 

funds available for debt retirement to $132.2 million as at December 31, 1972. 

 

I should like to take a moment to review the national economic conditions which prevailed in 1972, and 

the circumstances which will likely exist in 1973. 

 

In general the national economy in 1972 grew at a rate comparable to that of 1971. The dollar value of 

economic activity expanded at a rate of approximately 10 per cent in 1972. However, general price 

increases accounted for almost half of that increase. As a result, the real growth increased 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

524 

 

by only five per cent in the past year. 

 

Much of the expansion in economic activity during 1972 was due to continued growth of consumer 

expenditures on goods and services. However, a disappointing feature of 1972 was the fact that private 

and public investments were only about 10 per cent higher than those of 1971. Consequently, the 

national economy did not experience a major expansion in productive activity. 

 

The optimism suggested by national economic indicators is deceptive. The development of long-term 

employment opportunities was not comparable to the rate at which the economy grew in monetary 

terms. The creation of new jobs did not keep pace with increases in the labor force. As a result, 

unemployment in 1972 was again a staggering 6.4 per cent. What is more disturbing is the fact that 

many parts of the country will again suffer from extremely heavy unemployment in the winter months 

and unacceptably high levels during the remainder of 1973. 

 

Early in 1972 our Government recognized this possibility. We took early action by announcing our 

winter employment program and we pressed the Federal Government to implement a national 

employment program. Once again, the Federal Government was late in announcing its employment 

program. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, that program was announced only after it was obvious to everyone that the national 

economy was not producing the number of jobs required to employ all those persons who were seeking 

work. 

 

It is clear that many of the unfavorable features of 1972 will recur in 1973. The twin problems of 

unemployment and inflation will continue to plague the nation. 

 

The major responsibility for these chronic problems rests with the Federal Government, since it has the 

fiscal and monetary capacity to alter this situation in a significant way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The lack of a sincere effort on the part of the Federal Government to tackle the 

unemployment-inflation problem has important implications for Western Canada. The proposed Federal 

tax incentive for industrial expansion, if implemented, will undoubtedly benefit the industrialized areas 

of Canada more than the less developed regions. In short, Mr. Speaker, it is perpetuation of those 

national economic policies which have restricted the ability of the western region to expand its 

economic base. 

 

The Federal Government’s proposed amendments to corporate taxation are but another example of its 

lack of understanding of, and concern for, the unique developmental problems of Western Canada. 

 

The broad brush approach to fiscal and economic development policy followed by successive Federal 

governments has tended to ignore the basic problems which have hindered the advancement of the 

Prairie Provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to co-operate with the Federal 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

525 

Government in developing policies and programs to remove the real and artificial barriers which have 

restricted the development of an industrial base in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to the Saskatchewan economy. The Saskatchewan economy 

experienced a significant improvement in 1972 as it continued to recover from its earlier downturn. 

There are strong indications that the present trend will continue into 1973. A rise in personal income to 

$2,665 million in 1972 should provide the basis for increased expenditures on consumer goods and 

services in 1973. 

 

The agricultural sector continued to dominate the performance of the provincial economy. Realized net 

farm income increased from $356 million in 1971 to $616 million in 1972 — a rise of 73 per cent. 

Agriculture is expected to maintain its favorable performance in 1973 in view of existing grain 

marketing commitments and anticipated higher prices for livestock and most grains. 

 

Although the value of Saskatchewan mineral production in 1972 remained at about the same level as in 

1971, more buoyant price and market prospects suggest an 8 per cent increase in value for this sector in 

1973. Production and sales from all other primary resource industries rose steadily in 1972. 

 

The Province’s manufacturing sector continued to grow at a steady pace in 1972. The construction 

industry also experienced considerable activity in 1972 as evidenced by an increase of more than 25 per 

cent in the number of housing starts and completions and a 50 per cent increase in the number of units 

under construction at year end. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Retail sales continue to respond to favorable levels of farm cash receipts and other 

components of personal income. Total sales reached $1,275 million in 1972, a 14 per cent increase over 

1971. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — A further rise in retail sales is predicted for 1973. Mr. Speaker, as long as the economic 

destiny of this province depends heavily on the primary resources sector, there can be no assurance that 

our economy will be able to generate sufficient economic activity and jobs to fully employ our labor 

force. 

 

Furthermore, the decimation of our rural communities and the decline in provincial population are 

problems that cannot be ignored. 

 

At present there is insufficient employment in rural areas to fully employ young persons entering the 

labor market for the first time. Consequently, there is a continuing drift of people from rural areas to 

urban centres in search of employment. 

 

The majority of people who left the Province or migrated from rural to urban areas are the young, more 

productive members of our population. It is on this group that ultimately the 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

526 

 

burden for shouldering the responsibility for social services and providing the basis for future economic 

development will fall. 

 

If the average population age continues to increase, the imbalance between dependent and productive 

groups will continue to grow, thereby reducing the ability of the province to provide an adequate level of 

services. 

 

If past trends were to continue unchecked, the economic and social mosaic of Saskatchewan would leave 

much to be desired at the turn of the century — a province of a few hundred thousand people, engaged 

in the production and export of raw materials from its rich resource base. 

 

While improvements have occurred in the past 18 months, further positive action is required by 

governments to stem and reverse this trend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these problems are not new to Saskatchewan, nor are we the first to recognize that the 

problems exist. It is one thing to recognize the existence of a problem. It is another to take forceful 

action to solve that problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, this Budget introduces new programs to solve those problems in 

Saskatchewan. It provides positive steps to stimulate economic development in the Province and to 

revitalize our rural areas. 

 

It will take direct measures to conserve our most valuable resource — the young people of this province. 

But we must not expect that the present trend will be reversed or the current situation stabilized 

overnight. The solutions to these problems are not to be found in anyone program nor can they be 

achieved through the initiative of one level of government. They require concerted action by all levels of 

government over an extended period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have already alluded to the problems which have plagued Saskatchewan for the past few 

years. The remedy for these problems lies not in treating the symptoms but rather in attacking the 

underlying causes. 

 

Economic stability in Saskatchewan can be achieved only through the development of a stable and 

diversified agricultural industry, the development of our primary resources and the creation of secondary 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Budget we will present a new approach to achieve economic stability in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — One component of this approach will be a combination of agricultural programs 

designed to arrest the rural-urban shift by making it possible for the small farmer to continue to operate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

527 

Mr. Cowley: — Another component is the direct involvement of the Government in the development of 

our primary resources for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

A third component is the development, through a more effective Department of Industry and Commerce, 

of secondary industry in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, a major part of this Government’s focus on economic development is 

contained in the new package of programs to be initiated by the Department of Agriculture. One of the 

problems confronting the agricultural industry today is the scarcity of young farmers and the resulting 

decline in farm population. The capital investment required to establish an adequate land base has for 

many years been a deterrent to young farmers seeking to establish themselves in a farming operation. 

 

To alleviate this problem, Mr. Speaker, in 1972-73 we implemented the Land Bank program not only 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — . . . to assist young farmers in acquiring land, but also to provide the older farmer with 

an opportunity to retire in dignity at a time of his own choosing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The success of this program is readily apparent — in the current year the Saskatchewan 

Land Bank Commission has accepted 350 offers for land sales representing a total of over $10 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that in 1973-74 we will provide $20 million to be advanced for 

land purchases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — While the Land Bank program assists young farmers in acquiring land, there remains 

the problem of low returns and low equities which limits their ability to repay loans and their access to 

credit. To improve the rates of return, we recently announced a reduction in rents payable under the 

Land Bank program. 

 

Rents were reduced to 5 per cent of the land value thereby providing lessees with an opportunity to 

establish viable economic entities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — If we are to stabilize the agricultural sector of our economy, diversification into 

livestock must occur. In the long run, this course of action will pay dividends both to individual farmers 

and to the entire province. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

528 

 

One constraint in expanding the livestock industry is the present credit system which imposes short 

repayment periods, high interest rates and high security requirements. In 1973-74 we will introduce a 

comprehensive agricultural development program. It will provide $2 million in grants to assist in the 

development of viable farm units. 

 

Under this program farmers who wish to stabilize their farming operations through expansion into 

livestock production will be eligible for grants ranging from $200 to $8,000 depending upon their needs 

and the potential for such expansion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, the program will provide both the equity and the incentive for young 

farmers to engage in livestock production. In addition to the provision of grants, we are instituting a loan 

program. Unlike the present Federal programs and the services offered by financial institutions, these 

loans will be tailored to the needs of young farmers willing to diversify their farming operations through 

livestock production. 

 

The maximum loan available to an individual will be $60,000 with repayment terms, interest rates and 

security requirements specifically designed to meet the needs of the livestock industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are convinced that such programs are essential to the development of a strong livestock 

industry in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — While the current buoyancy of the grain economy will render transition more difficult, 

the move must be made now if we are to achieve stability in the future. To administer this program we 

are proposing to establish FarmStart. You will be asked to provide $15 million to be advanced to 

FarmStart for lending. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — A number of additional programs are proposed to provide assistance to the livestock 

industry. We will assist in the development of farm water supplies to meet the needs of the increasing 

livestock population. $680,000 is provided in the Estimates for this purpose. This includes $200,000 for 

jumbo dugouts and $150,000 for drill tests in addition to the $330,000 provided for in the current 

program. 

 

Veterinary services to control disease and loss of animals will be improved and increased by the addition 

of veterinary staff. $107,000 will be provided to the Veterinary Diagnostic Service at Western College 

of Veterinary Medicine in Saskatoon to meet the needs of the northern part of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — $720,000 will also be provided to improve the grazing 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

529 

capacity of leased provincial lands to accommodate additional livestock. 

 

The increased emphasis on livestock production has necessitated a change in focus within the 

Department of Agriculture. Specialist services will be provided to assist farmers in the management of 

livestock herds and the development of viable farm units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget provides for a substantial increase in personnel to meet this need in our 

agricultural industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — One of the weaknesses in previous programs was a lack of communication between the 

people responsible for developing the programs and the farmers for whom the programs were designed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We will bridge this gap with field staff who will take the programs to the farmer and 

aid him in dealing with specific problems. This will be achieved by decentralization of the Department 

to provide service on a regional basis. 

 

Because livestock is a contributor to pollution, we will provide $250,000 to assist in the construction of 

works to control contaminated run-off and manure. We will also assist farmers to relocate facilities to 

reduce the dangers of pollution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We propose to establish an Agricultural Implements Board which will represent 

farmers, dealers, manufacturers and the Government. It will review complaints concerning agricultural 

implements and, where a farmer suffers loss due to unreasonable delays in obtaining parts or because the 

manufacturer has failed to fulfil his warranty obligations, he will have recourse for damages and 

compensation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The expenditure for the Agricultural Implements Board will be $34,000 in 1973-74. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many farmers located within the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation District have 

invested substantially in land development but have not experienced the rates of return which were 

expected. 

 

The previous administration placed heavy emphasis on construction of canals and works. This resulted 

in heavy construction costs but did not improve the position of the farmer. Our Government has decided 

to place its emphasis on finding solutions to the problems which confront farmers on the east side before 

we ask more farmers in the area to risk their economic futures on what has proven to date to be an 

unknown 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

530 

 

venture. To this end, we are assisting in the construction of a co-operative alfalfa cubing plant to meet 

the rapidly expanding market for this product. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — In addition, a field testing program will be undertaken to test additional crops that may 

be grown under these conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the combined ordinary and capital budget for the Department of Agriculture will amount to 

$21 million, an increase of 11 per cent over 1972-73. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, we are continuing our efforts to improve the crop insurance program. In 

1973-74 we will include two additional crops — fall rye and sunflowers. We will provide a quality 

guarantee in addition to the present quantity guarantee. We have also provided for improved methods of 

selling and servicing insurance contracts. 

 

These changes will make the program more attractive and more accessible to the farmers of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, having dealt with our most important primary industry, I turn now to a 

consideration of our other natural resources. 

 

We are all aware that Saskatchewan has been richly blessed with an abundance of natural resources. The 

previous administration knew this, but what did they do about it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they indulged in a massive give-away program unparalleled in the history of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — And who were the beneficiaries of this display of generosity, Mr. Speaker? Not the 

young people of Saskatchewan, who represent the future of our province. Not the senior citizens who 

pioneered this province. No, Mr. Speaker, the beneficiaries of this massive give-away were the friends 

of the party opposite — the corporate giants of Eastern Canada and the United States. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, in 1971 we pledged to develop our natural resources — to renew our 

renewable resources and to conserve our non-renewable resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me outline the approach of this Government to the development and use of 

non-renewable resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

531 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, in planning the utilization of these resources, the Government has but one 

chance. If we give away our oil and gas, if we give away our metallic and non-metallic minerals, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no tomorrow — they are gone forever. Therefore, at this Session we will ask the 

Legislature to establish a Crown corporation to carry out exploration for petroleum and natural gas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This is an essential step if the people of this province are to derive greater benefits from 

the use and development of this valuable resource. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the coming fiscal year the Government intends to embark on a program of mineral 

investigation and evaluation designed to accelerate the development of our mineral resources in the 

North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We have provided $500,000 for this purpose, in addition to the current geological 

science program that was accelerated last year. This increased expenditure will facilitate the economic 

development of Northern Saskatchewan and provide employment for residents of the North. Also in 

1973 we will continue the coal reserve investigation program initiated last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have stated that this Government intends to use our forest resources for the benefit of 

the people of Saskatchewan and in a manner which creates maximum employment for the people of the 

North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We recognize that reforestation must not be neglected. Over the next five years we will 

triple our reforestation program, increasing production of seedlings from 2.5 million to 7.5 million 

annually. This is necessary to renew our forests. 

 

We also intend to start a forest management extension program to make the public more aware of the 

value of our forests and the methods of conservation. 

 

This past fall we announced that we would undertake a number of environmental impact studies — to 

determine the effect of a hydro-electric development on the Churchill River. These studies will be 

carried out through the Department of the Environment at a cost of $1.2 million. 

 

We will also implement some of the recommendations arising from the Qu’Appelle Basin Study and 

evaluate other recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

532 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, in this Budget a new emphasis will be placed upon programs designed to 

increase economic activity in the province. 

 

We believe that the economic future of this province cannot depend entirely on the king-size, capital 

intensive industry which the previous administration concentrated on, with little success, I might add. 

 

The Department of Industry and Commerce will be strengthened to search out new approaches to spur 

the development of secondary industry in the province. 

 

We will undertake a systematic examination of manufacturing opportunities in the province to identify 

the kinds of goods that can be produced here. 

 

We will step up our efforts to establish markets for Saskatchewan products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to elaborate on some of these new programs designed to broaden the 

economic base of this province. 

 

In this Budget we are providing funds within the Department of Industry and Commerce for a Research 

and Development Branch whose primary task will be to identify the commercial value of our primary 

products, to determine the extent to which they can be processed or manufactured here in Saskatchewan 

and to identify new opportunities in the area of manufacturing and processing. The services provided by 

the Saskatchewan Research Council will be utilized wherever possible. 

 

In 1973-74 the Government plans to establish a trade office in Tokyo to develop opportunities for 

Saskatchewan products to penetrate the vast Pacific Rim market. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Saskatchewan House in London will perform an active role in promoting Saskatchewan 

products in the European Common Market. We have found by rather sad experience that we cannot sit 

back and wait for the Federal Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce to promote Saskatchewan 

interests. We must assume an active role if we are to obtain results. 

 

Internally, the Government will introduce a “Buy Saskatchewan” campaign designed to acquaint 

Saskatchewan residents with the wide range of products already processed here. 

 

The total trade development program will cost $465,000 in the 1973-74 fiscal year, more than twice the 

previous effort. 

 

The briefs which have been presented to the Special Committee on Business identify several basic 

improvements which are required to enable the businessman of this province to develop and expand his 

operation. 

 

One of the most frequent requests is for management advice and consultative services. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

533 

Although the Committee has not yet presented its report, we believe that immediate action is required to 

assist the businessmen of this province. 

 

You will be asked for funds to provide for program additions to the Business Assistance Branch. A field 

organization will be established to provide consultative services on a regional basis. 

 

These field representatives will provide the necessary link between the Department and the business 

community, establishing for the first time communication on a two-way basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We recognize that there is widespread confusion concerning the kinds of assistance that 

are available to individual businesses from the two senior levels of government. Many good ideas die on 

the drawing board because the innovator lacks the resources or expertise to gauge potential markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the programs provided through the Department of Industry and Commerce will remedy 

this situation. 

 

Funds will be provided in this Budget to assist in financing studies to expand and cultivate markets, to 

promote product diversification and to solve other business and management problems. 

 

This program will provide Saskatchewan businessmen with the kinds of assistance that are presently 

available only to the large corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I turn to tourism, which is an important component in the economic activity of this 

province. The Canadian Travel Survey of 1971 estimated that tourism in Saskatchewan accounted for 

expenditures of more than $178 million. 

 

We plan to accelerate development of the tourist industry: 

 

- through the construction of three tourist reception centres; 

 

- through the expansion of tourist counselling and marketing efforts; and 

 

- through the provision of capital grants to encourage municipalities and other local organizations to 

construct tourist facilities. The estimates contain a provision of $100,000 for this purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new and expanded programs of the Department of Industry and Commerce will work 

only if the necessary resources are made available to the Department. The previous administration talked 

a great deal about industrial development but continually denied to the Department the personnel 

required to bring about that industrial development. 

 

In this Budget we will provide funds for a substantial increase in staff for the Department of Industry 

and Commerce to undertake the necessary research to develop our opportunities for trade and to provide 

consultative and management services to 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

534 

 

the Saskatchewan businessman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I turn now to consider our proposals in the area of transportation and 

communication. 

 

We hope to improve the quality of life in small urban centres by making these centres more attractive 

places to live. 

 

In 1973-74 we will spend over a million dollars on Operation Open Roads and a further $750,000 on 

Operation Main Street. 

 

We will share with smaller centres the cost of improving side streets. It is expected that this program 

will cost a total of $9.8 million with $1.2 million to be spent in 1973-74. 

 

For the 1973-74 fiscal year, this represents a total of over $3 million to be used for the improvement of 

streets and access roads to serve our smaller centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this does not mean that our main roadways will be neglected. Emphasis will be placed on 

those highways serving sub-regional needs. Some roads which are presently oil-treated will receive 

bituminous surfacing, thereby providing a higher standard of service. 

 

To facilitate economic development in the northern part of the province, a micro-wave network will be 

established to serve the major communities. Sask Tel will spend a total of $7.15 million on this 

development with $3.7 million being spent in 1973-74. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This network will provide a means of communication for persons working in the North 

as well as providing our northern residents with a long distance telephone facility comparable to the 

service that is taken for granted in the southern part of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the emphasis which we have given in this Budget in attacking the problems of agricultural 

diversification and economic opportunity does not mean that we are abandoning the traditional role of 

Saskatchewan and the New Democratic Party as leaders in the field of services to people. 

 

Rather, it is an acknowledgement of the fact that the services that the people of this province have come 

to accept as an inherent right can only be supported by a vigorous, stable economy. 

 

We are proud, and justifiably so I believe, of our records in the areas of Education, Health and Social 

Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — I turn now to a review of our accomplishments in the past 18 months and our proposals 

for the these fields in coming year. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

535 

Last year we indicated that the educational needs of the province are changing. The people of 

Saskatchewan no longer view education as a process that begins with the first day of school and ends 

when one leaves a formal learning institution. 

 

Rather, education is considered to be a life-long process. In the current year we established the 

Department of Continuing Education to co-ordinate and broaden the educational opportunities for 

persons who have left the formal school system. 

 

In 1973-74, the expenditures on Continuing Education, including the University, will be nearly $65 

million. 

 

Enrolments at the University appear to have stabilized but the provincial operating grant for existing 

programs continues to increase dramatically. In 1973-74, the operating grant to the University will be 

$38.5 million, an increase over the current year of nearly $3 million. This includes $500,000 for 

teaching positions at the South Saskatchewan Base Hospital. The increase in the operating grant on a 

comparable basis, is $2.4 million, or almost 7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our belief that those persons who benefit directly from the services which the 

University and post-secondary institutions offer ought to bear some of the financial responsibility for 

these services, in direct relationship to their ability to pay. 

 

However, we believe that attendance at these institutions is a right not only for those who have adequate 

financial resources. In 1971 we introduced the Saskatchewan Student Bursary program to assist 

University students and students enrolled in a two-year technology program at the institutes. 

 

There will be a moderate upward adjustment in fees at the Institutes. 

 

On the basis of estimates supplied to us by the University, there are indications that the Board of 

Governors may increase tuition fees in order to offer the level of program which they propose for the 

coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that this year we will increase the non-repayable student 

financial assistance under the Student Bursary program by almost 50 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — An additional $425,000 will be provided to bring the total expenditure to more than 

$1.3 million. The increased benefits under this program will offset any potential increased tuition costs 

for those students who require financial assistance. 

 

Because of stabilizing university enrolments and declining school enrolments, we have asked the 

University to make an inventory of existing facilities and to develop a long-term plan for capital 

development. 

 

The results of the study will not be available until 1973 or early 1974, therefore, no funds have been 

provided for new buildings in the 1973-74 Capital Grant to the University. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

536 

 

The Capital Grant, totalling $5.5 million provides for debt retirement, for completion of capital projects 

that are currently underway and for renovations to existing buildings. 

 

Nursing programs are presently being transferred to the recently completed Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Arts and Sciences in Regina. Enrolment in these programs in the current year totalled 425, but 

with the commencement of the second year of the program this fall, we expect total enrolment to 

increase to 830. 

 

Last fall the Institute offered a two-year dental technology program — the first of its kind in North 

America — with enrolment limited to 35 students. This program will provide trained personnel for a 

child dental program which we plan to introduce in the fall of 1974. Enrolment this year will increase to 

60 in the first year of the program. 

 

The Regional Vocational Centre at Meadow Lake will commence operations late in the summer of 1973, 

offering courses in the commercial and trades areas for up to 200 students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the development of community colleges is an integral part of the concept of continuing 

education. 

 

Saskatchewan is still basically a rural province. To copy the organization and program of provinces with 

a large urban population would be absolute folly. Throughout Canada the needs of rural areas and small 

communities have been given less attention than those in cities. 

 

We believe that community colleges can alleviate this situation. Our efforts will be directed toward the 

development of a unique community college system which will distribute educational opportunities 

throughout the province and which will serve the needs of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Under this Government, a major responsibility of community colleges will be to promote informal and 

formal adult learning in the community. Emphasis will be on programs to meet the needs of local 

communities rather than on programs which are established or imposed from above. 

 

Community colleges are not intended to duplicate services or facilities which are already present, but 

rather to co-ordinate the delivery of all adult educational facilities in the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to assist in determining the requirements for community colleges throughout the province, 

we initiated pilot projects last year at LaRonge, Humboldt Yorkton-Melville and Swift Current. 

 

The 1973-74 Budget includes funds for further development of these pilot projects. 

 

Turning now to the traditional school system, Mr. Speaker, I should point out first that the figures shown 

in the Estimates for 1973-74 are not entirely comparable to the amounts in 1972-73. 

 

Grants to Schools-Operating in 1973-74 will be $100.9 million compared to $90.1 million in 1972-73, 

an increase of $10.8 million. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

537 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, as all operating grants are no longer being provided through the 

Department of Education, some of these grants are now being provided through the Department of 

Continuing Education and the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that operating grants to local school boards will be increased by 

$10.2 million in 1973-74 to almost $96.2 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This increase will be sufficient to offset the increase in recognized school expenditures 

at the local school board level thereby enabling boards to finance 1973 expenditures with no increase in 

property taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Capital grants for school construction will be nearly $5 million. School construction 

will be concentrated primarily on the replacement of outdated facilities and the construction of special 

purpose areas. 

 

In 1972, we started six kindergarten pilot projects to assess alternative approaches, not just for the cities 

but the entire province. We believe that the program must be responsive to the needs of rural 

Saskatchewan and be adaptable to a variety of situations. Funds have been provided in this Budget to 

continue with these pilot projects. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, the Palliser Regional Library will be established in the coming year at a 

cost of $133,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This will complete the regional library system in this province. Grants to municipal 

libraries and establishment and operating grants to regional libraries will be increased by $115,000 in 

this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, our Government is dedicated to an improvement in the quality of health 

programs in response to changing health care needs. The previous administration abdicated this 

responsibility on the grounds that the province could not afford to continue its role as a leader in the 

provision of health services. We recognize that there has been a marked increase in the cost of these 

services, but we reject the idea that the solution to the problem lies in cutting back on essential services. 

We believe that the responsible approach is to identify programs which are ineffective and make the 

required changes. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

538 

 

In many instances in-patient hospitals are not the most effective vehicles to provide health care services. 

In the current year we provided funds for the establishment of community health and social service 

centres which provide comprehensive health services at less than half the cost of in-patient hospitals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — In the coming year we will examine the feasibility of establishing additional health and 

social service centres. 

 

There is an urgent need for extended care for our senior chronically disabled citizens. This year we will 

provide 57 Level IV beds in North Battleford and we will increase the number of such beds in other 

locations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as has already been announced, and is included in this Budget, we will initiate a hearing 

aid program to provide hearing aids at reduced costs this coming year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — In the fulfilment of our election platform, chiropractic services are now included under 

Medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — I have already referred to the dental technology program that has been initiated at the 

Technical Institute in Regina. This year we will assume financial responsibility for the dental care 

project which has been operating on a pilot basis in the schools in the Oxbow-Carnduff region under a 

Federal grant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for many years Saskatchewan provided leadership in the development of mental health 

programs. We believe that those of us who enjoy good health have a responsibility toward those who are 

emotionally disturbed, to those who are mentally retarded and to those persons who suffer from a variety 

of mental illnesses. 

 

In this Budget we will provide funds for 11 new professional psychiatric workers to substantially 

upgrade the services to emotionally disturbed children and adolescents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We will increase the grant to Mental Health Saskatchewan by 40 per cent to $35,000 to 

assist in the operation of White Cross centres at 10 locations in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We will assume the financial responsibility for the Alvin Buckwold centre in Saskatoon 

which serves about 400 mentally retarded persons in that community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

539 

Mr. Cowley: — The capital budget of the Department of Public Health includes $2 million for a start on 

the $25 million addition to the University Hospital and a comprehensive diagnostic and out-patient 

treatment centre will be constructed there, second to none in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — More than $500,000 is also provided to complete construction of the South 

Saskatchewan Hospital centre which is scheduled to commence operation in late 1973. It will be used as 

a training facility for medical students at the University of Saskatchewan and provide more than 300 

beds when it becomes fully operational. The total capital cost of the hospital is expected to be more than 

$15.8 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan takes second place to no jurisdiction in Canada in the 

variety and quality of our programs to assist those who are handicapped or disadvantaged. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — In 1973-74 the expenditures for social services programs will increase to approximately 

$88 million. There are three components in this increase. 

 

The largest one is that during this current year we transferred the responsibility for programs for the 

mentally retarded from the Department of Public Health to the Department of Social Services, resulting 

in a $12.5 million increase in the budget of the Department of Social Services. This amount includes 

$7.3 million for the cost of operating institutions at Moose Jaw and Prince Albert and a further $5.2 

million in income support payments under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan for residents of these 

institutions. 

 

The second component is an increase of $6.2 million in payments under the Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan. This increase is due primarily to the rise in the cost of living and the increase in the number of 

dependent families and elderly citizens requiring assistance. 

 

The third component of the increase is the allocation of $3 million to provide better care for our senior 

and chronically disabled citizens through public assistance to residents of special-care homes. The costs 

of operating these homes have been rising rapidly. Since coming to office we have paid grants to 

special-care homes to assist them to meet increasing costs. In 1973-74 the assistance will take a different 

form. The Budget provides subsidies to private paying residents in special-care homes as follows: for 

Level III patients — $4.80 a day and for Level II patients $1.80. This program is aimed at providing 

financial assistance for those requiring more intensive care in special-care homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of our senior citizens prefer to remain in their own homes and in the communities 

where they have put down their roots. It is their right to do so and we respect that right. This does not 

mean that they do not require some services to enable them to live in dignity and comfort. We 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

540 

 

believe that these services ought to be made available whether they live at home or in an institution. In 

this Budget almost $285,000 has been made available to provide community services to the elderly and 

the chronically disabled who live in their own homes and communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This is in addition to the home repair plan for senior citizens which I will cover more 

fully when I come to housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public interest demands that assistance in coping with their problems be provided to 

persons who have broken the law. Putting a person in jail is not always the most effective method of 

rehabilitating the offender. Indeed, the effects of this may in some cases result in a complete rejection of 

society and sow the seeds whereby an individual may become a continuing menace to society. Because 

we believe that in many cases better results can be achieved through the services of a probation officer, 

we are providing funds for an additional 10 such persons. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, at this Session, legislation will be introduced to establish the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The corporation’s program will be directed toward improving living accommodations 

for the aged and for those in low and middle income brackets. During the current year we broadened the 

grant structure of The House Building Assistance Act to include families whose annual income was 

from $7,000 to $9,000. Grants ranging from $300 to $800 were made available on a sliding scale related 

to annual income. The extension of the grant was in recognition of the difficulty encountered by 

individuals at this income level in making the down payment on a new home. 

 

In recent years the supply of subsidized low rental public housing has not kept pace with the needs for 

such accommodation. The level of 300 units per year was totally inadequate. The resulting shortage in 

accommodation has been most seriously felt by our senior citizens whose need for public housing is the 

greatest. We recognize this urgent need and this year we intend to increase the number of public housing 

units significantly. This will result in an increased investment in public housing in 1973. 

 

The provision of additional public housing and new housing units is not the complete solution to our 

housing problems. Throughout Saskatchewan, particularly in rural areas, many homes are in need of 

repair, but the owners lack the financial resources to undertake major renovations. To meet this need, we 

will provide loans to families whose annual income is limited, part of this amount will be in the form of 

a forgivable loan spread over a five-year period. The amount of the forgivable portion will be dependent 

upon the income of the applicant and the cost of the renovations. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

541 

Mr. Speaker, for pensioners receiving a guaranteed income supplement, the expenditure of even $200 or 

$300 on repairs to their homes is an undertaking which few can afford. The alternative to living in an 

uncomfortable or an unsafe house is to obtain accommodation in a publicly sponsored senior citizens 

residence. To enable these persons to remain in their own homes and to make those homes more 

comfortable we will provide grants ranging from $200 to $500 for the repair of their homes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The amount of the grant will vary according to the size of their guaranteed income 

supplement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in some communities, both the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation and private 

lenders have been unwilling to make mortgage loans available for house building. We intend to meet 

this need by making mortgage funds available through the Housing Corporation. We also hope to take a 

more creative approach to low income housing needs by implementing a phased housing and 

co-operative housing program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, time doesn’t permit me to mention many other excellent programs that are contained in 

this Budget. I expect that as others enter this debate they will outline them in more detail. I mention two 

or three departments, the Department of the Attorney General; the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan, where there are many new and exciting programs; the highway program which will be 

announced by the Minister of Highways and the Department of Culture and Youth. Mr. Speaker, these 

will be elaborated on in coming debates. 

 

Before reviewing how we propose to finance our expenditures I should like to spend a few moments on 

our Government’s fiscal policy for 1973-74. During 1972 Canada once again experienced unacceptably 

high levels of unemployment. While Saskatchewan’s rate of unemployment was significantly below the 

national average, it reached a point where we believed that government action was necessary. We took 

such action. In September we announced a Provincial Winter Works program. We believed that an 

announcement of our intentions was essential at that time so that local governments might plan projects 

for the winter months. I am pleased to say that local governments have co-operated and many job 

creating projects are under way all across the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — We allocated $5 million to this program and we anticipate it will create 4,200 

man-months of employment, if fully taken up by local governments. The Federal program was not 

announced until December — and as a result it will have a limited impact this winter, a much more 

limited impact than if it had been announced at the same time as the Saskatchewan program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we chose this form of economic employment stimulus over tax reductions for two reasons: 

first while tax reductions may be a sound policy to stimulate employment in Canada as a whole, they do 

little to stimulate employment in Saskatchewan. A tax reduction would do little to ease the 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

542 

 

unemployment situation in Saskatchewan, indeed the major benefits of a Saskatchewan tax reduction in 

terms of added employment would accrue to Eastern Canada since a large part of our consumer goods 

are produced there. 

 

Secondly, winter works projects not only create employment in Saskatchewan, but also add to 

community facilities in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Particularly in the smaller communities where the recreational facilities are being 

constructed or upgraded, public offices renovated and service facilities established. Projects undertaken 

through the Winter Works Program will be of lasting benefit to the communities and the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to the Municipal Winter Works Program we accelerated our capital works program by $3.4 

million. The Crown corporations accelerated their capital works programs by over $4 million to ease 

unemployment during the winter months. 

 

The increased emphasis which is being placed on housing will provide a significant impetus to job 

creation in Saskatchewan in 1973. 

 

You will be asked to provide funds to create jobs for our young people this coming summer. $1 million 

has been allocated to the Department of Culture and Youth for this purpose and $1.5 million is provided 

in this Budget to employ students in government during the summer months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, we recognize that these measures are essentially short-term solutions to 

what is a long-term program. The long-term solution to achieving economic stability in Saskatchewan is, 

as I have pointed out, to be found in diversification of the agricultural industry, the developing and 

processing of our primary resources and the establishment of secondary industry. 

 

This Budget outlines plans which coupled with the relatively buoyant state of the agricultural sector of 

our economy are expected to provide more job opportunities for Saskatchewan people that have ever 

been available in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments about the current employment statistics in 

Saskatchewan. Our average monthly labor force grew by over 2,000 workers in 1972, as compared to an 

absolute decline of 4,000 in 1971. Mr. Speaker, this simply means that now our youth feel there is some 

hope for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — They are confident they can build a future here for themselves. No longer are they 

leaving the province in droves . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

543 

Mr. Cowley: — . . . the moving van vanishing over the horizon is no longer indelibly etched upon every 

Saskatchewan child’s memory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, in the non-agricultural sector there were 249,000 workers employed as 

compared to 230,000 in January last year. Mr. Speaker, this simply means that 19,000 more men and 

women have jobs in 1973 than in 1972. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, it’s evident that many people from the agriculture sector have also 

registered for work. What is happening is that the Winter Works Program which our Government 

initiated is having its effect. Some of the under-employment which has always existed in Saskatchewan 

is coming to the surface because now there is an opportunity for farmers to gain employment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — And hence they are registering at Manpower Offices so they can work on the local rink 

or municipal office to augment their farm income. Mr. Speaker, our policies have created more jobs, 

they have raised hopes and expectations and this Budget is a major step in attempting to meet them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to the manner by which we propose to finance the 

budgetary program I have outlined for you today. We believe that reliance on the regressive property tax 

must be reduced . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — . . . particularly in those circumstances where the services are not closely related to the 

property itself. The level of property tax cannot be ignored by Federal and Provincial governments. The 

provincial-municipal tax structure must be viewed as a whole. 

 

During the election campaign we promised to reduce the property tax burden for school purposes to an 

average of 25 mills. I am pleased to announce that in the coming year our Government will fulfil this 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — School grants will be increased to a level which will stabilize the average school mill 

rate across the province at about 43 mills. Operating grants to local school boards will be increased by 

over $10 million to a total of $96.2 million. Thus the Provincial Government will be picking up the total 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

544 

 

increase in operating costs related to recognized school program. At this Session you will be asked to 

amend the Property Improvement Grant program to provide for increased grants to property owners 

equivalent to an 18 mill tax reduction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — For farmers the 18 mill reduction is applicable up to $15,000 of taxable assessment. 

The maximum grant to a farmer with a taxable assessment of $15,000 will be $270, an increase of $75. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The 18 mills for the businessman will raise the maximum grant to $180 for his business 

property. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — That’s part of the war to help business. 

 

For the householder the level of eligible assessment will be raised to $8,000 providing a grant equivalent 

to 50 per cent of his municipal taxes to a maximum of $140. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The maximum grant payable to the individual for any combination of the above will be 

increased to $270. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — With school mill rates at an average of 43 mills across the province based on an 

equalized assessment and with an 18 mill Property Improvement Grant, our commitment of 25 mills will 

be achieved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — I want to summarize how the increases in school grants and Property Improvement 

Grants have been used to meet that commitment. In 1973 expenditures by local school boards are 

expected to reach $180 million. School grants will provide $96.2 million or 53 per cent. Property 

Improvement Grants will provide $30.5 million to property owners, leaving $55.2 million or 30 per cent 

to be financed by the local ratepayers. This is in marked contrast to the situation in 1970-71, the last full 

year of Liberal administration when out of a total expenditure of $155 million the local ratepayer picked 

up nearly 50 per cent of the total cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I will not take the time of the House to 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

545 

read the tables before me but I should like them recorded. 

 

In December we announced that individual and corporate income taxes would be raised to enable the 

Government to reduce the burden on property tax. With the announcement of the level of the Property 

Improvement Grant and school grants the impact of this tax shift becomes more evident. I will give you 

some examples from the tables. 

 

A farmer with a $15,000 assessment, a wife and two children, with an annual income of $8,000 before 

personal deductions, will experience a net benefit in terms of the Property Improvement Grant over the 

old Home Owner Grant payment and the increase in the provincial income tax, his net benefit will be 

$176.50 a year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — To the householder, with two children, with local taxes in excess of $288, with an 

annual income of $8,000, the net benefit to this individual is $50.50 a year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This tax shift is of major benefit to the majority of Saskatchewan residents, to farmers, 

to small businessmen, to householders in the low and middle income bracket. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This move, Mr. Speaker, is a significant step in the reform of our tax structure. It’s a 

positive attempt to bring fairness and equity to the provincial tax structure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I turn now to the revenue structure and our fiscal position for next year. In forecasting 

revenues for the next fiscal year, we have assumed that economic conditions will continue to improve 

but at a pace slightly slower than in 1972-73. The lower rate of growth is attributable to a predicted 

increase in grain sales in 1973 somewhat less dramatic than that which occurred in 1972. 

 

Improvements in retail markets largely in response to the much improved agricultural economy have 

raised E&H Tax to reach $80.3 million in the next fiscal year. 

 

Gasoline taxes are expected to yield $57.1 million in 1973-74. Individual Income Tax is expected to 

provide $95.6 million with Corporation Income Taxes expected to yield almost $19 million. 

 

We estimate that tobacco taxes will yield $6.8 million in 1973-74, an increase of $600,000 over the 

current year’s estimate. The increase is due to two factors, the normal growth in sales and the adjustment 

of the rate on all cigarettes to 9/25ths of a cent. This will eliminate the current preferential rate of 

8/25ths of a cent per cigarette on those cigarettes which are 85 millimeters in length or less. The change 

will be effective at midnight tonight. At the same time, the formula under which cigars are taxed will be 

altered to reduce 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

546 

 

the number of break-points. This change is being made in the interests of the administrative simplicity. 

 

Revenues from provincial Succession Duties and Gift Taxes are estimated to be $2.8 million in 1973-74. 

 

In the last year’s budget address we articulated our philosophy that the true owners of our natural 

resources are the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — To obtain for the people of this province a fair share of the profits from mineral 

production we made changes last year in the royalties and fees payable in respect to mineral production. 

This year we intend to increase the oil and gas royalty and fee structure to bring it more into line with 

what we believe to be a fair return to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — This will generate additional revenues in the amount of $7 million. The aggregate 

effect of the changes which we made last year and the changes which we are introducing this year will 

be to increase resource revenues to $52.7 million in 1973-74 compared to $34.3 in 1971-72. Mr. 

Speaker, we believe that this constitutes a more reasonable return to the people of this province for the 

use of their resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the equalization program represents the largest single unconditional grant under the 

Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act. In 1973-74 we expect receipts from this source to reach 

$136 million. We anticipate that the post-secondary adjustment payment will amount to $12.6 million. 

Hon. Members will note that for the first time all receipts from the Federal Government under the shared 

cost programs are shown as revenue. This is a direct result of our conversion to a gross budgeting 

system. 

 

Government enterprises including the Saskatchewan Liquor Board are expected to contribute $55.4 

million to the consolidated fund in 1973-74. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are estimating total revenues at $723.7 million. 

 

I’d like to sum up our position, Mr. Speaker. Cash inflows or budgetary revenues will amount to more 

than $723.7 million. Cash outflows or budgetary expenditures will be almost $722.8 million, leaving a 

cash carry-forward of approximately $935,000 in the 1973-74 fiscal year. In terms of the fiscal period 

which started with the 1972-73 fiscal year we estimate that our cumulative cash carry-forward will 

amount to $8.4 million at the end of the year. 

 

It’s derived from three sources. An estimated cash increase in 1972-73 of a million dollars and $.9 

million in 1973-74 plus the transfer to the consolidated fund in 1972-73 of the $6.5 million previously in 

the Treasury suspense accounts. This money was there for the construction of the University Hospital 

extension and the completion of the South Saskatchewan Base 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

547 

Hospital. These funds are now shown as a cash carry-forward and we intend to use them for the purpose 

for which they were set aside. The only difference is now the Legislature will appropriate the funds to 

meet the costs of construction in the year in which they are incurred and the funds are in full view of the 

public instead of being hidden away and unaccounted for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that this is a responsible Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — With the relative buoyancy of the economy I am pleased that we will be able to present 

a Budget in which we will have a small cash carry-forward into 1974-75. However, Mr. Speaker, our 

Government is by no means bound to a balanced Budget. Indeed, should the economic situation warrant 

expenditures in excess of revenues to create employment and opportunities for the people of this 

province, we would not hesitate to deficit finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, there are two sets of commitments which I would like to conclude my 

remarks by saying a few words about. I believe that there are two sets of commitments that people 

expect a government to fulfil. One set consists of the written commitments with which we are all 

familiar, the party program. The other commitment is unwritten and seldom articulated, either by the 

politician or by the public. It’s not specific and can probably be best be described as an impression in 

people’s minds. Because this commitment is conceived in the minds of individuals, it varies somewhat 

from one person to another. For some it’s only a sense of direction. For others it assumes a more 

tangible form. 

 

In 1971 the people of Saskatchewan soundly rejected the party on the other side of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The people rejected them because they failed to live up to either set of commitments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — The people rejected their crude and arrogant methods. They were rejected because the 

gerrymander violated the people’s innate sense of fair play. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — They were rejected because they failed to develop this province and because they 

ignored the concern of the people about foreign ownership and methods of resource development. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

548 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, if I was poetic I would say they were rejected because the people sensed 

they danced to a tune played by a few musicians rather than to the chorus of the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) whom I note is not in his chair, 

during the days when he was Provincial Treasurer occasionally indulged in the field of rhetoric. Let me 

quote a gem from his budget address of 1969 when he said: 

 

In too many areas of our country we see children and adults by the hundreds of thousands coming out 

of rundown shacks, wading through mud and dust to get to palatial schools, luxurious hospitals and 

elegant nursing homes. 

 

Now after reading that who can say that the gentleman does not have a social conscience. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that was 1969, and what did the Government of which he was a part do about the mud and the 

dust and the rundown shacks? Nothing, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely nothing. It wasn’t until this 

Government assumed office in 1971 that Operation Main Street was introduced to fix those muddy 

streets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — It was this Government that initiated the street improvement program to settle the dust 

that assailed the nostrils of the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — And it is our Government that will do something about those houses through our 

housing program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, that is the difference between Liberal pretences and New Democratic 

Party performance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, in 1971 the people of this province spoke for bold and imaginative 

policies. They asked for new approaches to old problems. They asked for development but development 

in their interest and with some regard for the quality of life. To that call for action, this Government 

responded and will continue to respond. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Those who sit opposite and some small interest groups cry “Halt”. But we remember 

they cried ‘halt’ to Medicare and 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

549 

what a catastrophe it would have been for all of Canada if they had their way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, now they cry ‘halt’ to a Crown corporation to explore for oil and gas. 

They call ‘halt’ to the development of our forest resources by the people of the province. They call ‘halt’ 

to a Hog Marketing Commission. And they call ‘halt’ to a fairer tax structure based on ability to pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that those who call ‘halt’ missed before, missed during and missed after June 23, 

the message of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, I present to this House with confidence this Budget and the programs 

which it contains. I have confidence in the direction we are setting for this province and confidence in 

our ability to achieve those goals which the people have set for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, before calling the motion, I am sure that 

there a few of us on this side of the House who would like to say a few nice tings about the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — We are somewhat limited, of course, by the quality of the Budget, and consequently 

the nice things won’t take quite as log as some of the other things. 

 

First of all I should like to congratulate the Honorable Minister on his first Budget as the first Minister 

of Finance in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The major change, of course, apart from the name, Minister of Finance, has been the 

change in the method of accounting for the funds of Saskatchewan and that, I think, represents the major 

change in this Budget over last year’s Budget. In the past, of course, the Government having very little 

to offer, has changed a name, formed a committee, commenced a study, or added Legislative Assistants. 

 

I did want to congratulate the Hon. Minister on his selection of a tie and he surprised me on the method 

that they used to accomplish this. I felt that it would probably require 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

550 

 

a Cabinet decision and I was indeed surprised that it was only necessary to call a Committee to select a 

tie for this particular job — very important piece of business. I assume that this matter will be resolved 

into a committee during the summer interval. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only do we have a new Minister of Finance, we now have a new Minister of Social 

Services, formerly Welfare; a new Minister of Government Services, formerly Public Works; a brand 

new Minister of Culture and Youth; another Northern Saskatchewan Minister . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — We have a duplicate Minister in charge of Education, that is one man doing two jobs. 

I don’t know how he can handle the two but that’s the situation. I wondered if the Hon. Premier was 

going to adopt the name Prime Minister. I await that eagerly, I mean in this House and not in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that as the population goes down the names and number 

of Cabinet Ministers across the way goes up. 

 

Now his Party has a great preoccupation with names. I observe in the last House they were not satisfied 

with the name ‘Home Improvement Grant’ so they brought in what is called a ‘Property Improvement 

Grant’. I’m sorry, it was a ‘Homeowner’s Grant’ and it went to ‘Property Improvement Grant’. Now the 

old grant was given to people who were homeowners, just as the name implied, but some people are 

naive enough to believe that just because you have a property improvement grant system you have to do 

something about improvement of property. Well, I have an advertisement here by the Government and 

here is what it says: 

 

Property taxes for school purposes throughout Saskatchewan averaged 43 mills, some places they are 

higher, some places they are lower. So what we are going to do is we are going to reduce the burden 

here. 

 

I mean, here’s what it says: 

 

The best way to reduce these taxes is to provide a direct grant to resident property owners. 

 

This is what the Government did, they called it a ‘Property Improvement Grant’. It is money back on 

school taxes to use any way you want. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, what you call it is not what it means at all. 

 

An Hon. Member: — When was that ad published? 

  

Mr. MacLeod: — That ad was published just in October, 1972. Now I suppose there are some people in 

this House that believe the 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

551 

number of the ads produced by the Provincial Government in Saskatchewan had something to do with 

the Federal Government, the Federal election that was going on at that time, and certainly nobody on our 

side of the House would ever suggest that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh no! Purely accidental. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — However, I was very interested in the remarks of the Hon. Minister about the 

reduction in property taxes. Now this is practically the same thing that they said last year. They said, we 

are going to reduce their property taxes, and I want to assure the Minister that I was very glad because I 

noticed that on my tax bill for the year, property taxes were reduced from $680 to $720, and I assume 

we are going to see a repetition of this thing in the coming year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about that tax shift? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — The one thing I will talk about for a minute is the total obsession by the Hon. 

Members across the way with names. I notice they changed their Party label a few years ago from CCF 

to NDP, without changing any of their policies, and I should like, if I may, to give them a little bit of 

advice. Gentlemen, I would recommend that in future you do like we do, keep the name the same but 

update your policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now I recognize that the Liberal Party has constantly gone ahead with a policy of 

rejuvenation and updating of its policy. The Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) refers to this with 

considerable annoyance, as political expediency and for the Members across the way who don’t know 

the definition of political expediency, it is this . . . 

 

Mr. Lane: — Ask Roy! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — If your Party does it, it is keeping in tune with the times. It’s only political 

expediency if the other people do it. Now, the Attorney General was, therefore, rightly disturbed and 

annoyed and made his annoyance known to the House several days ago because the Liberal Party was 

constantly reviewing and renewing its policies. 

 

I might say that I am disappointed that his masterful performance is not recognized in the Budget. I 

would have thought that having spent all day telling what the Liberal Party stood for, incorrectly, 

without in any way telling what his Party stood for, and in such a masterful way, would have drawn an 

Oscar. There are no provisions for Oscars in the Budget, despite the fact that he is my Number One 

nominee. 

 

There is a story that I have to tell about the Attorney General. He comes from Saskatoon and the people 

up there know him a little better than we do and one lady said, “I want to tell you, Mr. MacLeod, about 

the Attorney General”. They said, 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

552 

 

“You’ve got to watch him very carefully”. But she said, “He gives himself away. If he holds his hand 

behind his back he is telling the truth; if he puts his hand in his pockets you can be sure you can rely 

upon him; but when he moves his lips, look out”. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now we are very interested, of course, to observe the two events in the House 

yesterday that I see have some reflection of in the Budget today. 

 

First of all the Hon. Minister in charge of Industry in this province (Mr. Thorson) made an 

announcement. He wasn’t very happy about making that announcement because Robin Hood 

Multi-foods Limited in Saskatoon announced a $650,000 mill and the Minister didn’t know about it. He, 

therefore, put a rush call to his Deputy Minister instructing him to find out all about this and the Deputy 

Minister reported, as he reported to the House, that this company was in fact going to build something in 

Saskatchewan and hadn’t taken the trouble to let the Hon. Minister know. 

 

Well, I want to tell him why he didn’t know. It’s because the city of Saskatoon and the city of Regina 

have a policy and that policy is ‘never tell the Government about your program of development’. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Hogwash! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Hogwash nothing. As a matter of fact it has been transferred to the Premier and to 

Members of the Government and they know very well that it’s true. What has happened is this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tremendous assistance given by the Department of Industry and Commerce was clearly 

demonstrated in a recent case in Regina. The city of Regina had negotiated for the acquisition of a new 

industry — a food processing industry. They had arranged for the sale of land, they had made all the 

arrangements with that company and then they made the mistake of telling the Provincial Government 

and the Provincial Government, under the Hon. Minister, spent almost a year trying to persuade them 

not to go to Regina, but to go to some other centre in the province, for political purposes. This company 

eventually rejected the Provincial Government, it decided it would set-up in Regina and in a fit of 

annoyance the Hon. Minister then, himself, announced a program which had previously been announced 

by the Mayor of Regina. As a result of this kind of political shenanigans the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon have declared a firm rule — they have instructed their officials not to tell the Provincial 

Government when they are making any arrangement at all for a new industry . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — . . . because the kind of help they get from the Provincial Department of Industry and 

Commerce they can do without. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

553 

An Hon. Member: — Like the Roumanian Tractor Plant. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Now, that was a most interesting kind of event that occurred yesterday in the House. 

Another one, Mr. Speaker, was the request by the Opposition to have priority debate on a matter we 

considered as urgent, namely, the rise in unemployment from 5.5 per cent to 7 per cent. We thought that 

was pretty serious. Now I discover on Page 9, and again on Page 30 of the Budget (they are concerned 

enough to put it in two places), that they regard the 6.4 per cent unemployment as staggering, but 7 per 

cent isn’t staggering. I would have thought they would be all flat on the floor, but apparently the magic 

figure isn’t 7 per cent, it’s 6.4. That’s the one that staggers them. If it’s 6 per cent they’re not staggered. 

6.6 per cent they’re not staggered, but 6.4 — that really gets them. Now I assume that whatever they do 

in future they’ll see to it that the unemployment doesn’t reach that magic figure again. 

 

I’m disappointed, of course, because it did seem to me that what David Lewis was saying last October 

was that a rate of unemployment reaching 7 per cent, without being precise, was serious. Apparently the 

National New Democratic Party considers a rate of unemployment approaching 6.7 to 7 per cent is 

serious but in this House does not. The New Democratic Members of Saskatchewan don’t regard it as 

sufficiently serious to call a debate on it. Now, again there are some people unkind and uncharitable 

enough to believe that when David Lewis was crying about unemployment last fall it had something to 

do with the Federal election. 

 

The interesting part of the Budget, of course, is that the program called PEP, Provincial Employment 

Program, has been continued by this Government. It has been continued with a reduced amount — one 

and a half million dollars was authorized last year, if I read correctly it’s one million dollars this year. 

But the figures are pretty unimportant. It doesn’t matter how many dollars we are talking about because 

the plan is actually a plan whereby the Provincial Government will pay up to $150, we’ll pay 50 per cent 

of the cost of employment, we will share the cost 50-50 with employers, up to a maximum of $150 per 

month to a maximum of four months in the summer months. The essence of the program is this, that a 

job must be created for the summer months and half the cost is paid by an employer and half the cost by 

the Government. The Government can budget $20 million for this if it wants, students still can’t find 

employment in this province. 

 

The biggest single problem last summer was the failure of students to get employment in Saskatchewan. 

I talked to numerous students who couldn’t get employment, so the Government is not going to have to 

match very many jobs because before you have to match it you’ve got to find somebody who will hire a 

student. You can’t pay for no work and the way this Government is carrying on there aren’t going to be 

very, very many jobs in Saskatchewan. The predictions are that the Province of Saskatchewan will have 

a population of about 890,000 at the time of the next election, the last report we have is that it has sunk 

to 917,000, it will continue declining unless something is done. So what is the solution offered by the 

Government? No solution at all. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

554 

 

I was very interested in their concern about rail line abandonment. Their solution is: don’t let anybody 

do anything. The interesting part about the NDP platform is that they vary from total conservatism on 

the one side to absolute radicalism on the other and what their Party needs more than anything else is a 

trapeze so they can swing from one to the other. For example, this rail line abandonment, if that is 

stopped that’s their answer to all of the problems of the small towns in Saskatchewan. Now last year I 

gave them some suggestions on how they could assist small towns in Saskatchewan. They didn’t take 

any of these suggestions at all. What they did do, they came forth with a bold resolution saying, “don’t 

move a railway, don’t move a track”, — a tremendous plan. It reminds me of the mother who had a 

daughter who wanted to go swimming. The mother says, “fine darling daughter, hang your clothes on a 

hickory limb but don’t go near the water”. Now that’s the way this Government wants to do things. It 

says that whatever you do don’t change anything, but we demand dramatic and bold new programs. 

 

Now the Budget. Well the Budget certainly didn’t solve any of those problems. I’m very interested in 

the Budget. Let me look at where the money comes from to begin with. Well, to begin with, 40 per cent 

of the Budget, $295 million comes from the Federal Government. Now, Mr. Speaker, I observe that the 

Hon. Minister in his first major role as a Minister of Finance went to a conference and the western 

representatives were talking about their needs and desires and all the rest of it, but what did the Hon. Mr. 

Cowley say? He said nothing — “Cowley silent at conference”. Now, I’ll tell you, there are two main 

reasons to be silent, one is if you don’t know anything, you can effectively mask your lack of knowledge 

. . . 

 

Mr. Lane: — Not Elwood. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — . . . the other reason is because you just don’t have the moral courage to ask for more. 

After a Budget, with 40 per cent of it provided by the Federal Government, surely we at last can no 

longer go to Ottawa and have the courage to ask for another penny. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Now we know why he was quiet. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Yes, now we know why he was quiet. The largest single source of funds, the major 

source of funds is the Federal Government. Yes, those Federal Liberals, all they are doing is bailing out 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the average annual amount of money received by the Provincial 

Government in each of the nine years before this Government came to power, was $25 million in 

Federal equalization payments. Now that wasn’t all they got, but in the Federal equalization payments it 

was $25 million. The equivalent amount in the first year of the New Democratic Party’s term of office 

this time was $119 million — I’m sorry $107 million and last year budgeted for $119 million — $227 

million from the Federal treasury and yet as a result of that this Government was able to get only a 

measly $10 million surplus last year and it found itself obliged to raise the taxes from 34 per cent to 37 

per cent when the Federal Government reduced its tax base and another 3 per cent this year to 40 per 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

555 

cent. One kind of wonders where the money is going to. Despite this fantastic upsurge in the economy, 

despite the revenue at an unprecedented level — $30 million from liquor sales alone, despite the $10 

million, this Government still seems to want more money and throughout the Budget there are increases. 

Now where did these increases go? Well, 25 million of the increased dollars come from personal taxes, 

$25 million out of the pockets of our wage earners, $4 million more out of the corporations of the 

province, a total of almost $30 million. However, the Government is not going to take without giving. 

Therefore, it gives somewhere between an $8 million and $10 million increase in connection with its 

Property Improvement Grant which we all know has something to do with relief of the tax burden. Now 

this is what I call an interesting transfer of the burden — $30 million more out of your pocket, transfer 

$10 million back in, that in the NDP lexicon is a fair trade. I wonder what Mr. Lewis is thinking about 

his Saskatchewan division at this time? I’m so sad over the way they have wrecked our province, I’m 

almost crying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here, from the Leader-Post of Wednesday, February 7th, where it talks about a 

headline from Ottawa, “Corporation Tax Cut Threat to Liberals” and “The New Democratic Leader 

demands that there be a tax cut in personal income rates”. While the Federal Party is demanding a 

reduction in the personal income tax rates, the Provincial Party is increasing the personal tax rates. 

Either the one hand doesn’t know what the other is doing or the Party with a principle has two different 

sets of principles depending on where you are and what you are doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party is spending our money in a variety of ways of interest to the 

people. I was rather hoping, Mr. Speaker, that we might have got some solution to one pressing problem 

in Saskatchewan, namely, the one that the Hon. Mr. Bowerman has charge of. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . all left. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — No, they sit here for one hour and a half in these uncomfortable surroundings — and 

I say uncomfortable because of all the money being spent by the Government, they don’t seem to have 

one nickel for air conditioning to these premises. Or if the air conditioning is here it doesn’t work, 

particularly when the Hon. Minister has taken up an hour and a half. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me talk about what Mr. Bowerman did during the last year to spend our money. The 

point comes out, and here is what he says: “The year under review has been one of re-examination and 

planning”. Congratulations! Planning to win Athabasca! Well that was a bad plan. “A new high was 

achieved in the sale of hunting licenses”. 

 

Now I want to report on the very essence of his programs. He says: 

 

Extensive inventory and research activities were continued and initiated to assist in the development of 

effective resource use and management. 

 

Whatever that means I don’t know, but it is certainly of little value to the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

556 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the real essence of this Budget is that it is designed to continue to engage more and 

more people, more staff, for political purposes. As part of this program they have decided to jimmy the 

Budget. What they have done is to alter their budgeting methods. Everybody is this country operates on 

a year to year basis. You budget for one year, you make your plans for a year and at the end of the year 

you know whether you are ahead or behind it. This Government has invented what they call “cyclical 

budgeting”. They have decided, according to the Hon. Minister of Finance (Mr. Cowley) that they are 

not going to terminate at the end of the year, they are going to carry on. And here is what he says: “The 

adoption of long term fiscal accounting will mean that the financial statements of the province will more 

accurately reflect the Government’s long-term approach to fiscal planning”. 

 

The accumulative cash position was shown for an extended fiscal period. Here is the clincher! “There 

will be no attempt to set the length of a cycle in advance. They will be terminated and initiated 

according to current economic conditions”. And what I want to say is that he will stop it and will start it 

whenever it suits the Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — That is a flexible plan. So if we have a good year ending 1974 that will be the end of 

the cycle. If we have a bad year ending in 1974 it won’t end, it will carry on. That is the sort of thing 

that they do when kids are flipping, they go two out of three and if the fellow loses he says, three out of 

five. If he loses the flip of the coin again it is four out of seven and so on, and that is the way the 

Government is going to operate the cyclical budgeting in the future. That is, it will never end, the cycle 

will never end until it suits them. Not only is this Budget confusing to the ordinary citizen, not only do 

they juggle departments year after year, they are now never going to quit until they are ready to quit. I 

suggest to them that they will quit, they will quit in 1975. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had just received the Budget and the Estimates a few moments before we entered the 

House today. Obviously we cannot give a detailed analysis of expenditures exceeding $700 million in 

the few minutes at our disposal, particularly since the Government has had months to consider what it is 

going to do. Considering the time that they have had, I regret that they did not produce a better 

document for our perusal, but nonetheless it is going to take me a little time to study this and I shall have 

more to say on Monday. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I can say that most of what I read is either a joke or a bad dream. This, in many 

cases, is a stand-pat Budget. There are no exciting new programs at all. The expenditures on the tourist 

industry are a joke. The Hon. Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Bowerman) has his budget reduced by 

$2 million. The tourist industry, however, boldly is going to go out and they are going to construct three 

new reception centres. Isn’t that nice! I suppose one on a road south, east and west, to introduce to the 

Province the new people who are expected to flock in here. 

 

The small businessmen and the farmers have very little to 



 

February 9, 1973 

 

 

557 

be pleased about in this Budget. It is obvious from an early perusal that there is practically nothing to 

please them or to give them cheer. The only thing that we can expect out of the Government is a new 

name. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Cowley, despite the fact that the people are leaving the province, says that people are no 

longer leaving in droves. I have no doubt that the Premier will call a Cabinet meeting, or perhaps a 

committee, to try to find out a new name to identify those numerous people who leave Saskatchewan. 

They may call it leaving in herds, but obviously the word ‘droves’ is no longer part of the New 

Democratic Party lexicon. 

 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I shall have a few more remarks and I shall attempt if I can to find 

something good about this Budget, because if doesn’t please me to harp about these things at all. It suits 

us, in the Liberal Party, far better to be positive about these things. It suits us far better to look forward 

to a glowing tomorrow and, therefore, I shall make every effort to find something good in this Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Whether my efforts are thwarted or not, Mr. Speaker, I should like to continue my 

remarks on Monday and, therefore, beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:33 o’clock p.m. 


