



















































Hansard: February 02, 1973


 

 

 

223 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

7th Day 

 

Friday, February 2, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

WORDING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Throughout the last few years there has been discussion as to the proper form of a 

Resolution in regard to preambles. I refer Hon. Members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and 

Forms, Fourth edition, 1958, page 165. 

 

A substantive motion is a self-contained proposal submitted for the approval of the House and drafted 

in such a way as to be capable of expressing a decision of the House. 

 

And further on page 166: 

 

A motion should not be argumentative and in the style of a speech nor should it contain unnecessary 

provisions or objectionable words. Motions are usually expressed in the affirmative, even where their 

purpose and effect are negative. 

 

Further in Bourinot’s Rules of Order, Revised by J.G. Dubroy, page 28: 

 

A preamble is objectionable in any motion or proposed resolution. When a motion is agreed to, it 

becomes a resolution. It is a common practice to prefix preambles to a set of resolutions, but it is at 

variance with correct parliamentary usage, and can be easily avoided by a careful framing of a motion. 

 

I want to emphasize to all Hon. Members that a preamble is argumentative and is not to be part of a 

motion. Certainly arguments can be offered during the debate on the motion but should not be part of the 

motion. 

 

After very careful consideration of Resolutions Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10, as they appear in the Routine 

Proceedings and Orders of the Day, I rule that the said Resolutions do contain preambles. Any 

irregularity in a Resolution renders the whole Resolution irregular. (Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 

and Forms, Fourth Edition, 1958, page 167.) On the other hand, by means of small amendments, the 

irregularities in the above mentioned Resolutions can be corrected. (See previous rulings in Journals of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, March 5, 1952, page 125; March 17, 1970, page 97 and 

August 10, 1971, page 33.) 

 

For the above reasons, I will amend the Resolutions as follows: 

 

Resolution (No.4) — delete the word “supports” and 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

224 

substitute the words “press for.” 

 

Resolution (No.5) — delete the words “in recognition of its concern about the disruptions to grain and 

livestock producers resulting from unstable feed grain prices and serious shortages of feed grains.” 

 

Resolution (No.6) — delete the words “deploring inequitable freight rates which burden Saskatchewan 

industry.” 

 

Resolution (No.7) — delete the words “recognizing its serious concern at the plight of our senior 

citizens.” 

 

Resolution (No.9) — delete the words “recognizing the inherent instability in world grain prices and 

markets, and the disrupting effect this instability has on the remainder of agriculture and the provincial 

economy.” 

 

Resolution (No. 10) — delete the words “regrets to learn of” and substitute the word “opposes”. 

 

I shall ask the Clerk to make these corrections and print them accordingly so that the Members can be 

prepared when the Resolutions do come up. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. D.W. Michaluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to 

the Hon. Members of this Assembly three groups of high school students, some 150 in number, from the 

three high schools in the Blaine Lake School Unit, seated in the west gallery and the Speaker’s Gallery. 

Leask and Marcelin High Schools are on the periphery of my constituency and the Shellbrook 

constituency, while the Blaine Lake Composite High School is within my constituency. 

 

In the Marcelin group, Mr. Speaker, I recognize many familiar faces as it was in this school that I spent 

the last four years of my teaching profession and I have had the privilege of instructing some of them. I 

did have the privilege of substitute teaching in the Leask High School after my retirement so there are 

some familiar faces there also. Mr. Wayne Wilte who is accompanying the Marcelin group was on the 

teaching staff at Marcelin at that same time. I want, Mr. Speaker, to extend a particular welcome to Mr. 

Ken Kulrick, principal of Blaine Lake Composite High School and his group from Blaine Lake and the 

surrounding area. In this group are some students from the village where I reside, the village of Krydor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome the entire group here today. It is my sincere hope that they will profit in an 

informative and educational sense from their trip to the capital city and this Legislature. Undoubtedly, 

Mr. Speaker, their presence here this afternoon will give each one of them an insight into our democratic 

process. It is my wish and hope that their return home will be safe. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my privilege this afternoon 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

225 

to welcome that same group of students to the Assembly. The students are from the Shellbrook 

constituency as the Hon. Member from Redberry has indicated. At least two of the schools are in the 

constituency of Shellbrook. I am sorry to say that I was unable to meet them prior to their coming to the 

Assembly this afternoon. Perhaps that privilege will be extended to me when they leave the Chamber 

and I shall have an opportunity to speak with them. 

 

It is not often that the Shellbrook constituency is represented here in the galleries during the sessions. 

Our constituency is somewhat removed from the capital city and the efforts that are required to be here 

are considerably greater than for those who are in closer proximity. I am pleased that the students and 

those who accompanied them this afternoon made this special effort to be here. I am pleased and 

delighted to be associated with them and to welcome them to the Chamber. 

 

I want to wish, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure all Members of the House want to wish the students a safe 

journey home and that their trip will have been considered by them both to have been a challenging and 

informative afternoon in the Legislature of the Province of Saskatchewan. We bid them a safe journey 

home and an early return. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.R. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, once again I have the honor of welcoming through 

you, Sir, another group of 75 high school students from Melville. These 75 students are seated in the 

Speaker’s Gallery to the north. 

 

Yesterday we had Grade Eight students from St. Henry’s High School from Melville and today, once 

again, we have another group under the supervision of the very same Bob Reid and also two other 

teachers, the Art teacher, Miss Koltan and the French teacher, Mr. Peter Johnston to supervise them. 

They have brought another group of 75 students here today from St. Henry’s. I want to welcome these 

75 Grade Nine students from St. Henry’s Separate High School from Melville. 

 

Many of these students attending here today and yesterday were from the Melville School Unit. I had the 

honor of being a member of that Board for a total of 13 years. Also, all of these students next year will 

be attending the Melville Comprehensive School, the school that serves all the students in the Fourth 

Division in the Melville area including the Melville Unit, the Melville Public School and the Melville St. 

Henry’s. 

 

I am certain these Grade Nine students are looking forward with great zeal and great interest to get to 

Grade Ten at the Melville Comprehensive School. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all Members of this Legislature welcome these 75 students and the staff 

with the sincere hope that this afternoon will be concrete evidence of how democracy works and how 

the elected Members contribute to its functioning for the betterment of the people of Saskatchewan. We 

want to wish them a good educational afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and a good, safe trip back home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

226 

QUESTIONS 
 

EXPENSES OF SPECIAL INTERSESSIONAL COMMITTEES 
 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I can ask the 

Premier if he would give us a commitment in regard to Orders for Return 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24. I will 

tell him what those are. These are the Orders for Return giving us the information in regard to the 

Intersessional Legislative Committees as to cost, their makeup and especially the total cost. The reason 

we need this as quickly as possible — we just got this Interim Report on the Special Committee on 

Welfare and it is a disgrace. I am sure they held 37 meetings, heard 200 briefs, spent unknown 

thousands of dollars and there is nothing in it. If this is the best we can get out of a whole year of these 

committees, it is absolutely a waste of taxpayers’ money. 

 

We have two Members on this committee and it didn’t follow the terms of reference. This report is an 

absolute disgrace. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! We can’t have a debate on asking a question. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Member asks for a commitment. I have reviewed 

those Orders. They haven’t been ordered by the Legislature yet. The Legislature can’t order them in that 

particular form since they ask all the people who attended the meetings and I am advised that nobody 

kept a count of all the members of the public who may have attended a particular meeting so we can’t 

pass them in this form. If we make that amendment and I have amendments prepared ready to move at 

the appropriate time, then my information from the Clerk is that this information is available and we will 

be happy to supply it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Interim Report of the Committee on Welfare is on the Order Paper and I 

would suggest the Hon. Member debate the shortcomings or otherwise of that particular committee’s 

report at that time at the appropriate occasion. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon 

Nutana South) and the amendment thereto by Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie). 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate yesterday, I had passed my 

compliments and congratulations to the three new Cabinet Ministers, to the Member from Athabasca 

(Mr. Guy) and I had dealt for a few minutes on what I considered the shortcomings of the Opposition. 

 

I should now like to turn to the Speech from the Throne and look at it in some detail; examine it in light 

of the needs and the aspirations of the people of Touchwood and how it will affect them. After reading 

the Speech over I am convinced it will go 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

227 

down in history as one of the great ones on the record of our province. 

 

Touchwood constituency which I represent is widely diversified in its people, in its geography and in 

what it produces. We have extremely good wheat lands in the Cupar plains, through to the beautiful 

rolling Touchwood Hills with all its early history, through to the Beaver Hills north of Ituna and on out 

to Theodore. Here are the mixed farms with many herds of cattle and hogs. The whole area through the 

years has been a reasonably sure moisture area. And here we have citizens that originated from every 

country of Europe. A real Canadian mosaic and one that I am proud of. 

 

Over the years this has been a small farm area, but in recent years because of short-sighted policy and 

successive Liberal and Conservative governments, more and more of these small farms have found their 

backs to the wall and have been forced to leave the land to go to the cities and start a new life. 

 

For many years governments and their programs, both federal and provincial, have assisted and 

encouraged this trend. They have worshipped at the shrine of bigness and of economic units. If we are to 

be a happy, vibrant, prosperous nation we must have farm policies that make this possible. If the 

traditional family farm is to survive, governments must immediately bring in programs to stop this 

exodus of the young people and encourage and assist the smaller farmers to diversify. In the end this 

will not cost society a cent, but rather it will be an investment. People working and producing food for a 

hungry world will enrich our society much, much more than people on welfare and it will also enrich the 

lives and the minds of the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Speech from the Throne and its contents in the light of what I have said 

and how it affects my constituency, I also look at it in the light of the election program of the New Deal 

for People that I and all New Democratic candidates went to the voters of Saskatchewan on. When I do 

this I am pleased with the document. As a democratic socialist of which I am proud I see the beginnings 

of our program. I also see programs that I believe will help solve some of Touchwood’s problems. Let 

me point out to this House just a few of them. 

 

The first I see is the FarmStart program. This program operated in conjunction with the Land Bank will 

begin to reverse the trend of few young people entering the business of farming. I do not say it will be a 

cure-all, but I believe it will be an assist. I see that it is a way for many present small farmers to stabilize 

their operations and in general make a more healthy farm community. When I talk of the farm 

community, I not only mean the farmers but I include the villages, the towns and the business people 

that serve our farmers. They are completely dependent on the economic welfare of the agricultural sector 

and when farmers prosper they prosper. When times are hard they suffer as well as the farmer and in 

some ways even worse. 

 

I see that plans are afoot to strengthen the hog marketing commission. Here is another step in the right 

direction. For years we have had the situation of fluctuation in the price of pork as the demand or the 

lack of demand of the product went. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

228 

As long as I can remember the price of pork has gone from one extreme to the other. If we were to get 

into the world market and in particular the Asian market, then the source of production must be uniform. 

I believe that a hog marketing commission is a step in the right direction. 

 

Farmers will appreciate anything that can be done in assuring the availability of machinery repair parts 

and warranty performance. In recent years one of the chief complaints I hear is often the long wait on 

repairs, also on the problem of getting proper warranty service. I am glad that this is mentioned in the 

Speech from the Throne. It is a national disgrace in my opinion. Surely when a farmer buys a $10,000 or 

a $20,000 machine, he should be able to get some good service for it. I only wish a provincial 

government had the power to do something about the prices of machinery and repairs. 

 

I see in the Speech from the Throne a new program to assist senior citizens to repair and improve the 

home. This has been long needed and will be a popular program. 

 

I am proud to see that plans are afoot to conserve every foot of forest products in the North. After the 

tour in 1970 that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) who was then the Provincial Treasurer, 

arranged for some MLAs to go through the pulp wood area, I was convinced that something drastic had 

to be done. The absolute waste that I saw was sickening. The people of this province have too big an 

investment in their natural resources to see them squandered. If there was one thing that defeated the 

Liberal Government in 1971 it was the resource giveaway and the resource waste. It is only a 

government like that government which worshipped at the shrine of international corporate enterprise 

that would succumb to such a disgraceful policy. 

 

With all the talk of fuel shortage in the world and with some 99 per cent of oil reserves in this country in 

the hands of a few oil companies, I welcome the announcement of the establishment of a Crown 

corporation to take part in the exploration for gas and oil. I hope this is one way of assuring that the 

people of this province will be protected in fuel supplies. I, for one, hope that in the future it can be 

extended into the production field as well. 

 

The announcement of further steps to reduce property taxes for school purposes will be welcome. Tax 

rates under the previous government grew and grew. Some of the local governments of Touchwood saw 

an increase from 1964 to 1971 of up to 20 mills. This news of large sums of money for local government 

plus increased Property Improvement Grants is another step in implementing a New Deal for People. 

 

For many years New Democrats have talked of the necessity of bringing in legislation to control the 

expenses of candidates of political parties. I am pleased that this will be done and this is another step to 

fulfil the New Deal for People. 

 

For 100 years the two old parties have been able to use the slush funds of corporations and special 

privileged groups. Ordinary citizens’ rights have often been forgotten in the face of listening to these 

groups. The old adage of, ‘He who pays the piper calls the tune’ is still true. Mr. Speaker, this Speech 

from the Throne is an example of what a people’s 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

229 

government that owes no allegiance to special groups can do. I am proud to be a part of this Government 

and to be taking part in seeing that both legislation and programs are what the people of Touchwood and 

in Saskatchewan want. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to what I have always done ever since I have been a Member 

representing Touchwood and review conditions in Touchwood in the last year. It is a rural constituency 

depending on agriculture and I must say that the finances of farmers have been a bit better the last year. 

Good cattle prices, free sale of grain and they have been able to payoff a few debts. But let me tell you 

the economic squeeze is still on. There are still farmers forced to leave the land. You will see auction 

sales this fall again. We need new programs to assist and I think that one of those programs is the Land 

Bank. I am not alone in this, I want to quote from an editorial from the Western Producer on January 

25th in part: 

 

The Saskatchewan Government is to be commended for making this positive move which is designed 

to facilitate the transfer of farm land from one generation to the next. The Land Bank system is an 

important measure which in effect introduces a major readjustment of the land tenure system we have 

known in this country since the first days of settlement. In the past two decades or so there have been 

growing doubts about the old system and its effectiveness in maintaining the family farm structure. 

 

They said the program for financing young farmers is going to be a good one. It is certainly going to 

need better and more technical advice. 

 

I want to express the appreciation of those people from villages and towns from Ituna to Semans who 

this year got natural gas. It was a long seven years of Liberal Government that they waited and they had 

promised them and again promised. I want to say how much we appreciate it. 

 

I am happy to see that the Cupar Nursing Home which is nearing completion will be, I believe, taking in 

guests by early April. Now, with the new criteria, I am hopeful that we can have some more of these in 

Touchwood and I know that the area of Ituna is already working on it. 

 

I want to speak on behalf of the hospital in Lestock, the need for updating this hospital. I hope that when 

the Budget comes in that there will be something for this. 

 

I want to turn for a moment or two, Mr. Speaker, to our native people. There is still a great need to assist 

these people. I am hoping that in the coming year that we may see an industrial school at Punnichy with 

the co-operation of the Federal Government, the Provincial Government and the Govan School unit. 

There is a great need to find employment, to start local industry, to involve the native people themselves. 

I want to also congratulate the Métis society in the building of the Lestock home. It was practically an 

all local effort done mostly by people who were untrained. It was a real “good training project. It might 

have cost a few more dollars than if you had employed an outside contractor and skilled labor but I do 

believe that it was a worthwhile training project. There is great need of upgrading and giving technical 

training and then finding 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

230 

employment for these people. If not what will happen? What is going to happen to democracy? I should 

like to ask a few questions. 

 

Have we got democracy? If so, will it survive? If it isn’t surviving what can we do to revive it? What 

happens if we don’t act on it now? I want to suggest to this House, Mr. Speaker, there is one word that is 

mouthed, used and abused and it is the word ‘democracy’. We use the word as though it was something 

accomplished. I am not saying that we haven’t a degree of democracy and I am not certain that we will 

ever achieve the ideal, but I am saying that we have not got it anywhere in the world to my knowledge. 

Immediately someone will say that we do have the right to vote, to choose our representatives, to govern 

ourselves. I will not argue that too much, except to say that the candidates or the political party which 

has the most money is more liable to win. Also as long as we allow lobbyists with their money and their 

privileges to operate, there will be no real voting democracy either. 

 

But there is more to democracy than voting. As long as there is no economic or racial freedom in our 

society there will be no real democracy. In fact I am not sure that the little democracy that we have will 

survive unless drastic action is implemented and implemented soon. Throughout the world the rich are 

getting richer, the poor are getting poorer. Our mass media is getting faster and faster. We now can see 

to a greater degree than ever before how the other half of the world lives. If something is not done to 

narrow the gap between the haves and the have-nots then I am afraid there will be uprisings and strife 

and rebellion by the underdogs and we shall be to blame. Unless we of the more advanced nations can 

find a way to get our surplus food, medicine, etc., to those countries that are hungry and sick the time 

may come when they will come and take it from us. Let no one say we can’t afford it. We, in the 

western world, can find money to build aeroplanes and bombs, produce our sons and daughters for 

cannon fodder, let us not say we cannot be our brother’s keeper. We call ourselves a Christian society. I 

say we are a disgrace to the Christian philosophy. How many of us would sacrifice our nice homes, our 

new car, our weekends at the lake, our three weeks holidays or any other of our modern conveniences 

that we take for granted. 

 

I ask how many of us really never see the color of the skin of those we meet? Or never stop to think of 

what the person’s religious or ideological belief is. Or how financially successful that person is. I don’t 

claim to be blameless, but unless society is prepared to bury its prejudices, we never can expect to come 

close to achieving true democracy. 

 

Let us not forget that the white man came to America, took over the land from the natives by force, stole 

their women and herded the natives onto reserves and has exploited them ever since. Mr. Speaker, I am 

worried at the reaction of our society to the underprivileged. More and more their attitudes are 

hardening, more and more they are suggesting tougher and tougher remedies. I want to suggest there 

must be patience, understanding and assistance. 

Today in some of the larger areas of our country there are now third and fourth generation welfare 

recipients. Children who grew up in the morass of poverty and unemployment have little chance to 

improve themselves. In my opinion governments must 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

231 

act now. They must bring employment, must improve housing, education and find a way to lift the 

unfortunate. Otherwise, we in Canada, will face the problems of Little Rock, Birmingham, Watts, 

Chicago or Washington. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that I have been sermonizing. I make no apologies. I have spent a lifetime fighting 

for the democratic process. I still have faith and optimism in that we can achieve this goal as a reality. 

We must be prepared to change in this new technological age, change to meet the new needs and the 

new techniques. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because this Speech from the Throne is aimed at some of the things I have been talking 

about, and I see the possibilities of improving our lot in our society, I will be opposing the amendment 

and I will be Supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, my first words must be to congratulate the NDP 

Members from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) and Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) for a good presentation in 

moving and seconding this Motion. I should also like to congratulate my colleague, Mr. Allan Guy, for a 

well deserved win in Athabasca and we welcome him back to this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the last session of the Legislature no Government program has received as much 

attention as the Land Bank. The rural people of this province have been subjected to a constant barrage 

of NDP propaganda which has been expensive, contradictory, misleading and deceitful. The purpose of 

this campaign was to promote and to salvage from disaster a plan that is basically unsound, and as a 

result of this campaign, the people of this province are confused as to the motives, objectives and 

operation of the Land Bank scheme. Most people suspect that the plan is costly, inefficient and harmful 

to our rural way of life but the details are often lacking. 

 

I should like to review the history of the Land Bank from the time it was first conceived until the 

present, in the hope that the details will be more clearly understood. 

 

Now we are not sure when the NDP first decided to take over the farm land of Saskatchewan. We know, 

for example, that at NDP conventions in recent years this has been one of the major issues. From the 

1969 convention we note: “A resolution aimed at eventual public ownership of farm land was passed 

Thursday by an agricultural panel at the Saskatchewan NDP convention.” At this and later NDP 

conventions, the pattern became clear. A great majority of the NDP were in favor of a takeover of farm 

land, but a battle developed between the Union people and the Wafflers on one side, who wanted 

publicly to make their intentions known, and another more politically minded group who also wanted to 

take over the land, but wanted to do it in a more discreet and subversive manner. At the 1969 convention 

the fight was chiefly between the Trade Unionists, such as Len Wallace, an NDP delegate from Regina 

East, against the political people, such as John Burton, Jack Messer and Alf Gleave. 

 

After the NDP became the Government, the battle continued. The Unionists, now joined by the Wafflers 

said, “Let’s be 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

232 

honest and say publicly that our intention is to own and control the farm land and the farmers.” The 

politicians wanted the NDP Government to own and control the land but were afraid to say so publicly. 

 

Reports of their 1971 convention were a little more explicit and revealed such information as follows: 

“A motion to delete the option to buy clause was made by William Gilbey, former President of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour.” John Gordon of Moosomin, a Waffler, quoted Agricultural 

Minister Messer as saying that during a closed panel discussion, that he would (that is Mr. Messer) 

would see to it that the Government made leasing of the land more attractive than the option to purchase. 

 

Speaking of the option to buy, Don Faris, MLA for Arm River, and I am glad to see that he is in his seat, 

was reported in the Leader-Post as saying that our Government could fail on that. The Liberals could 

come out with an option and destroy us at the next election. The tone or their dispute can be noted by the 

report that tempers began to show with Don Mitchell a Waffle spokesman, telling Mr. Kramer to sit 

down and shut up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — They compromised, Mr. Speaker, by referring in the Bill to selling after five years, 

but in no way is it an option to buy. My purpose in supplying this background is to make one point 

perfectly clear to start with. Some NDP have stated publicly, some privately, but they agree in principle. 

The NDP in Saskatchewan wants to take over the farm lands of the province and wants to have the land 

owned by the state. Let everyone, Mr. Speaker, be clear on that point, because it is the NDP philosophy 

in the Land Bank system. In order to make it sound better the present Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) keeps saying that he is changing the land tenure system of Saskatchewan which is simply a 

more acceptable way of saying that he is grabbing all the farm land he can get for the socialist state. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — With the NDP objective now clear in our minds we can examine the methods they 

have used and plan on using to accomplish their goal of state ownership of the farms. They had several 

schemes in mind. First the Estate Tax legislation passed by the NDP last year will make it difficult for 

farm land to be passed on to sons and daughters. This break-up of family farms will make it easier for 

the NDP to get control of the land. Second, the Foreign Ownership Bill would prevent an elderly farmer 

from leaving his land to someone in a neighboring province and would prevent any farmer from selling 

land outside the province thus restricting his market and putting him at the mercy of NDP land buyers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Third, the former Liberal Government had a policy of selling presently held Crown 

land to needy farmers. Hundreds 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

233 

of thousands of acres were sold but the NDP put an immediate stop to this policy in order to keep the 

land in the hands of the NDP Government. Fourth, Mr. Speaker, one of the most vicious schemes by the 

NDP to promote the Land Bank has become obvious in the past few months. The Federal Small Farm 

Development program is a plan to help transfer land directly from an older retiring farmer to a younger 

needy farmer. At this time I should like to tell you basically what the Federal plan proposes to do. First, 

retiring farmers would be granted a cash subsidy in addition to the regular selling price if they sold to a 

needy young farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The buyer of the land, Mr. Speaker, must not have assets of over $60,000 which 

means he is a relatively small farmer in this day and age. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Third, Mr. Speaker, the buyer will not be required to mortgage the farm he already 

owns in order to buy additional land. This is very, very important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Arrangements may be made for the retiring seller to continue to use the farm home   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: —   again, Mr. Speaker, there is no rental involved, there is a direct transfer of ownership 

from the retiring farmer to the younger needy farmer. This is basically, Mr. Speaker, the essence of the 

Federal farm plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Alberta signed this agreement last July, Ontario in August, other provinces followed 

suit. Benefits of the Federal plan are now available in six provinces in Canada. Another thing we should 

note that the plans are almost identical in all provinces. I have details of agreements with all these 

provinces. Everyone of these agreements states that land will be sold only to purchasers with assets of 

less than $60,000 or in effect small farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Agriculture have 

known this for at least seven months and probably longer because the Alberta agreement was signed and 

made public last July. However, they have deliberately misled the farmers of Saskatchewan by 

continually referring to the Federal plan as selling to the highest bidder or helping only the larger 

farmers. Mr. Speaker, in all the conflicting and misleading statements made by Mr. Messer in the past 

year regarding the two farm plans only once did he state his true intentions. I am going to quote from the 

Leader-Post September 15, 1972 — we are speaking of Mr. Messer: 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

234 

The Agriculture Minister said that during the negotiations with the Federal Government one of the 

factors Saskatchewan has insisted on, is first right to purchase from Ottawa, land that the Federal plan 

purchases from Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

I ask you to note Mr. Messer’s statement very carefully because it clearly establishes the NDP position 

regarding our farm land. He is saying in effect, Mr. Speaker, the NDP do not like the Federal plan 

because it transfers ownership of land directly from a retiring farmer to a younger needy farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Messer is saying that the NDP will have nothing unless they agree to buy the land 

socialist state instead of selling to do with the Federal plan and turn it over to the NDP it to a needy 

young farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The NDP, Mr. Speaker, have thus made their position very clear. The Minister of 

Agriculture and the Premier have deliberately, knowingly and callously stalled the Federal plan in 

Saskatchewan and thus have prevented our young farmers from enjoying its benefits the same as young 

farmers in other parts of Canada. They have sacrificed the needs of our young farmers in order to 

promote their own socialist land grab scheme in Saskatchewan. Of all of the crimes committed by the 

socialists, none is more despicable than this, they will stand condemned by the rural people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A case came to my attention last week, Mr. Speaker, of a needy young couple who had been saving to 

buy the farm of a retiring neighbor. They milked cows, kept poultry and hogs, deprived themselves of 

basic necessities trying to save money to make a down payment on this neighboring farm which they 

were renting at the time. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Trying to make a down payment! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — A few weeks ago the Land Bank Commission came along — Mr. Messer’s Land 

Bank — bought this farm for a big price and cancelled their lease. Their hopes are dashed. There is no 

other land available nearby to purchase, they could not compete with the NDP Land Bank which has an 

unlimited amount of taxpayers’ money available. If the Federal plan had been available, Mr. Speaker, 

young farm families like the one above could acquire land they need to make a decent living. 

Opportunities to purchase by these needy people are being missed every day. The blame for this 

situation can be placed squarely on the shoulders of Mr. Messer and his NDP colleagues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: —There is no doubt, no doubt in the world, Mr. Speaker, NDP are deliberately stalling 

the Federal plan so that they can grab the land for themselves. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

235 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Federal Government would soon put in the plan on 

its own and at least give these young farmers some small chance of competing with this free-spending, 

land hungry bunch of socialists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been listing the ways in which the NDP have planned to get control of the farm land 

of Saskatchewan. I have listed the Estate Tax legislation, the Foreign Ownership Bill, the NDP freeze on 

the sale of present Crown land and the deliberate stalling of the federal plan. Finally, of course, we must 

look at the direct method of acquiring land, the Land Bank itself. Our Liberal Members have effectively 

made their case against the Land Bank here in the House last year. I am not going into details again of 

these arguments. I will, however, show some of the ways in which this legislation is designed to acquire 

and keep this land for the socialist state. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, all of the Land Bank officials from the commissioners, 

district board counsellors, appraisers, etc., are hired or appointed by the NDP. No representatives of 

farm organizations, no freely elected people are involved, all are directly under the thumb of the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The possibilities of political interference in land purchases and land rental are 

obvious. You may have noticed, Mr. Speaker, ads in the paper when they were looking for counsellors 

and commissioners. I have the one here, Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission, looking for a chairman 

— $16,000 to $20,000 a year. Vice-chairman up to $18,000 a year. Part-time commissioners, $75 a day 

and they will get in addition to this, expenses. Now I am sure the farmers listening, Mr. Speaker, will 

agree that $75 a day for a part-time job is a better wage than most farmers get for running their combine 

or baling hay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The Bill, Mr. Speaker, gives the Minister fantastic powers to make regulations 

regarding the land purchase. For example, Section 67, subsection (f) says that the Minister can make 

regulations respecting the management and control of commission land, which means in effect that they 

can tell the renter how he must farm, what he can grow, when he has to summer fallow and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have no intention of ever selling any of this land to a renter. They have carefully 

provided for this in the Bill. I would ask the people of this province very carefully to look at the Land 

Bank Bill. First, they say that no land can be sold for five years. Now this, of course, Mr. Speaker, 

conveniently puts them past the time of the next provincial election and if they were re-elected they 

could immediately bring in an amendment to extend the period for five or ten years again. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

236 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The only chance the farmer has of buying the land is to hope that the Liberals will be 

elected in 1975, as we will sell the land back to him if he wants it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Now the NDP also protect themselves from ever selling, they also protect themselves 

by stating that they can set the price at the time of sale. There is no independent board, there is no option 

to buy at a specific price, no appeal from the price that is set by the Land Bank, which means, of course, 

that they can set a price so ridiculously high no one can ever buy. They have also stated that they will 

sell for cash only. Obviously if a person meets their qualification to rent the land in the first place it is 

unlikely that he is going to be in a position to buy for cash a few years later. 

 

Rents may be raised by the Land Bank, the renter will be forced to pay this increased rent or get off the 

land. Rents are cash, bear no relationship to crop yields, markets, prices or anything else. Thus we see 

that the whole plan is loaded in favor of the NDP Government. We should also note that a vast amount 

of public funds will be needed to supply and satisfy this socialist craving for our farm land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — They have already spent over $10 million and they predict themselves that in a few 

years it could surpass $100 million. This money must come from the pockets of the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, how do they intend to get this? They have already raised the income tax 

rate twice in the last year and a half, where we didn’t raise it in the previous seven years. I hope that 

every wage earner, every farmer and every merchant in this province when he is filling out his income 

tax form in the next few months will remember that his tax is much greater because of the actions of the 

Blakeney Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — At this time, Mr. Speaker, we should perhaps reaffirm our position regarding the basic 

philosophy of the Land Bank plan. We recognize that there are times when a farmer might find it 

advantageous to rent some farm land and I want to make this clear, perhaps when he is getting 

established or he may at some period have extra help or extra machinery which he may utilize efficiently 

on some rented land. We believe that a farmer’s ultimate goal should be to own at least part of the land 

he operates. We are opposed to a system whereby the state owns and controls the land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — We are opposed to a system where the farmer is merely a tenant or a serf tied to the 

land by a government lease, where he toils for the socialist state all of his productive years 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

237 

and leaves at 65 with nothing; where a farmer is deprived, Mr. Speaker, of the pride of ownership in his 

own land, where he has no incentive to improve his surroundings because they simply don’t belong to 

him. We are opposed to a plan where a farmer cannot retire with dignity because he has no land to sell. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Every small town in Saskatchewan has many retired people, retired farmers or 

widows of farmers who are living now on the proceeds of a farm that was sold at a price much higher 

than they paid for the farm years ago. Everyone living in rural Saskatchewan knows this to be a fact, but 

under the NDP land tenure system of Mr. Messer this will simply be no longer possible. The 

Government will own the land, there will be no land to sell. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Any increase in the value of land, and this could well happen over the years, will go 

to the Government, not to the retiring farmer or to the farm widow. Under Mr. Messer’s plan if a farmer 

dies at age 60 or 65 his widow will have no land to sell because he has been merely a renter and she may 

well be left with nothing. The Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, refers to his new system of land 

tenure. This system, of course, is not new. Many of the people living in Saskatchewan today or their 

fathers or grandfathers came to our province to escape just such a land tenure system as Mr. Messer is 

now proposing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — They came from Europe, from Poland, Ukraine, Scotland, Germany, dozens of other 

countries because in Saskatchewan the could have a chance to own their own piece of land. Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Messer is trying to turn the clock back 200 years with his new land tenure plan and the rural people 

of Saskatchewan will not accept it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — We have looked at the motives behind the Land Bank, the methods used to promote it, 

we have indicated our reasons for opposing it. We have traced the history of its development until about 

the time of the last session. Now let us conclude by examining what has happened in the past few 

months. 

 

The Land Bank offered to buy land and received a large number of applications from sellers, who sensed 

that the NDP may be paying a big price with government funds. This continued throughout the summer. 

The socialists were feeling pretty good, they had land available to buy, they had an unlimited amount of 

taxpayers’ money to buy it with. But there was one catch, no one wanted to rent. Mr. Messer had gone 

on record clearly and stated last spring that the plan would be self-supporting. The rent charged would 

cover the interest paid to buy the land. He was sure of this, he set the rental rate at 6 1/2 per cent, he 

published it in the Gazette to make it official. Everyone in the province knew what they had in mind. 

Now our Liberal Members 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

238 

told him that he wouldn’t get any renters at 6 1/2 per cent   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: —   no one would rent and we were proved correct. 

 

The months went by in the summer and in the fall of 1972, Mr. Messer and Mr. Blakeney were 

becoming desperate. They couldn’t keep buying millions of dollars worth of farm land unless they had 

someone to rent it to, and there were no renters. It appeared that the Land Bank scheme would be a 

complete failure before it really got going. By last December, the Minister of Agriculture was faced with 

an alarming choice, first he could let the Land Bank plan fail or he could bail it out by subsidizing the 

rental rate with huge sums of public money. The decision was made more urgent as the Legislative 

Session was fast approaching. The Minister stalled, and finally he completely reversed his previous 

stand — and this may not have been that difficult for the Minister of Agriculture — and then he 

announced on January 15th, just before the Legislature met, that public funds would be used to subsidize 

the rental rates and it would be reduced to 5 per cent of the purchase price. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, saved the Land Bank from disaster by producing the renters he needed to get it 

started. Perhaps even a greater influence was the fact that the prices for grain were rising and there were 

possible renters available. This put a little sugar coating on the pill for the renter but it didn’t change the 

philosophy of the Land Bank. In addition to the objections I mentioned before, it is an inefficient plan 

which will have to be constantly supported by huge amounts of taxpayers’ money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Blakeney on several occasions in the past and earlier in this debate has indicated that 

this Land Bank system will not reduce the number of farmers in the province, which, of course, is 

ridiculous. Every time the Land Bank buys land from a retiring farmer and leases it to an existing farmer 

he has, of course, reduced the number of farmers. This is another example of the Premier misleading the 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Some strange reports are already coming in, Mr. Speaker, of the way the Land Bank 

transactions are operating. I am just going to give you one or two quick examples. 

 

A farm worth about $34,000 was purchased by the Land Bank for over $50,000. A neighbor brought to 

my attention that a potential renter would be much better off paying 6 1/2 per cent of the true value, 

rather than 5 per cent of this inflated price. 

 

A farmer who had been advertising his land for sale at $27,000 couldn’t find a buyer. He had it 

appraised by the Land Bank and they gave him $30,000. Obviously a misuse of public funds. 

 

An elderly gentleman told me last weekend that he sold his land to the NDP Land Bank for a big price. I 

asked him what he was going to do with the money and he replied that he was going to buy more land. 

He said, “You know, with a scheme like this 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

239 

going I don’t want to miss out,” and he told me with a twinkle in his eye, “I may decide to retire again 

next summer.” 

 

In order to verify the accuracy of the information we receive, we have asked the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Messer) if he will have his Land Bank officials supply Members of the Legislature with details of 

Land Bank transactions. Public money is being spent and we are the representatives of the public. Mr. 

Messer arrogantly refused to comply with our request when I asked him this question in the House. 

Apparently our only chance of getting this information is to put hundreds of written questions, which 

may sit unanswered on the Order Paper for weeks, months or years. 

 

Even in its early stages, the Land Bank is obviously inefficient. Its future is unpredictable. We know that 

it will result in a large portion of our farm land being owned by the state. From comments made by the 

Minister and other socialists, we can suspect that they have in mind the establishment of co-op farms or 

state farms, which would compete with free-enterprise farmers who are left. 

 

With the Land Bank they have created a monster which could well destroy our cherished rural way of 

life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — If enough opposition is shown by our rural people and others to this land grab scheme, 

perhaps we can keep the damage to a minimum until the next provincial election when the people will 

have a chance to elect a Liberal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, a Liberal Government would return control, management, and 

ownership of farm land to the farm people where it belongs. 

 

It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will not be supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Flasch (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I am glad that there is so much applause from the 

Members opposite before I start because you don’t know what you will get after you finish. 

 

I should like to start off, Mr. Speaker, by doing some of the traditional things, congratulating the mover 

and seconder of the Address-in-Reply for the excellent job that they did. I should like, too, to 

congratulate the new Members who have been added to the Cabinet and I know that they will do a 

creditable job. And I suppose once more I have to congratulate the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

He is back again and he is back in his true form. Like one of those big bears that he has so many of in 

his constituency, he came lumbering out of the woods and he headed straight for the garbage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

240 

Mr. Flasch: — He really wallowed in it the other day, Mr. Speaker. I should caution him though not to 

take too much consolation from that win, that narrow victory, because if his popularity and the 

popularity of his Party. Doesn’t increase any faster in the next two and a half years than it has in the past 

year and a half, they will be wandering in the political wilderness of this province for a long time to 

come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I should like to say, too, that the Federal Liberals didn’t do very well in the election 

campaign and they certainly did nothing in British Columbia. In the Federal campaign, they elected one 

Member. We are not exactly happy either, we elected only five, but I’ll tell you that’s better than they 

did. I know that it is not much consolation to say that one did five tomes as well as a Liberal in any field 

of endeavor but at least we did do better. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Now it was rather amusing to see the part the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) 

played in the Federal campaign, I remember how before the vote, he went around praising the Prime 

Minister. He said he was the greatest thing that has ever happened to Canada. Here was the man whom 

Canada needed — just what the doctor ordered. And then after their dismal showing in the election, he 

made an about-face and he castigated him at the Liberal convention and he said it was about time he 

listened to the people of Western Canada. I thought for a minute there would be repeated that old 

biblical tale of David and Goliath, Mr. Speaker,. But that’s the Liberals; they say one thing and they do 

another. It is like the character in Richard III, I believe it was who jumped on his horse and rode off in 

all directions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I should like, Mr. Speaker, to caution the Liberals to establish their credibility once 

more among the people of this province. We wouldn’t want to see them vanish entirely from the 

political scene. I can just picture, if they keep on doing what they have been doing lately, what will 

happen in years to come. If you want to see a Saskatchewan Liberal you will have to go to a museum. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Can’t you just picture it, Mr. Speaker,? You walk in and there on the shelf beside the 

great auk and the passenger pigeon stands the last stuffed remains of Saskatchewan Liberalism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: —This is what is going to happen to them if they are not careful. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

241 

The latest move though by the Leader of the Opposition was the best one. The other day he named his 

shady Cabinet, or his shadow Cabinet and, of course, he “sicked” all of his boys on one of the 

Government Departments and he said, “Now you play watchdog.” He himself took the Premier’s office. 

I thought he would have left that for the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy), but he took it on himself. 

The Member from Athabasca knows all the figures and all of the salaries, but he didn’t get the job. But 

that wasn’t the best one; the Leader of the Opposition is going to be critic of the Boundaries 

Commission! That’s a good one! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — He suffered quite a demotion there, Mr. Speaker. He went from architect to critic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — But I’ll tell you one thing, he should know something about it. He knows all the “hooks” 

and he should be pretty good at his job of straightening them out. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for a minute to the economy of this province. Generally 

speaking, the farming economy is much better off lately. Look at the Liberals smile over there and take 

credit for it. I don’t mind. Cattlemen, no doubt, are well off because the price of beef is good. Certainly 

the large grain farmers are not crying right now. But there are many small farmers in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, who are a little bit unhappy and whose position is somewhat precarious. These are the people, 

Mr. Speaker, that a crop failure could certainly hurt. These are the people that according to the Speech 

from the Throne and through the Agricultural Incentives Act are the ones that are going to be helped. I 

certainly hope that the new program FarmStart will help these farmers put together the necessary 

resources to establish a viable economic unit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Now there are many things, of course, that I could comment on in the Speech from the 

Throne. I think it is significant that we are going to establish a Crown corporation for the exploration of 

oil and gas. I don’t see why when we own the resources we shouldn’t be doing something towards their 

development and toward looking for them. Obviously the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t think so, but 

then that really doesn’t matter. He would say that he’s perfectly free in his party to toss millions of 

dollars into Doré Lake but that we shouldn’t gamble with a few bucks in the interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I was rather interested too in his remarks about industrial development. Here one day in his speech he 

says, “I’ve got an alternative,” Yes, Sir, here it comes everybody — I am sure a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan didn’t sleep that night; they were waiting to see what he had. I wasn’t too optimistic, I 

thought perhaps he had another Anglo-Rouyn mine or another pulp mill. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

242 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — But, he had nothing as imaginative as that, Mr. Speaker. He came in here the next day 

all deflated and said the Liberals are going to amend about seven or eight bills. That’s all the 

imagination they have left, Mr. Speaker. That has been the story of the Liberals for the seven years that 

they were in office and that’s been their story ever since. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Mr. Speaker, I think that there is nothing that explains as well or defines as well those 

seven Liberal years in office as does Macbeth’s commentary on life. He described it, Mr. Speaker, as “a 

tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has seen fit to mention in the Speech 

from the Throne the establishment of a hog marketing commission. I think that it is time that the farmers 

in this province can expect to see some stability in prices for the hogs they produce. I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that I buy hogs one time for “two-bits” a pound, the next time 40 cents a pound and just about 

each time that the farmers in our area are raising hogs, the price is down and when they are out, prices 

are up. They are looking, Mr. Speaker, for some stability. The Liberals opposite would deny that to the 

farmers of this province, just as they did, they fought against Wheat Pools and everything else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this Agricultural Incentives Program that I spoke of a minute ago, 

will certainly complement the Land Bank. We just heard a few minutes ago from the Member from 

Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). He stood up in this House and condemned the Land Bank, called it no good, 

just as he has done and the Liberals have done ever since it was introduced into this House. But, I didn’t 

expect a Liberal to support the Land Bank because that’s not the kind of bank that the Liberals know 

anything about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — They likely know something about financial institutions like the other banks, but not the 

Land Bank. I remember last year the Liberals were very inconsistent on their attack on that Bill. The 

Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) and the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) both 

said, “They are going to make sharecroppers out of the farmers.” Then that large Liberal from Lakeview 

(Mr. McPherson) stood up and he intimated or implied, that it was going to be a good plan. He said, 

you’d have to have an NDP membership to get some of that land. There you see them again, Mr. 

Speaker, inconsistent; one says it’s no good, nobody would want the land, and the other says it’s going 

to be reserved for a privileged few. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

243 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — What do you do? Well, Mr. Speaker, the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) stood 

up a while ago, and in his usual fashion he twisted the truth so that no one would recognize it. I 

remember last year when he was speaking. I just thought of it. Somebody over there made the remark 

that some politician had told him one time never to tell the truth where a lie will serve just as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — I have been watching ever since, Mr. Speaker, and I am trying to figure out who is the 

most apt student of that teacher. I think the Member from Moosomin (he has gone out now) just made 

his nomination speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — Mr. Speaker, he compared the small farms program — that Liberal program — with 

ours. I should like to know how, under that program, anybody is going to be established in farming. I 

have a bit of duplicated paper here that says who qualifies for special credit. This is that Liberal plan. It 

says, “To qualify for special credit the buyer must be a Canadian citizen or a landed immigrant when he 

applies; he must be the owner of a farm, or a purchaser under an agreement of sale; or have been a 

tenant for more than three years; or be earning most of his income from the operation of the farm.” It 

doesn’t say anything about helping anybody to establish a farm, Mr. Speaker. Who is going to get into 

agriculture under a plan like that? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for a few minutes — well there is one more thing perhaps I 

should mention before I turn to my constituency. One of the other Liberals in this House — I almost 

forgot about it — the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) got up and attacked the program ‘Open 

Roads’ that we launched. He said that the Liberals should get credit for it. He was going to put the arm 

on that program, Mr. Speaker, and claim it as a Liberal invention. But we won’t give the Liberals credit 

for operation ‘Open Roads’. That was our program. Operation ‘Open Mouth’ maybe, Mr. Speaker, but   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: —   certainly not operation ‘Open Roads’. Now, Mr. Speaker, many of the people in my 

constituency over the years have been retiring to Medicine Hat. The exodus of retired people to 

Medicine Hat has gone on for years and it continues to do so. Many of those people, when they reach 

retirement age settle there and Medicine Hat, I suppose, is a nice city. It is made up largely of people 

who came from the area along the border and this is in no way any fault of the economic situation on the 

farms as maybe the Liberals would like people to believe. Indeed, if anything it speeds the process up 

because the faster they make their money to retire, the sooner they go to Medicine Hat. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are having a problem with keeping our 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

244 

senior citizens in Saskatchewan. Recently in Maple Creek, we did something about that because on 

December 15th the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) was out there and we attended the opening 

of the nursing home, the special care home, Cypress Lodge, in that centre which has been a long time in 

coming. I am happy to say that the Government of this province channelled $116,000 in the direction of 

that institution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flasch: — The people of Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker, are doing something about their senior 

citizens. Right now they are in the process of attempting to find out whether or not there will be 

agreement or interest in that community for the development of a Senior Citizens Housing Program. I 

wish them well in that endeavor. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, the other day, commented on the highways the Liberals were building in 

this province and I would say they did build some good highways. They built lots of them in the Wilkie 

constituency, but none of them, the real dandies, came our way during those seven years of Liberal rule. 

We are not really kicking. We did get some dust-free roads but many of the highways in my 

constituency now need rebuilding. I hope that the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) is listening. We 

do have a few fourteen or fifteen miles that are in urgent need of some dust-free treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must mention the Cypress Hills Park. As you know the focal point of all recreational 

activities in the southwest part of this province is the Cypress Hills Park. It is not in my constituency, 

but I have spoken often with the Member for Shaunavon (Mr. Oliver) who represents that area, and his 

people and those who are in my constituency are very concerned about the state of the skiing facilities 

there at the present time. 

 

Many of the people in Maple Creek have done a lot of work to develop what facilities there are. They do 

have the ski slope and, of course, Cypress Hills is a natural for skiing. It has the elevation and if there is 

snow anywhere in Southern Saskatchewan, certainly there will be snow in the Cypress Hills. But skiing 

enthusiasts have had a difficult time financially. The slope is there; they have a tow rope; they have 

some other machinery, but they are desperately looking for help and they need at least a T-Bar, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I don’t think that every time we want to improve something like this, we should go to a feasibility study 

and spend thousands and thousands of dollars getting some eggheads looking into books and coming up 

with some solution, which takes years to implement. I think that we should go ahead, and I hope that this 

Government will go ahead, and put a T-Bar in there, Mr. Speaker. And if, in later years, they find that 

there is a better location for the ski slope then move it and move the T-Bar. There is no great amount of 

money going to be lost in such a venture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that someone else wants to follow me on the air. I should have liked to have 

elaborated on my trip to the Yukon. I was fortunate enough to go on such a trip this summer, along with 

Mr. Speaker and the Member from Regina 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

245 

North West (Mr. Whelan). Time does not, however, allow me. 

 

The air flight was paid for by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. We looked after our own 

lodging, but I shall have to leave that for another time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that you have gathered by this time that I will support the motion and oppose the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be 

able to enter this debate and I first of all want to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the motion. 

Both of them have made their constituents proud and made all of us proud to be associated with them in 

this Legislature in the fine way they moved the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — May I also take this opportunity publicly and in this Legislature to congratulate three 

of my fellow Members of the Legislature who were appointed to the Cabinet this last May. I must say 

that they are a welcome addition to our ranks, have lightened the load and the work for the rest of us 

and, again, have been a great credit to their constituents and to this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — I cannot let the opportunity pass without extending to the Hon. Member for Athabasca 

(Mr. Guy) congratulations on his re-election in the by-election last September. I am hoping, Mr. 

Speaker, that his contributions to future debates will, in some way, be more constructive than his 

contributions to this debate have been up to this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, here at the beginning of the year 1973 we are in a much happier time 

than we were when the Legislature met in 1972. Economic conditions in Canada and economic 

conditions in Saskatchewan are certainly much improved. The one significant political event of the past 

year has also made a very substantial contribution to our optimism and hope for the future. That is the 

fact that during the Federal election on October 30th last, the people of Canada made clear that they 

were not satisfied with conditions as they existed earlier in 1972. 

 

We have a minority government in office in Ottawa and I ask the Hon. Members to cast their minds 

back to the last few years, going back to 1957 and from that time until this time we have had only two 

majority governments in office in Ottawa, the one of Mr. Diefenbaker’s from 1958 to 1962 and the one 

of Mr. Trudeau’s from 1968 to 1972. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, every citizen of Canada looking back over those years will believe and 

appreciate that Canadian 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

246 

 

citizens by and large got more action out of their Government in Ottawa in everyone of those years 

when there was a minority government in office. I am optimistic about the future for Canada as a result 

of the work of the present Parliament, because I believe a minority government will be much more 

responsive to needs and the desires of Canadian citizens than it ever would have been if there had been a 

majority Liberal Government elected last October. 

 

On the international scene, too, the events of the past year, indeed, the past days, give us much more 

optimism and hope for the future than we would have entertained one year ago. The end of hostilities in 

Indo-China and Vietnam is now surely at hand. I remind the Hon. Members that for more than three 

decades, with the possible exception of the year 1954, there has not been a time when there was not 

active hostilities and war some place in the world. 

 

I remember 1954 because that was the year in which the hostilities previously ended in Indo-China when 

the French forces were defeated at the Dien Bien Phu and unfortunately that peaceful period was 

short-lived and it has taken us all that time, nearly two more decades, to bring the fighting to a stop 

again in Vietnam. We can now look forward with some confidence and hope to a much more peaceful 

world than we have known in recent decades. 

 

In Europe, Great Britain is entering the European Economic Community and that opens up the 

opportunities for trade, not only for the people of Great Britain and Europe, but for those of us who have 

a particular association and particular interest in Great Britain and in Europe. So I am confident that 

economically, politically, in this world and in this nation everything points to a much more hopeful 

future than we could have expected one year ago. 

 

Here, at home, it happens to be a particularly unique year in that we are going to have a number of 

celebrations in Saskatchewan during 1973, beginning with the celebration of the centennial of the 

RCMP. In this year 1973, we are going to have the World Curling Championship, the Silver Broom 

Curling Contest here in Saskatchewan, in Regina, in March of this year. And in July, of course, we are 

happy to note that the Royal couple will be visiting Regina and visiting Saskatchewan to help us 

celebrate the centennial year of our Mounted Police. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just say a word or two about economic conditions in Saskatchewan. I have said that 

this is a much happier time than it was one year ago. I have particularly in mind that some of the story 

has been, first of all, forecast in headlines of our newspapers and as the year rolled on in 1972 some of 

the newspaper stories have clearly indicated the improvements that we have been making in 

Saskatchewan in our economy during the past 12 months. 

 

The Leader-Post on December 28, 1971 had a headline which said that steady economic growth is seen 

for Saskatchewan. I cannot help but refer to a headline which appeared in the Leader-Post a little more 

than one year later, on January 3, 1973, with the dateline from Estevan, which is naturally a place dear 

to my heart as it is my home and because I have the opportunity in this Legislature to represent the 

constituents in Estevan and in the whole constituency of Souris-Estevan. The headline on the 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

247 

story from Estevan on January 3, 1973 said: “Best year for financial returns.” And the lead paragraph is 

that year-end reports from city businessmen indicate 1972 was the best year in history for financial 

returns. And then the story goes on to give some of the details of various business places in the city of 

Estevan and the fact that they had the largest sales and the .greatest volume of business in 1972 in their 

recent experience. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Now that is an indication of how the year began and how it ended. I just want to refer 

Hon. Members, because I know sometimes we tend to forget some of the good things that are happening 

in Saskatchewan, especially to our industries and our businesses. I want to refer to a headline or two 

from various publications taken, not for all of the 12 months, but a random sample so that we can 

remember some of the good things that have happened during 1972. 

 

In March there was a headline in the Star-Phoenix dated March 22, 1972, that “AGRA expands its plant 

to make margarine” and Members will be familiar with that story. There was an interesting headline in 

the Leader-Post of April 11, 1972 which on the face of it might not have been thought to be of any great 

significance, but the Members will remember the discussions and debates that were carried on in this 

Legislature a year ago and so this headline which says, “Burns announces that plant will not close” had a 

final special significance in April 1972. On April 18th in the Globe and Mail there was a story from 

Regina which said, “Interprovincial Steel and Pipe to double output capacity” and it goes on to tell about 

a planned $5 million expansion, which I am happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that that expansion has taken 

place during the year 1972 at Ipsco. 

 

Here is a headline from July 28th in the Leader-Post which says, “Yorkton plant expanded”, and the lead 

line is: “The second expansion program within a year is now under way at the Yorkton based Morris 

Rod Weeder Company.” And another story from Yorkton in the August 21, 1972 Leader-Post which 

says: “Housing plant in full swing.” It goes on to say that three or four homes are being turned out daily 

by the manufactured homes plant of the planned building division of the Beaver Lumber Company 

Limited recently established here at Yorkton. 

 

On September 22, the Star-Phoenix had a headline which said: “Review shows Saskatchewan personal 

income on rebound,” and goes on to show how the statistics are moving up during the year 1972. 

Another headline from the Star-Phoenix October 24, 1972 says: “Steel service plant opened in 

Saskatoon.” The lead line: “Largest steel service plant in Saskatchewan was officially opened in 

Saskatoon by Russell Steel Limited recently.” 

 

And again from Saskatoon, November 30, 1972, the Star-Phoenix, the headline reads: “New Mendel 

plant opened.” The story goes on to give an account of how the expansion, at a cost of $4.5 million to 

the Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon, makes it the single largest industrial employer in 

Saskatchewan and one of the foremost industries in this province. 

 

Coming up to the present time, here is a headline from the Star-Phoenix of January 5, 1973 and it says: 

“Tourist business 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

248 

increased last year.” May I just take a moment to give credit to the former Government for having had 

the imagination to think of and to put into operation, Homecoming ‘71. It was an excellent program 

which all of the people of Saskatchewan who live here enjoyed very much. It made us good hosts to 

many of the visitors who came back to Saskatchewan during 1971. I say, without any hesitation, that it 

has paid good dividends as a promotion to the tourist industry because all of the indicators for 1972 

show that we had more tourists and more tourist business in Saskatchewan in 1972 than we had in 1971. 

 

Here is a headline from the Leader-Post of January 10,1973 which says: “The White Cockshutt plans 

implement parts centre.” It goes on to tell about the establishment of this new parts distribution centre in 

Regina and Members will know that that follows a decision by the John Deere Company to set up a 

similar distribution centre in Regina also. 

 

Here is a headline from the Star-Phoenix of January 17, 1973 which says: “Best year ever for retail 

sales.” It goes on to give some of the statistics from Saskatchewan for 1972. A small announcement in 

the January 27th Leader-Post which says: “AGRA announces a sale to Chile.” It goes on to talk about a 

$3 million sale of crude rapeseed oil to Chile by that company out of its plant at Nipawin. 

 

Here is a headline from the Leader-Post, January 3, 1973 that says: “Industries show expansion in 

1972,” and goes on to detail some of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is going on in Saskatchewan and has been going on since this Government took 

office in June of 1971, has attracted the attention of not only our local press but also of publications that 

originate outside of the province. In the magazine “Trade and Commerce” for August of 1972 the details 

of what is going on in the economy in Saskatchewan was set out in several stories, some of them dealing 

with various communities and cities throughout the province, others dealing with sectors of the 

economy. The headline in the lead article, which by the way is written by Robert Tyre, and some 

Members may remember Mr. Tyre who is quite familiar with Saskatchewan and not always known, I 

may say, as being particularly sympathetic to my friends in the former CCF and the present New 

Democratic Party. But the headline or title to Mr. Tyre’s in “Trade and Commerce” for August 1972 

says: “Provincial economy on upswing from disastrous 1970 slump.” And then it goes on, and under the 

heading of “Projects” it lists various companies throughout the province which have started new 

production or are expanding. Under that heading it lists some, and I have counted 21, different firms and 

then under a heading “Secondary industry” it goes on and lists some more and there I have counted a 

total of 19, making between the two, 40 firms in all which, since this Government took office, have 

either continued with expansion plans which they had or have started new expansion plans or started 

new commercial production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t set this out with the purpose of trying to suggest that we are doing all in 

Saskatchewan that we should like to do in the way of industrial development or employment 

opportunities other than in primary industries. But I do mention all of these to remind the Members that 

it is not as gloomy a picture as the mover and the seconder of the amendment would have us believe 

when they suggest there is not sufficient economic activity in Saskatchewan to provide alternative 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

249 

employment opportunities to our farm economy. 

 

There are good things going on in Saskatchewan. They are going on in the private sector of our province 

and they are going on in the public sector of our province. I think the experience of the past year gives 

us good reason to be optimistic that we will make even further progress and greater increases in 

economic activity in the year ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — All of the economic indicators for Saskatchewan since this Government took office 

have been turning up with two exceptions or one exception really and that is the population figures. But 

when it comes to personal incomes or the net value of construction, when it comes to public and private 

investment, when it comes to retail trade, all of these figures are upward in Saskatchewan since this 

Government took office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — And as was pointed out by the Premier in this debate even the population decline in 

Saskatchewan, at least, has slowed down since this Government took office as compared to the days 

when the Liberal party was in office up until June 23, 1971. 

 

Our labor force, the number of people employed, is also increasing. In 1970 it was at peak for 

Saskatchewan at 350,000. It declined in 1971, during the last year that the Liberals were in office by a 

couple of thousand. By 1972 it had recovered its earlier peak of 350,000. So, I think we have reason to 

believe that there are more employment opportunities in Saskatchewan than there were in those last 

years of Liberal administration, that that trend is also upward. Just as a footnote, I was interested to learn 

just this week that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation at December 31, 1972, had 3,131 more 

customers than it had at December 31, 1971; a small, but I think, significant indicator of the increase in 

economic activity, the increase in employment opportunities that is taking place in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does this come about? Well, let me refer Hon. Members to an article that appeared in 

the January issue of “Canadian Business,” January of this year. I quote this one small passage from it. 

 

Total capital investment (speaking of Saskatchewan) will probably increase by about the same 

percentage as 1972, an estimated 8.5 per cent. Mr. Blakeney’s Government is pursuing a policy of 

encouraging development of relatively small manufacturing projects preferably based on local 

products. This contrasts with the spectaculars subsidized by the previous government at considerable 

cost to provincial taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the change in our economic situation in Saskatchewan since this Government took 

office is because of the definite change in the policy of the Government towards economic development. 

And that has been enunciated many times that it is our fundamental belief that our economic future in 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

250 

Saskatchewan depends upon building up the people who are here and developing the resources with our 

people here in Saskatchewan and that we will not likely provide additional employment opportunities, 

we will not likely get the best development of our resources by chasing around North America or 

Europe trying to persuade some investor to come here to make a killing out of the exploitation of our 

mineral resources or our forest resources or any other of our natural resources. That is the policy which 

we have been pursuing. To try to build on what is here and to build up the people who are here. That 

naturally attracts us to our most important industry, agriculture, and hence the Speech from the Throne 

sets out some of the important new programs which we will be initiating and the other programs which 

we will be continuing to develop to build up our farm economy; to provide more opportunities for young 

people to farm and have family farms because they clearly are essential if we are going to have 

worthwhile smaller communities throughout the countryside in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — So we want to try as much we can to process the products from Saskatchewan, our 

primary products from agriculture and from our resources. We want to develop industries and services 

which will find ready markets in our farm economy in the province and, of course, wherever we can to 

want to take advantage of any opportunity to manufacture goods which can be sold in markets in the 

Prairie Basin and beyond our borders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of strategy which we intend to follow and I may say that in the course of 

this Session it will become clear how we intend in the Department of Industry and Commerce to build 

up the staff, to reorganize the branches, to launch new programs based on putting that strategy into 

practical application. 

 

I regret, Mr. Speaker, to have learned in more detail as the months went by when I became the Minister 

of Industry and Commerce, how sadly that department had been run down and neglected and was not 

anything like the kind of department it once was when my late friend the Hon. Russ Brown, was first its 

Minister and the first to build it up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, in 1972 it was a good year for business in Saskatchewan. And it was 

particularly a good year for small business men. There were during the year 19 operations which entered 

new commercial production, 29 operations which expanded and 15 new industries were announced. 

Together these would represent employment opportunities for some 1,400 new jobs in Saskatchewan. 

From the 1st of April, 1972 until the end of December of that year, there were six forgivable loans made 

under The Industry Incentives Act which totalled over $131,000 and which gave employment to 54 

people in those six new industries. As well there were five loans which had been finalized for payment 

at a total of over $85,000 although the money had not yet been advanced. That would have provided 

employment for 83 people. There were 20 loan applications being processed at the end of 1972 under 

The Industry Incentives Act for a total of more than $1 million and for 98 new job opportunities. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

251 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say something about what we have done during this past year with SEDCO. The 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, which was another agency that was created while 

my friend the Hon. Russ Brown was Minister, was set up for the express purpose of making credit 

available for industrial opportunities in the province. I regret to say that when the Liberals were in 

office, they did not make the best use of it that could have been made. It became clear to us that not only 

should we make more use of it in offering credit services to manufacturing and processing industries but 

that its terms of reference should be expanded so that credit could be granted to other types of industries 

as well. So, since August 1st of 1972, these terms of reference for SEDCO have been considerably 

broadened and now the corporation is able to consider applications for loans from not only industrial and 

manufacturing industries but also from service industries, people in the tourist business, recreational 

activities, retail and wholesale business, personal and professional services. Even in communication and 

transportation we are able to consider loan applications. Also, of course, for our people in the 

construction and contracting business. 

 

In the year 1972, SEDCO gave assistance to more than 60 enterprises. Which is a record number for any 

year during the whole history of SEDCO since it was established. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that is twice as many enterprises as were assisted in the year 1971. In 

1972 the dollar assistance by SEDCO was nearly 13 million. It is interesting to note that more than 

two-thirds of the assistance given was given in the latter half of the year after the terms of reference of 

the SEDCO Corporation were expanded to include a greater diversity of enterprises. It is also I think 

worthy of note that more than half of the assistance was given in amounts of less than $100,000. So 

when I say that it was a good year for business and a good year for small business in Saskatchewan, I 

think we can say with some pride that SEDCO had some involvement in it. 

 

In 1972 we have concentrated on assisting industries related to agriculture, the basis of our economy. 

Almost two-thirds of the industries which were announced in 1972, either process farm products grown 

in Saskatchewan or serve agricultural producers. More than half of these are located in the smaller 

centres away from the large cities of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since it was only in August that the terms of reference of SEDCO were broadened, 

Members will not be surprised to know that the volume of applications being considered by the SEDCO 

board each month has been increasing. I should just like to say something about the kinds of loan 

applications that were presented to the board of SEDCO at its last meeting which was in January of 

1973. There were a record number of applications to consider, 21 in total. Of that 21, 15 were accepted. 

Two were declined and four were deferred for further information. The total value of the loans accepted 

of the 21 was just under $2 million at $1.927 million. The kinds of businesses which were represented 

by those loan applicants were of six different types. There were five loans from manufacturing industries 

for a total of over $400,000. There was one service industry in an industrial sense and it was a loan of 

something over $9,000. Four loan applications came from people in the tourist accommodation business. 

The value of the loans extended to those four was over $1 million. There were three loans from retail 

businesses accepted for just under $300,000. One in 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

252 

transportation at $25,000, one in the contracting business at $35,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I confidently expect in this year ahead of us that there will be an increasing volume of loan 

applications received by SEDCO and accepted by SEDCO and that will play an continuing and 

increasingly significant part in the economic development of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word or two about our co-operation with the commercial firm from 

Roumania that manufactures tractors. 

 

I have a clipping here, Mr. Speaker, which quotes the Leader of the Opposition as having something to 

say about that but perhaps if he is going to take his seat in a minute or two I will wait until he is there 

and I will remind him of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Members will appreciate (and I think everybody in the province 

appreciates by now) that there are certain additional difficulties over and above the ordinary involved in 

trying to put together an industrial package when all the people involved are sitting in a gold fish bowl 

and that is the way our Roumanian partners and ourselves have been   

 

An. Hon. Member: — Gold fish just came in. 

 

Mr. Thorson: —   since this whole discussion began about Roumanian tractors in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You made the headlines. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — The Leader of the Opposition says that we made the headlines. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

think he was in on the act whenever he could get in. I don’t think he ever hesitated on this subject or for 

that matter on any other subject to have something to say. I have a clipping from the Leader-Post of July 

27, 1972 which says, “Economist says, prices will have to be lower.” That’s not exactly a revelation. I 

think everybody understood that if the Roumanian tractors were going to be of benefit to Saskatchewan 

farmers the price for them would have to at least meet the price of alternative offerings. At any rate the 

story goes on and deals with what the Leader of the Opposition had to say and at the very end it says: 

“He,” meaning the Leader of the Opposition, “had no objection to the Saskatchewan Roumanian 

partnership itself.” 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I don’t, never have had. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — I am glad to know, Mr. Speaker, that he has no objection to that. I hope he will have 

an opportunity to discuss that with his colleagues in this Legislature who seem at times at least to 

express a different sentiment. 

 

May I just, without wanting to create any controversy or any more controversy about the subject, try to 

set the record straight. I want to begin by saying something about what we have as partners, that is the 

Roumanian Company and our Government, agreed to so far as the terms of our partnership are 

concerned 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

253 

and particularly about our financial commitments and obligations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we expect that to get the plant established it may require something in the order of less 

than $2.5 million. We have agreed as partners that on our side we should have a 49 per cent interest and 

on their side the Roumanians should have a 51 per cent interest. And I may say that they were always 

firm that as developers of the tractor they should have a 51 per cent interest. We have said that our 

shares would amount to about $171,867 and theirs will be $178,882 and that makes a total injection of 

cash for shares of $350,750. In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have agreed that SEDCO should advance, by 

way of a loan, slightly over $1 million and the Auto Tractor people will also advance by way of a loan, 

slightly over $1 million. Somewhat more than our share because they will have 51 per cent of the loan 

and we will also have, as we have the shares, 49 per cent. 

 

Now that is the extent of our risk, Mr. Speaker, $1 million by way of loan which will be secured by a 

first mortgage on the plant and the building and the land when it is established, if indeed it is 

established, and, of course, we will have the risk money of almost $172,000 in for shares. 

 

The Roumanians will also have to bear the financial burden of financing the inventory of components as 

they come into the plant to be assembled and of finished tractors in inventory ready for sales. It is 

anticipated that that will put a burden on them of at least $1.5 million at any given time. 

 

They will be bearing the greater risk and we will be bearing very little risk because, at the most, I would 

say it would be something like the shareholdings of $350,000 we could lose even if a disaster fell and 

this company had to be wound up after a few years. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What about the $1 million? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Well, as I said the $1 million we feel is secured by a first mortgage on the land and the 

building. We don’t expect to lose anything on that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me just say something about our agreement with our partners so far as the 

shareholders are concerned. We have agreed, although we have 49 per cent and they have 51 per cent of 

the shares, that it will take 75 per cent of the shares to make a decision about three different types of 

matters. One, would be any amendments to the articles of the association of the company. Two. Any 

amendments to the capital structure or the incurring of any new funded debt, any new capital debt, 

would require agreement by 75 per cent of the shareholders and not the simple majority. And, in the 

third category, it would take agreement by 75 per cent of the shareholders on anything dealing with the 

consolidation or the amalgamation or a merger or a winding up of the company. 

 

We have also agreed with our partners that there should be seven directors on the company, which will 

be operating in Saskatchewan. And that, while we will only name three and they will name four, but on 

some matters it will take at least five directors in order to approve of the following types of things, that 

is, hiring of a general manager or determining the terms 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

254 

of his contract, including his areas of responsibilities and his authority. 

 

On any contracts with any shareholders there will have to be a majority of five of the seven directors in 

agreement. And if there are to be any dividends to be declared or share redemptions or capital 

expenditures, again, there will have to be agreement by five of the seven directors. We think that these 

provisions give us perfectly reliable control and security so far as our involvement in this venture is 

concerned. 

 

Let me also say something about the status of our application for a grant from the Department of 

Regional Economic Expansion. In 1972 we applied jointly as partners for a grant of roughly $1 million 

in our application. At that time, on the initial application, DREE turned it down arguing that we as 

applicants had not adequately established projected sales and profits for the new company. 

 

The officials from the Department of Industry and Commerce, led by the Deputy, Mr. Dombowsky, 

subsequently submitted more data to DREE. At this point, early this winter, DREE indicated that if the 

partners would hire a manager to head the company the chances of getting a grant would be greatly 

improved. So, accordingly, Mr. Speaker, we are in the process of doing that now. It is now clearly 

necessary that we advance the stage of agreement between our partners and ourselves on terms of the 

contract for a general manager. I may say we have taken on a consultant, who has been assisting us in 

many phases of this whole project, to help us recruit a manager, and I am informed this week that we 

have received five interesting applications for that position. I think that it will be necessary before the 

winter is out for a team of some of our people from Saskatchewan to go to Roumania to finalize the last 

terms in the contract for a general manager. I expect then on return to Saskatchewan that the general 

manager will be hired and we will then meet the DREE officials again and if their decision is favorable, 

about this project in Saskatchewan, then I think we can go ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I hope DREE comes through. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Oh, yes! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes that I have left I should like to say a word or two 

about the state of the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Members will be happy to know that in the opinion of the industry the outlook for exploration for oil in 

Saskatchewan is much better now than in any time in the past three or four years. I say that because, and 

I refer the House to the Leader-Post of December 20, 1972 in a headline which says: “Oil right sales net 

$4.5 million.” And the story begins by saying that receipts from the sales of Crown petroleum and 

natural gas rights in 1972 reached nearly $4.5 million. The highest since 1969. The 1972 total was well 

above the $2.5 million revenue from bonus bids on Crown rights in 1971 and the $3.8 million for 1970. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I say that is a better indication than anything else you can get about the opinion of 

the people in the 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

255 

industry as to the prospects in Saskatchewan. The fact that they are putting up money to get lands in 

Saskatchewan to explore for oil and gas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that although we have enjoyed good revenues from our oil resources in 

Saskatchewan, our crude oil production is declining in recent years. We reached a maximum of 

production in 1966 with 93 million barrels and that has declined steadily each year since then. Our 

reserves are also declining, Mr. Speaker, and we have been, since 1959, actually producing more oil 

each year than we have been finding by way of exploration in Saskatchewan. 

 

I just give some examples, Mr. Speaker of the situation. In 1954 there were 14 pools discovered with 

total ultimate reserves of 714 million barrels. In 1965 there were also 14 pools discovered but the total 

ultimate reserves were only 52 million barrels. That has been typical of the oil industry’s experience in 

Saskatchewan right up to the present time. 

 

Our drilling has also been falling off in Saskatchewan in recent years. In 1971 there was a substantial 

decrease in all important categories compared to recent years. You have to go as far back as 1962 to find 

a year when the number of wells drilled was as low. 

 

The value of our sales of our oil, however, is in a different direction. There the trends are upward not 

down. That is the only major economic indicator for our oil industry which has been increasing in recent 

years. The annual sales in 1971 were $229 million and exceeded the $200 million in each of the last 

seven years. Of course this has been due, naturally not to increasing production because that has been 

going down, but has been due primarily to an increase in price. Members should keep in mind that there 

was a 25 per cent per barrel increase in the price of crude oil in December of 1970. There was a 10 cent 

increase in late 1972 and a further 20 cents per barrel increase announced at the beginning of this year. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, the totals for money spent, money taken out of our oil industry in 

Saskatchewan. The most obvious trend in expenditures by the industry is the sharp decline in money 

spent for exploration and development in the years since 1965. From $95 million in 1965 exploration 

and development expenditures have dropped by one-half to $47 million in 1971. Operating and royalty 

expenditures have naturally risen because the number of wells in production has increased. In both these 

categories operating expenditures and royalties paid, however, there has been a levelling off. The level is 

$50 million in the first category and about $25 million in the last. 

 

Total expenditures by the oil industry have decreased from $159 million in 1965 to $124 million in 

1971. Mr. Speaker, the direct government revenues from the oil industry in Saskatchewan reached its 

peak in 1965-66 at $38 million. It has now declined to about $28 million in the current fiscal year. 

 

Let me just say a word — and I think the Members opposite will be interested in knowing something 

about the cost of doing business in the oil industry. It is not as the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) 

tried to suggest the other day, $150,000 per well. The experience in recent years in the various areas of 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

256 

Saskatchewan suggests that the maximum for bringing in a well could be as much as $150,000 or 

$160,000 if you were in the southeast part of Saskatchewan drilling to the very deep zones. But if you 

are in northwestern Saskatchewan, the Beacon Hill area, gas wells have been brought in there with an 

expenditure of as little as $30,000 and dry holes as little as $13,500. In the Kindersley and the Swift 

Current areas you find the sort of middle ranges for the cost of drilling wells, but even in the Swift 

Current area to go to 4,600 feet has required an expenditure of perhaps $35,000 if it is a dry hole but of 

course if the additional expenditures of bringing a well onto production are incurred, it can almost 

double that. I think the suggestion that it costs $150,000 per well is one which we should not leave 

unchallenged. 

 

Just something about the cost of a barrel of crude oil in Saskatchewan to the producer. In the period 

1960-64 the cost per barrel was almost $1.30 and by 1967-71 the cost per barrel had risen to about 

$1.60. Just comparable figures for Alberta and $2.04 per barrel in British Columbia. The present cost to 

find, develop and produce a barrel of crude oil in Saskatchewan of $1.60 can also be compared to the 

average net price per barrel received by the producers which is $2.44 in 1971. If you add the recent price 

increases the average net price for a barrel of oil in 1973 is about $2.70 and the cost of finding it in 

Saskatchewan is about $1.60 — finding it and producing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have just a few minutes to say something about natural gas. In the past Saskatchewan has 

not had sufficient gas production to supply demand in the province. We have had to rely on some from 

Alberta. For example, in the year 1971 our domestic commercial and industrial demand was 82 billion 

cubic feet and we supplied 52 of that out of Saskatchewan or about two-thirds. The significant element 

of uncertainty has been introduced in our gas picture now with the events that are going on in Alberta in 

the industry and at the behest of the Government of Alberta in an effort to increase the well head prices 

for gas. 

 

But we have large, untapped gas reserves in Saskatchewan in the Milk River formation in the southwest 

part of our province. Some authorities in the industry place the volume at over one trillion cubic feet 

which is approximately equal to the present proven gas reserves in Saskatchewan now. And as the price 

increases it becomes more and more economically feasible to produce gas from these Milk River 

horizons in Saskatchewan. 

 

I just wanted to say, Mr. Speaker, that we can anticipate, not only increasing prices in gas because of the 

well head increases, but also because of the application of Trans-Canada pipe lines to the National 

Energy Board for an increase in its rates. The application has been in two phases. Phase one has been 

completed and the National Energy Board has already decided that Trans-Canada should receive an 

increased return on its investment. Phase two has not yet been completed and in that decision we will 

learn how that increase in cost of transporting natural gas to customers in Canada from Alberta is to be 

allocated among the various provinces. 

 

If the Trans-Canada application is accepted as that company presented it, we can anticipate something 

over a 13 per cent increase in the cost of gas that we import from Alberta. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

257 

Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, when the decision is made in the spring of this year we shall not be penalized in 

Saskatchewan in being expected to pay higher prices for our gas than we should pay based on our 

proximity to the source of supply and the cost of transporting gas from Alberta to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had wanted to say more in this Throne Speech Debate, but I feel it only fair that I give 

way to one of the other Members before we adjourn for the day. We are, in the Government, Mr. 

Speaker, engaged in the process of building a better Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — We set out with some clear precision, so that no voters in Saskatchewan could be in 

doubt about where we stood, how we intended to do that when we published our New Deal for People. 

We presented it to the electorate in June of 1971 and they gave it a very resounding endorsement. As we 

go through month by month and year by year of our present term of office, we intend to fulfil the 

undertakings contained in the New Deal for People which has been endorsed by the people of 

Saskatchewan. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning, that this year 1973 will be an 

even better year than the year 1972 which was a good one. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, as we keep faith 

with the people of Saskatchewan, they will endorse our programs and we can look forward to a renewed 

mandate at some occasion in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, because it is altogether too pessimistic and gloomy and not based 

on the facts of the situation in Saskatchewan I cannot support the amendment and I will not. But I will 

enthusiastically support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Prior to entering this debate, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to welcome back to this Assembly the junior Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). The man 

who keeps winning elections in spite of the many devious and controversial methods used by the 

Government opposite to attempt his defeat. 

 

I congratulate the mover and the seconder. It was certainly an excellent effort in self-deception or 

self-hypnosis if they really believe what they were saying. 

 

I note in particular the efforts made by the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) to extend the hand 

of co-operation to the Opposition. 

 

I also note his expression that perhaps it will have to be the newer Members of this House that will have 

to take the lead in this regard. I ask him where the hand of co-operation was when the Members of the 

Opposition last session tried to bring in legislation to prevent discrimination because of age. And I ask 

him how he could, if he is attempting to co-operate for the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan, 

participate in the perversion of the democratic process that went on in 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

258 

Athabasca which was detailed by the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

 

We note the remarks of the Hon. Member from Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) who spoke in this debate when 

he made one of the classic statements in this House, ‘Our Government is committed to democracy and 

the giving of information.” I We wait with   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: —   a great deal of anticipation your stand when we start getting answers turned down or 

refused on the Orders of the Day. 

 

We commend the Hon. Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) on seconding the Speech from the 

Throne, the youngest Member I believe in this Legislature. I am sure that the Hon. Premier looks 

forward to the day when the junior Member becomes a great orator in this House, the day that his voice 

changes, whenever that happens. 

 

We note the comments by the Hon. Member, the Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Thorson). He 

took the most positive approach to the stand that this Government has taken on the Roumanian tractor 

plant. He was so positive to state that the Roumanians are coming, if DREE is favorable, then I think it 

will go ahead, he only thinks it will go ahead at that point. We are no closer to having Roumanians in 

Saskatchewan now than when the promises were first made by the Government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — I should like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to commend the appointment of the 

new Cabinet Ministers and we note other than the flying circus that seemingly they were all appointed 

because of their lack of participation in the Athabasca by-election, rather than their participation. 

 

I am sure that some of the Members with ambitions in the very back rows over there, like Mike and 

some of the other Members, now look with trepidation when they think of the new Cabinet post coming 

along and they know that they are ruled out. I know that the Members opposite wait with a great deal of 

anticipation the Premier’s promise of a new Cabinet post. Certainly the citizens of Regina will feel more 

than slighted if the former mayor, the most experienced Member of the back benchers of the 

Government opposite doesn’t receive his just and due consideration. I am sure that the Hon. Member 

from Arm River (Mr. Faris) regrets his unfortunate statement of comparing Liberals to “dogs returning 

to their vomit” when he looks over at his competition from the cloth who now has the new Ministry of 

Social Services. I would hope before we get into this debate, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member from 

Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) has his seat belt done up so that we don’t get interrupted as the Hon. Member 

from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the allegations made and proven by the Hon. Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) should 

put to rest once and for all the sanctimonious hypocrisy of the Government opposite when it comes to 

elections. It should also make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan that not only an Independent 

Boundaries 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

259 

Commission is in order, but that a Chief Electoral Officer   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: —   of Saskatchewan should be independent of any political party. 

 

There has been some thought, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP Government has been concerned with the 

rights of the individual. And somehow the false impression has got through to the people of 

Saskatchewan that a person is more than a person who simply marks an X on his ballot. As a matter of 

fact, Mr. Speaker, some people even believed that they are voting for the old CCF party and that there 

were no differences between the old CCF party and the present NDP when they voted on June 23, 1971. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were conned, misled and deceived by one of the 

autocratic forms of democratic socialism ever perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The predecessors of the Government opposite did create and did implement legislation dealing with 

individual civil liberties. Legislation called the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights was implemented in 1947. I 

believe, the first in Canada. 

 

The old CCF Party even gave the person the right to rest assured he would not be faced with 

prohibitively high medical bills and the right to medical assistance. The myth that the party opposite was 

concerned about the individual had its germination during 20 long, gaunt, depressing dreary years of 

hypocrisy. But this party that the Government opposite hearkens back to, Mr. Speaker, is dead. The 

party that this Government hearkens back to has been shot, hung, guillotined and cremated and been put 

away to rest by the executioners of the Government opposite. 

 

The Human Rights legislation passed by the CCF was broken by the present Attorney General. 

Legislation proposed in this House by this Opposition to extend the rights of the individual to prevent 

discrimination by reason of age was rejected in a high-handed manner by the Government opposite. 

 

In the field of health, Mr. Speaker, we have had a history of health programs under the now deceased 

CCF party. The recent announcement by the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek) regarding 

chiropractic care was welcomed by the Members of this Assembly. 

 

But let’s look at some of these programs. Medicare and the proposed dental care for children, they have 

not, notwithstanding the remarks of the Members opposite, improved the quality of the medical care to 

the poor of Saskatchewan. There are no incentives in the programs for doctors to practise in rural areas, 

or on Indian reservations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — What have you done in seven years? 

: 

Mr. Lane — There are no changes in the basic causes of ill health 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

260 

among the poor in Saskatchewan. I am personally sympathetic, Mr. Speaker, to the premise set out by 

the Brookings Institution. which the Members opposite may be well aware of. That our social programs 

and the social programs of the Great Society in the United States have failed to improve health services 

and have failed to improve the health of our citizens. 

 

But I condemn the Government and the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, for creating an atmosphere in 

Saskatchewan. An atmosphere that the addition of more money to health services and health programs 

will improve the health of our citizens. You have created this atmosphere through the use of and the 

cheap political ploy of buying votes. 

 

Free medicare to those over 65, did not do one thing to improve the health of our senior citizens. It was 

crass politics. Unfortunately because of the climate you had created it was effective. You promised a 

right to good health in your New Deal for People. But you haven’t delivered. 

 

You have refused when you were the Opposition party to create an atmosphere in the field of health that 

the whole problem of health must be looked at in the total context and must be looked at rationally. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it caught up with the Hon. Minister of Public Health. I am going to quote 

from a press statement, Mr. Speaker. The Health Minister said (in an unexpected and emotional 

outburst) — now that I should like to have seen, Mr. Speaker. Did he throw his shoe? Did he throw the 

Commonwealth? What did the Hon. Member do to give this unexpected and emotional outburst? He 

said: 

 

One major goal of one of his projects was to cut costs. 

 

Costs had risen by 37.5 per cent to this year’s $132 million since 1968-69. If costs were to continue to 

increase at this rapid rate, in the next five years we could be spending more than half of the current 

provincial budget on medicare and hospitalization. 

 

“Costs” the word “costs.” Sorry that the Hon. Member, Mr. Feduniak, isn’t here with his dictionary. 

Costs, a word that wasn’t even in the old CCF dictionary. Now the Hon. Minister of Public Health is 

going to cut costs. The man who was going to save the small hospitals has now moved to cut the 

approved bed rate in Saskatchewan. You have not delivered the right to good health and your petty 

political approach has convinced the public that simply more programs is the answer. 

 

But what was promised by the NDP Government — good health and good education are the right of 

every Saskatchewan citizen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — Who said that? The New Deal for People. What had a right under the old CCF Party had 

become a base political ploy under the executioners opposite. 

 

A right to good education and, again, I refer to the yellow journal of a booklet about Saskatchewan. 

An election fought on promises that had no basis in reality 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

261 

or in truth. Promises of a New Deal in education, an end to student-teacher ratios and an end to supposed 

education strife in Saskatchewan. Not one effort by the NDP when it was in opposition to be 

constructive when our whole process of education is in the throes of some of the most drastic and 

far-reaching changes in the history of formal education. 

 

Not one constructive approach when our teacher status and security were being threatened. When our 

trustees are losing local control, when our system of higher education is being drastically changed. Just a 

crass, cheap Populist approach to play on the fears and legitimate concerns of those involved in the 

educational process. One of the secrets, Mr. Speaker, to being a successful Populist is to make sure that 

those who voted for you at least seem to be happy. We, in the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, look forward to 

the Government’s proposals of several important changes in the field of education. 

 

But the people involved in the field of education are not looking forward to some of your several 

important changes. They know and they know full well that they were misled on the question of 

student-teacher ratios. They know they were conned on the promise to make good education the right for 

every Saskatchewan citizen. 

 

Your promises and your practices and your political tactics struck fear into all citizens in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. You are dividing the people against themselves and causing them to fight against 

themselves. 

 

You have already caused hatred between towns in this province   

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: —   between relatives in this province, between trustees and between teachers. (The Hon. 

Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, Mr. Hanson, knows of what I speak). And between parents and 

children over your cheap political approach to education. The right to a fair education system has died 

under the present NDP Government. 

 

You promised to end student-teacher ratios — you didn’t deliver. You, Mr. Premier, promised autonomy 

to the Regina Campus — you haven’t delivered. You promised a good education and you deliver 

division. The rights of the old CCF have been buried by a band of democratic socialists. The NDP 

promised leadership in education and delivered conflict, confrontations, crisis and controversy. And you 

may want to look up that slogan in the New Deal for People. 

 

The divisive politics of the NDP have carried from the towns and village of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

to all the provinces of Canada. 

 

We have had the Premier’s statement that his policies and his position is not divisive of Canada. Perhaps 

he was misquoted. Perhaps we are not doing as well under DREE as we should. Perhaps Quebec is 

doing better. 

 

But to take this message into other parts of Canada during a federal election, when the speech is purely 

for the political benefit of the local audience, I say his statements and his 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

262 

approach is divisive. We note the quietness of the Premier in Saskatchewan and the truth was not told in 

Saskatchewan of the Premier’s actions in the rest of Canada until the Prime Minister spoke in Regina. 

All because of the silence of the Hon. Premier when he was in Saskatchewan. And to show the political 

approach that the Premier had taken in the rest of Canada and why his credibility is in question, I am 

going to refer to a press clipping from Charlottetown in the Leader-Post Mr. Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Messer). Here is the statement made by the Hon. Premier in Charlottetown when he is trying not to 

be divisive. 

 

There is not a Cabinet Minister of any importance in the Trudeau Government who is from east of 

Quebec City or west of Hamilton. 

 

That’s the Premier of Saskatchewan. No Cabinet Minister of any importance west of Hamilton. Now 

that’s the difference between the Government and our party. We take pride in our accomplishments. We 

don’t constantly deride and degrade the people of this province. We may disagree or oppose, but to 

disparage our own accomplishments, Mr. Speaker, is strong evidence of the lack of pride the NDP has in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Since Confederation in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and historically in England, one of the prestigious and 

important positions in any government has been that person charged with administration of justice. It is 

a position in which partisan politics should enter as little as possible. It is a position where the 

responsibility to ensure justice for all is the overriding responsibility. 

 

It has always been that way in Canada, and it has always been one of the most senior prestigious Cabinet 

positions in Canada. 

 

Yet the Premier of Saskatchewan says that we don’t have a Cabinet Minister of importance west of 

Hamilton. The fact that we have a native son from Saskatchewan who is Minister of Justice for Canada 

is a source of derision for the NDP and the Premier opposite. The fact that he said it outside of 

Saskatchewan and not in the province certainly brings into doubt the Premier’s sincerity and credibility 

on the question of Saskatchewan’s constitutional politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — We have had individual pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, passed in the 1972 Legislative 

session which began an assault on the individual liberties in Saskatchewan. Land Bank legislation 

introduced by the biggest small farmer in Saskatchewan took away the right to own farm land. We will 

propose legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we have proposed legislation to restore basic rights to individuals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — I might add, Mr. Speaker, that our intention in proposing legislation is to correct what we 

feel is wrong in existing legislation. We have no intention in rehashing legislative principles that have 

been approved by this House. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

263 

We will propose amendments, for example, Mr. Speaker, to an Act to establish a Department of 

Consumer Affairs. Mr. Speaker, while criticizing the “cease and desist” powers in the Act, we asked on 

several occasions that reasons be given for the need for such power. We were unable to get an answer 

from the Minister. The new Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) went so far without a reason to 

welcome the power and even suggest that it be extended for 10 days. This power, Mr. Speaker, has cast 

a strong shadow and lack of credibility over Saskatchewan business and it’s a power that should be 

repealed. We received no reasons for such power then, we see no reasons for such power now. 

 

I did, Mr. Speaker, receive a couple of possibilities and suggestions from members of the Intersessional 

Committee on Business. The first suggestion was that if a drug store is selling thalidomide, that the 

Government should be able to close down that drug store for five days. Not simply pull out the drug, 

they want to close down the drug store. I am sure the new ‘minister of secondary industry from Bruno’ 

is prepared to make comments on how to close down a drug store. I refer to secondary industry as a new 

approach to industry — if the first one is run by a Liberal close it down and then open up a second one. I 

might advise the Members of this House that question of harmful drugs is already covered under federal 

government legislation and such actions would be ultra vires of the Province of Saskatchewan. Again, 

we see no reason for that power. The second suggestion for that power was that an unsafe product might 

be sold. We certainly don’t feel, of course, that unsafe products should be on the market, but why the 

Government could not take the approach of stopping the sale of the unsafe product wherever it is instead 

of insisting on closing down the business for five days. Again, there is federal government legislation in 

this field. The power to close down any business for five days is unnecessary, unwarranted and 

discredits Saskatchewan business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — We looked at trade unions, Mr. Speaker. The right to free speech by the individual trade 

union member was taken away by the Government opposite. We will restore this right if the legislation 

we propose passes this Assembly. We will give back to the individual union member the right to 

criticize his own union, the right to talk against his own union and the right to exercise his freedom of 

speech. 

 

The Land Bank with its attempts to destroy the concepts of a right to private property, the blockade of 

the Small Farms Development Act by the Premier and the czar of agriculture simply because the land is 

for sale immediately is grounds for non-implementation of the Small Farms Development Act which 

would assist Saskatchewan farmers. The Premier says that the only reason the province has not signed is 

because the land has to be sold to a person who is already farming, an admitted weakness of that Act. 

Yet the first lease under the Land Bank, Mr. Speaker, was to the son of an NDP supporter who was 

already farming at the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — The only reason the 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

264 

Government opposite will not join the Small Farms Development Act, Mr. Speaker, is because it will 

work and because the Government of Canada will not give the selling bonus and the option of first 

refusal to the NDP collectivization plan. 

 

We have had announcements throughout the year by the Treasury benches opposite. One which gives us 

a great deal of concern is the NDP proposal to control cable television in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

The Premier of Saskatchewan has stated: 

 

We believe that SaskTel must own its own broad band cable network and be able to cross subsidize 

from high profit urban cable systems in order to extend services to smaller, uneconomic rural centres. 

 

An excellent principle, Mr. Speaker, however it falls down in what we think the practice will be. What 

will we see on cable television, I ask, Mr. Speaker? Certainly, if the Hon. Member from Saskatoon 

University (Mr. Richards) has his way, we won’t see Archie Bunker. What are we going to see? We are 

going to see the terror of the highways, the man with the hat reading the road information program. We 

will have the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman) reading the fishing report on cable 

television. That’s what we will see again if this type of advertising is indicative of what is going to go on 

television under the ownership of the Government. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — What will Henry do? 

 

Mr. Lane: — Henry will be on giving his own version of what should happen and what the Throne 

Speech and what the Budget Speech should be. This ridiculous picture of the Minister of Highways (Mr. 

Kramer), Mr. Premier and the Members of this House, is a prime example of the arrogant demagogue 

among Members opposite and it is that type of practice that we oppose. 

 

We heard the hypocritical hysteria of the Members opposite when they were in Opposition. I am going 

to refer to a speech by the Hon. Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). The Hon. Member for 

Touchwood speaking to the believing people in Dysart, Saskatchewan, said and I quote: 

 

Above all a New Democratic Government will eliminate waste and mismanagement particularly in 

such areas as highway spending and partisan political propaganda. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, oh! 

 

Mr. Lane: — That’s what the Members opposite were going to eliminate. I think if the Members 

opposite don’t believe the Member from Touchwood, that they could refer to the New Deal for People 

under the taxation category which says exactly the same thing. That the Members opposite when they 

formed the Government were going to eliminate the partisan political propaganda. And this is what we 

get, smiling Eiling! Smiling Eiling on the hotline for winter road information. But the control of cable 

television, I submit, Mr. Speaker, is just one step to control the political thought in this province and it is 

one step in the new demagogues’ approach to electioneering. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

265 

Again some steps have been referred to by the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

 

This House has debated and argued about the complete lack of political ethics on the part of the 

Members opposite in providing government contracts to its party owned printing company and printing 

service, Service Printers Limited. In the previous 20 years of CCF rule Service Printers did over 

$460,000 worth of business for the Government, $466,000 to be exact. Let’s assume because it is not a 

large multi-national corporate ogre, that Service Printers only made a 5 per cent return. Over $20,000 of 

the taxpayers’ money went into the CCF and NDP campaign kitties and it has started all over again, Mr. 

Speaker. The profits of Service Printers paid for by the people of Saskatchewan will go to maintain the 

arrogant Government opposite. 

 

The new demagogues are hiring their defeated candidates to establish a political machine again paid for 

and supported by the people of Saskatchewan. Edward Shillington — $17,976, paid for by the people 

opposite. Jim Eaton defeated candidate for Cannington — $945 per month, paid for by the people of 

Saskatchewan. Clifford Arthur Lloyd, defeated candidate, Regina — $815 a month. Gerry 

Pout-MacDonald — $9,887 a year, defeated candidate for Regina Albert Park. John Burton, 

Administrative Analyst V — $1,612 per month, paid for by the people of Saskatchewan. I am convinced 

that John Burton lost the election on purpose because he couldn’t afford to go to Ottawa. Frank Buck 

didn’t do as well and the Premier is going to have to fit him in the ranks. He ran, he lost and he only got 

$1,147 a month. 

 

That’s why we fear cable television under your control, Mr. Premier. We will see smiling Eiling and we 

will see programs designed to ensure that the party propaganda machine is carried into nearly every 

home in this province. 

 

The proposed legislation to control candidates’ expenditures will mean absolutely nothing in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. The propaganda machine is being assembled, party hack by party hack, 

defeated candidate by defeated candidate, partisan civil servant by partisan civil servant, contract by 

contract, Lank Bank committee by Land Bank committee and advertisement by advertisement. When 

the Government opposite is finished, Mr. Speaker, their candidates won’t have to spend a red cent for 

election expenses. The democratic socialists want a divided province but they also want the complete 

control of the economic, social and educational life of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the blueprint for democratic socialism laid before this Legislature. We have a 

torrent of Crown corporations notwithstanding that everyone of them is in the highly competitive field. 

Social democrats from Europe — I am going to refer to a treatise that I referred to last year — “The 

American Challenge” by Jean Jacques Servan-Schreiber facing the same problem in France as here. I am 

going to repeat what I said last year in light of the Government’s attempt to get into Crown corporations 

in competitive fields. 

 

Suppose a new regime (and he gives this example) wanted to nationalize IBM France which has 

several modern plants. Having taken control of these handsome installations the government would 

find that it had mistaken the shadow for the substance. What counts today for a corporation is 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

266 

not walls or the machines but the intangible elements that cannot be nationalized. Just as in biology the 

cell is different from the sum of its component molecules, so a modern corporation is different from 

the production factors that go into it. By nationalizing IBM we would simply force its managers and 

technicians to emigrate. We would be committing on the scientific and strategic level the kind of 

intellectual suicide that Hitler’s anti-Semitic policies produced in Germany 30 years ago. 

 

These Crown corporations are not the best way of utilizing provincial capital investment. As a matter of 

fact, in competitive fields they are probably one of the worst ways of doing so. In a society of great 

changes in man’s knowledge and man’s technology, the imposition of a form of management which is 

basically static cannot work. The box factories and the shoe factories failed because of management. I 

am assuming that the CCF had some evidence that there was a market for these products and I am 

assuming that the CCF had some reason to hope that they would be successful ventures. But they 

imposed a static management on a highly changing field and it does not work. Again, we are doing this 

in these proposed Crown corporations, we are imposing a static, basically self-serving form of 

administration on an entity which must constantly change in order to succeed. 

 

I hope to be able to find out in Crown corporations the number of new inventions discovered by SaskTel 

or Sask Power. Without a doubt, the new technologies of these two Crown corporations came from 

privately owned and free-enterprise industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more verbiage came out of the Government opposite when they were in the Opposition 

regarding the risk of public moneys. No greater risk of public moneys has ever been proposed before 

this Legislature. An admission was made by the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) that the only major 

petroleum reserves are in the deep horizons. Figures that such drillings will cost approximately $150,000 

per hole with no guarantee of success. One hundred dry wells means a loss of $15 million, a figure well 

within the realm of reality. As was mentioned in the House last year, if there is any fault for not having 

adequate returns to the people of Saskatchewan from our oil and gas, the fault lies with the now defunct 

CCF Government. That government watched and stood idly by while wells were being drilled, watched 

and stood idly by when oil wells gushed, watched and stood idly by while office employees of 

petroleum companies moved to that province. And now this Government wants to watch and stand by 

while millions of dollars of the people’s money go down to the high risk, high class deep horizons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be watching the Government’s actions regarding the field of driver licences. We 

go on record as supporting a licence suspension period that has no restrictions if the driver has been 

guilty of impaired or related offences. I am aware, Mr. Speaker, of the slogan or the saying that no one is 

more converted than the convert and we note the appointment of Father Gorski to the Review Board. We 

should like to have assurances from the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow), Mr. Speaker, that the House 

will be given an opportunity to debate any proposals to grant restricted licences to those convicted of 

impaired driving or related offences. Perhaps it may even be time, Mr. Speaker, for the Government to 

bring in more draconian measures to stop the carnage on our highways. 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

267 

Mr. Speaker, we note in the Throne Speech that there is going to be a new improved Litter Act. We 

condemn the Government opposite for its failure to take action in this regard and its failure to implement 

Liberal legislation of 1971 which would have been a simple outright ban on no deposit no return bottles 

and cans. That should have been implemented a long time ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We would hope that the Government’s welcoming of the forthcoming federal-provincial conference will 

mean a sincere effort on the part of the Government to alleviate the problems of Western Canada. The 

obstruction of the Small Farms Development Program means that benefits are not going to 

Saskatchewan farmers and this puts into doubt the sincerity of the Government in helping Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

I can remember, Mr. Speaker, the stabilization fight which the now Minister of Justice was admitting 

from the start, that the program was only a start. His motives and his intentions were slammed and 

defeated and driven into the ground by Members of the party opposite. His motives were challenged and 

questioned. When the Foreign Ownership Bill was introduced in this House, the Minister of Agriculture 

didn’t want his motives questioned yet he felt it’s all right to question someone else’s. 

 

We are concerned that the Party opposite will make that conference a political arena which could set 

back equity for Western Canada for a generation. 

 

Just a comment about the Premier’s remarks in this debate about the tax increase. I just wanted to 

paraphrase a little slogan for the Premier that he may have heard that, “A tax increase, is a tax increase, 

is a tax increase.” Mr. Speaker, we intend to take a positive approach in this Session. But we will 

criticize where such criticism is warranted or valid. We will continue to fight and fight for the 

implementation of Federal Liberal programs which the Government opposite has stalled or will 

sabotage. We will fight above all for a restitution of individual liberties. We will fight against the 

unnecessary control and the arrogance and the demagoguery of the Government opposite. Such 

arrogance and demagogy has been proved during 19 long, gaunt, dreary months of democratic socialism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should just like to take a moment in joining with the Premier and some of the Members 

opposite in expressing some happiness in the announcement of the end of the American involvement in 

Vietnam. The involvement was one of history’s greatest tragedies as were the errors of American 

advisors that placed that country on the road to this tragedy. I would hope that the people who have 

vilified the American people for this tragedy would now turn their efforts to extending compassion to 

the American people as they try to heal their own wounds. We welcome the efforts of the Government 

of Canada and the speed with which it expedited the Canadian Peace Keeping Force into the war zones. 

I hope that the Members of the Opposition in Parliament were not serious when the Government was 

criticized for sending troops without the approval of Parliament. I commend the Government of Canada 

for its action and I hope for an atmosphere of compassion towards the American neighbors prevails. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 2, 1973 

 

 

268 

Mr. Lane: — I will oppose the motion and support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes that we have remaining today I should 

initially like to welcome the junior Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and at some later date I should 

like to dwell a little bit further on that. Of course it is customary to congratulate the mover and the 

seconder of the Speech from the Throne. I am especially pleased this year to be able to congratulate the 

mover and seconder. I think that they can be justly proud in their recognition and the honor which they 

have received. 

 

I might mention here, just going back on what happened last year, that the mover and the seconder of the 

Speech from the Throne then, shortly after the House prorogued were both made Cabinet Ministers. I 

imagine that the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) and the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) 

are quite pleased that their possibilities of becoming Members of Cabinet this summer look very good. I 

am sorry though that the Member for Regina Wascana’s (Mr. Baker) hopes have been shattered in this 

regard but I just might mention that if I had any influence with the Premier I would certainly put in a 

good word for you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — There are many comments which I should like to make regarding the Speech from the 

Throne and, Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


