



















































Hansard: March 15, 1973


1653 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

36th Day 

 

Thursday, March 15, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to 

introduce to you and through you to the Members of the Assembly a group of grade seven students, 

some 31 in number I am informed, for Victoria School in Saskatoon. The school is located in Nutana 

Centre constituency. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Harrison and Miss Urton. I sincerely 

hope that the deliberations this afternoon will be edifying, educational and informative for this group. 

 

I understand they came down by Yellow Bus Lines. I will have an opportunity to meet them about 3:15 

and I hope then to answer any questions the students may put with respect to proceedings in the 

Assembly. I am sure we all wish them an interesting afternoon and a good trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through 

you to this House a group of students from Hugh Cairns School in Saskatoon. They are grade seven 

students, 41 in number, and they are sitting, I believe, in the east gallery. They are accompanied by their 

teacher, Mr. Boden. These students, Mr. Speaker, are of particular interest to me because I know many 

of these students personally and also their parents. I hope that their experience here in the House will be 

worthwhile and that their trip to Regina and to the capital here will be long remembered in their lives. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the privilege of introducing to you and through 

you to the Members of this House a group of grade eight students from Weyburn Junior High. Today we 

have a similar group of some 70 in number who, in total yesterday and today, comprise a full class of 

140 grade eight students of the Weyburn Junior High School. These students, Mr. Speaker, are sitting in 

the west gallery. The same two teachers accompany them here this afternoon, Mr. Nedelcov and Mr. 

Fletcher and their bus drivers, Mr. Borshowa and Mr. Hulbert. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that it is our wish 

that their journey to Regina and to the Legislative Building proves educational and that their experience 

here gives them further knowledge of their provincial Legislative Building and their Government in 

action within its walls. I am sure we all wish them a very safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1654 

Mr. Cody (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I want today to introduce to you and to Members of the 

Assembly a group of 50 grade eight students from the Bruno School. They are seated in the east gallery 

and they are here today with their teachers, Randy Warick and Lyle Hassen. Mr. Speaker, Bruno, of 

course, is not a community which needs much introduction in this House or in Saskatchewan and not 

really in Canada, for that matter, because it’s had its rightful share of ink in the newspapers these days. 

Bruno is one of the fine farming communities in the centre of my constituency of Watrous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all Members of this Assembly wish the students and their teachers a very fine 

afternoon here in the Assembly watching democracy in action. We all wish them a very safe journey 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Wounded Knee, South Dakota 
 

Mr. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, just before the Orders of the Day, I wondered if I 

might ask a question of the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) or the Premier (Mr. Blakeney). 

 

It has come to my attention or it has been reported to me that the Government may have used funds to 

finance people to go to Wounded Knee, South Dakota and I should like to determine the accuracy of this 

report. I would like to ask the Minister or the Premier if any Government moneys have been used to 

sponsor, or pay the cost of, or the transportation of, or any other expenses in any way connected with a 

person going or more than one person going from Regina or Saskatchewan to Wounded Knee in the last 

three weeks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, so far as I am aware no Government funds have been 

used for that purpose. I am certainly not aware of any program or any move to expend Government 

funds in that way. As you may know, the Government makes unconditional grants to the Metis Society 

of Saskatchewan and to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians to carry out their general functions. 

They list their functions under broad headings and I cannot assert positively that no funds of those 

organizations were used, but certainly no funds coming from the Government of Saskatchewan, so far as 

we are aware, have been so used, at least to my knowledge. 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Just a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Premier would undertake 

to determine whether any moneys have been so expended and I direct his attention particularly to the 

Department of Social Services. I observe that the Premier did not undertake to try to determine the 

accuracy of that report. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think it would be better if the Hon. Member would put it on the 

Order Paper. I am perfectly happy to attempt to find that out. It is just a little awkward to be undertaking 

to deal with oral questions in this way. But 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1655 

specifically the answer is yes, I will try to find out. I would request, as a matter of convenience to us and 

to the House that the Member put it on the Order Paper. 

 

Grant To Moose Jaw Board of Education 
 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Education. The 

Board of Education in Moose Jaw has brought in a preliminary budget calling for an $130,000 deficit for 

the coming year which would either be a deficit or a mill increase of four mills. They have indicated that 

their expenditures will be up $200,000 or four per cent over last year and that the provincial grant will 

be up $50,000 or an increase of two per cent over that they got last year. Would the Minister say 

whether this grant is the final word to the City of Moose Jaw or will he undertake to review the grant 

that he is giving them? 

 

Mr. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, the list of grants, moneys that have gone out 

to boards are estimated grants for the coming year. I think that is traditional. If there are changes in 

enrolments, for instance, over the period of the year, then there will be changes in the grants, particularly 

an upward trend if there is an upward increase in enrolment. But that would be the final figure. Now 

there may be some mistakes as far as calculating the grant and if the board feels that they would like to 

meet with me, with my staff to discuss the grants we are certainly willing to do that. They fit into the 

formula which was debated and discussed in the House last year. I indicated some changes during the 

Budget Speech Debate and they have fitted into the formula and the grant, as we have indicated to them, 

will be their grant in an estimated form. 

 

Advertising Improperly Done by Government 
 

Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, a few days ago I 

raised a question and I brought into the House and tabled the March issue, or part of the March issue, of 

a little publication called “Saskatchewan Light and Power” in which there was an ad placed by the 

provincial Department of Agriculture advising people of the deadline to apply for the lease of certain 

lands and the deadline was February 15, two weeks earlier. Today I have a copy of the Leader-Post, a 

final notice put out by SaskTel stating that the alphabetical or white pages of the Regina City Telephone 

Directory will close and the deadline is March 2. They advise people to act now if they want to make 

any changes and it happens to be the March 12 issue of the Regina Leader-Post. Now I might question 

the Premier, is this waste of money, and this is only two instances, are these the result of the stupidity of 

their eastern advertising agency, Dunsky, or it is the result of just the natural stupidity of the 

Government in wasting taxpayers’ money? I wonder if he could give us the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I know that the Member opposite is much more familiar 

than I with the stupidities of eastern advertising agencies. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1656 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I am certainly not aware of the reason for that advertisement. It may be the 

stupidity of our staff, it may be the stupidity of the Leader-Post. I suspect that all of these people, 

including ourselves, have showed ourselves capable of some fair amount of stupidity and we will try to 

find out at whose door we should lay this particular piece. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, with reference to the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question pertaining to Light and Power, my staff did look into the script that was submitted 

to the Farm Light and Power publication and in our script the deadline was March 15 and an error had 

been made in setting of the type. It was not an error that emanated from the Department of Agriculture 

in regard to that particular ad. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — If we can just nail this one to the stupidity of the Leader-Post, we’ve got it made, 

haven’t we? 

 

MOTION 
 

House to Pay Tribute to Silver Broom World Curling Champions 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may ask leave of the Assembly to 

introduce a motion, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) and I believe with the 

consent of the Opposition: 

 

Ordered, that when this Assembly adjourns today it shall stand adjourned until tomorrow at 3:15 

o’clock p.m. so that this Assembly may pay tribute to the curling champions of Canada, Denmark, 

France, German, Italy, Norway, Scotland, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States, who are 

participating in the Silver Broom International Curling Championship in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason for this Motion is, I think, clear. After consultation with the Opposition, it was 

thought fitting that this Legislature take a few moments to pay tribute to our international visitors. The 

method suggested by the Clerk would be that we might do it tomorrow at normal commencement time 

of 2:30 and set aside 45 minutes; perhaps 15 or 20 minutes will be taken for some brief words of 

welcome from myself or of the Opposition or someone representing the Opposition’s side, and 

presumably a reply on behalf of our international visitors. At that point we would have an opportunity to 

mingle with and meet personally our visitors from these many lands. They then would withdraw and we 

will assume our ordinary business at 3:15 or thereabouts. That’s the proposal. I believe it is a fitting way 

for us to acknowledge our visitors and express a fitting way for us to acknowledge our visitors and 

express to them our welcome. Accordingly, I move the motion which I just read. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1657 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek 

(Minister of Health) that Bill No. 67 – An Act to amend The Cancer Control Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I should like to comment favorably on 

the manner in which the Minister spoke to this Bill because he did it in a non-political way and I think 

this is commendable because the Cancer Control in this province has seen experience under various 

governments and, I think, is recognized as one of the most successful Cancer Control programs in the 

world. It has a long and enviable record and I certainly won’t add anything to cause a political fire. 

 

It was felt two or three years ago that after the Cancer Commission and The Cancer Control Act had 

been in operation for some 40 years, that it needed some review and some reassessment and some 

revaluation, and that possibly as a result of that study and review that it could play a more vital role than 

it had in the past. It is interesting to note that the President of the United States not too long ago 

indicated an all-out battle against cancer in the United States and gave many, many millions of dollars of 

support to the American Cancer Society. Here in Canada we haven’t declared the same all-out war on a 

Canadian basis, although the Canadian Cancer Society has been active for many, many years and I 

believe the Minister mentioned that it had its founding in Saskatchewan. I think there is a debt of 

gratitude coming to the thousands of volunteers in the Cancer Society for the millions of dollars they 

have raised throughout the 25 odd years they have been in existence. I think it is an indication of the 

status of that association when one realizes that year in and year out they have been able to exceed their 

quota of funds that they put a drive on for. 

 

It’s regrettable that due to the calibre of the people engaged on the Johnson Commission and the size of 

the task that we gave those people – when I say the calibre I have reference to the fact that they were all 

very busy people – that it took a little longer to complete than we have originally intended. But when 

one looks at the report, it is quite a voluminous document of some 179 pages with 71 recommendations 

and it was put together by people under the chairmanship of Mr. Justice Johnson. Judge Johnson, being a 

member of the Queen’s Bench Court is a very busy man, but his right-hand men were equally busy and I 

refer to Mr. Harry Bower who is the provincial manager of the Royal Bank, Doctor Walton, director of 

the Manitoba Cancer Foundation, Doctor Taylor, a prominent surgeon, and Bob Genereaux, a consulting 

engineer here in Regina and one other one, Mr. Harold Dietrich, a lawyer. 

 

The result of almost two years work, I think, has brought forth an excellent report and as the Minister 

indicated quite a number of the recommendations are being implemented and I would hope that as time 

goes on the Department and the newly formed commission can see fit to implement some of the other 

recommendations. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1658 

There is one gentleman involved in the work of the Cancer Control in this province that I think bears 

special mention and I refer to Doctor Tom Barclay who has been executive director for quite a number 

of years but in the last year or so has carried a very heavy load in that he was covering Saskatoon as well 

as Regina. It must be a pretty onerous occupation for him and I’m sure all Members of this House 

appreciate his contribution. 

 

The important thing, I think, which was brought forth in this Act is the make-up of the board and the 

powers given to that board and a feature that I like very much, namely a built-in turnover plan so that 

there will be a change of personnel on the board as times goes on. 

 

I think there is some merit in the thought of a full-time chairman, because it is a demanding job and the 

new role, or the new powers and purposes will be such that a chairman, even if he is only part-time, can 

make a big contribution to the future of Cancer Control in this province. 

 

One other observation – the Minister made reference to the betatron which has been installed in 

Saskatoon and it is unique I think that this is only about the second one in North America and I think we 

should also remember it was unique in the manner in which we acquired it, in that we bartered grain for 

it, just in case some of us may have forgotten that business manoeuvre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t wish to prolong the debate, I merely want to endorse what the Minister said and 

publicly acknowledge the contribution made by Mr. Justice Johnson and his committee in a very 

worthwhile task and I know we all wish the future of the cancer program in Saskatchewan success and 

that success will be the day when we find the answer to this scourge. 

 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I want to express my appreciation and 

thanks to the Members of the Opposition for their endorsement of the amendments that are being 

proposed to The Cancer Control Act. 

 

Perhaps the question that the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw raised was answered by the Member from 

Whitmore Park. The other day he raised the question on the term appointments i.e. limiting them to three 

years and permitting a further three year appointment. I am glad to see that the Hon. Member from 

Whitmore Park does endorse the idea. Perhaps he might get together with the Hon. Member from Moose 

Jaw who seemed to question the idea when he spoke in the debate. 

 

I have already expressed my thanks and appreciation to the members of the Johnson Commission both in 

a personal way and by way of letter. We do appreciate the contribution made by the members of the 

Johnson Commission who studied the cancer program and who made a number of very useful 

recommendations. The other day I said the recommendations in a majority of cases can only be acted on 

by the program development and do not require legislative changes. Those legislative changes that are 

necessary are being made in the Bill. We do hope that with changes in the membership of the 

commission we can again give new impetus to the Cancer Control program. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1659 

May I also say that we are faced with some problems particularly in the need of expert physicians, 

radio-therapists, where there is a shortage. I’m glad to see that our recruitment program has had some 

success. My information is that four radio-therapists are coming to Saskatchewan. We now have three 

radio-therapists in the province. When you consider that in the whole of Western Canada there are only 

twelve radio-therapists we can consider ourselves fortunate in relation to other provinces. It is because 

we have had a meaningful program but I think that the program does need some new life. 

 

With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that 

Bill No. 66 – An Act respecting Community Colleges be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, I adjourned the debate yesterday 

because as I said I knew that there were other Members who wanted to speak in this debate. 

 

I closed by saying, Mr. Speaker, that I thought that this innovation and this concept that is being 

developed in community colleges in Saskatchewan is going to serve as an example, I believe, to other 

jurisdictions in Canada in the development or the improvement of their community college systems. 

 

I think that you can look at the places, as I mentioned the other day, and the mistakes that have been 

made in places like Ontario, where the community colleges are no longer continuing to be, in fact, 

community colleges but have become campuses geared mainly to a campus situation rather than serving 

communities. 

 

In Saskatchewan because we have had the benefit of being able to see the errors that were made in other 

jurisdictions. We have been able to develop a program which will, in fact, really and truly serve the 

communities where they are and serve the people in their communities by having programs that are of 

interest and are of need to them, offered to them in the communities in which they live rather than 

having to travel any kind of long distances to be able to take advantage of these programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, I will be very happy, and I can say this for the people in my 

constituency, or part of one of the community college pilot projects, I’m very happy to support this Bill 

which, as I said before, is very significant and is going to be another milestone in the development of 

educational programs and educational systems in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, should like to add a few comments to the 

already goodly number of speeches that have been made in this regard to this Bill, Bill 66, an Act 

respecting Community Colleges. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1660 

The need in the communities for a program of education other than that being offered by the regular 

school system has, in the past decade, been recognized not only by those providing the education, 

including teachers, trustees and other people but the many working people mostly adults who need 

refresher courses and varied other people who make up the community. Now these people realize that to 

be a part of today’s mechanical and technological world and, of course, Mr. Speaker, to add to the 

enrichment of life across our province, particularly to the rural life, educational programs had to arise 

based on formal and informal needs of each separate community. Thus, the idea of the community 

colleges was born, hopefully, far different from the community colleges of the North American past 

which for all purposes became glorified high schools or glorified colleges or often pint size spitting 

images of the big brother, the university. Now the community college of Saskatchewan will, in fact, be 

the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the clearly definitive idea of this concept is that the college is the community and the 

community is the college. This indeed is a very accurate description of the proposed community colleges 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

What I like about this program of community colleges, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s the community that 

determines whether it wishes to have any courses, formal or informal, that it’s the community having 

established the need for a course, decides all the particulars about it, when it will be held, where it will 

be held and all other matters relating to it. It’s autonomy the kind that I like, Mr. Speaker. It’s the kind 

of autonomy and grassroots participation that I believe in and I am certain will be approved by the local 

communities, those that will have community colleges within their vicinity. 

 

The communities and the individuals within it will influence the make-up of the college and the 

make-up of its courses as I’ve already said. The people will be able to identify the needs of the 

community by program decision making. Changing needs and changing concerns will determine the 

kind of programs they will have. Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another important factor in this college concept is that the people will use their resources that they have 

at hand. They are free to move the classroom to a factory or to a farm, if that’s what they want. There is 

no rigidity of classroom curriculum. The lessons may be learned on the spot, so to speak, and in my 

opinion that is an excellent change from the strictly formal lecture methods that are so overworn and 

overused in our lecture halls of today. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, to use the physical facilities as they are without further expansion or money 

or further construction of buildings will meet with the approval of school boards, ratepayers and people 

in general, I’m sure. 

 

As a former trustee, I, as well as many other trustees, have often said, why should these buildings be 

used only forty hours a week, why not use them for as many daylight hours as possible? Why not use 

them at night, why should we not have adults using these costly facilities as well as regular students? 

This utilization of the school facilities by community colleges is a step in the right direction, Mr. 

Speaker. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1661 

Now four project areas have been established in Saskatchewan as has been said by the other Members 

on this side of the House. Each is to begin operation in the fall of 1973 – LaRonge, Humboldt, Swift 

Current and Yorkton-Melville. Because the Yorkton-Melville work has already progressed to a point, I 

want to make a few comments about it. 

 

First, let me say that the Yorkton-Melville area is an area of the province that is, in my personal opinion, 

very much suited to a community college program. It’s a very diverse area geographically and culturally 

as I have often said before. People in that area have been asking for information about community 

colleges, how a community is to go about sponsoring these, who qualifies for these programs, how they 

are paid for and many other questions. Ever since the opening of the office in Melville approximately 

two months ago, the community college developer has been continuously out in the field meeting the 

people, asking questions, talking to municipal people, service clubs, church groups, community groups 

and other groups of people that show interest are being visited by him. Then, of course there are those 

people who don’t meet with the developer and they deal through the office and the office secretary has a 

continual stream of people to deal with and also many replies to answer by phone and by mail. 

 

By the interest being shown, Mr. Speaker, the community college program can certainly look forward to 

a strong community participation in that region in the community college concept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the regulations regarding the composition of the board as written in this Bill, in my 

opinion, are quite flexible and indeed they should. The rule that points out the fact that all board 

members would have to reside in the area served by the college is further evidence of homemade 

participation and homemade organization. The local board chooses the principal who is also the chief 

executive officer. One of the board members, of which there could be a total of four to seven, could be a 

student, one member would be from the teaching staff. A yearly proposed budget would have to be 

submitted to the Continuing Education Department and a report on the college’s operation and financing 

would have to be submitted annually as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hopefully the community college concept will serve to bring education to the people in the 

community than as it has been where much of the formal education has been away from the community. 

It will provide the kind of courses the community wants and needs as I’ve indicated before. It will 

benefit every interested person regardless of his previous education or his background. A fairly good 

example of similar types of training are the short courses offered by Manpower, the Extension 

Department of the University, the Co-op Credit Society and others have shown that indeed there is a 

void in the community educational structure that could be filled by these organizations and that the 

community college concept can easily become the leader to this end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that I am certain will be the vehicle which will enable communities to 

determine in their own way a new grassroots participatory method of education. In view of the fact that 

many older people desire to participate in the process of learning, that many younger people are 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1662 

searching for knowledge tied closer to their needs, and that the concept of the structuring of this ideal of 

community colleges must come from the communities themselves which eventually builds up and 

strengthens the community itself, I am in full agreement of the Bill as I’m sure will be all other 

Members of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, think this is a very good Bill. I have some things 

that I want to say on it at a little later date and right now I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Rail Line Abandonment 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 

 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government that no railway branch line abandonment be 

considered in Saskatchewan before all the alternatives are thoroughly studied and the social and 

economic costs to producers, businesses and communities be ascertained and, further, that no 

abandonments be allowed without the prior agreement of the Government of Saskatchewan and, 

specifically, that no abandonments be authorized until 1980. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Gardner: 

 

That the following words be added to the motion: 

“and further that the railroad companies be obligated to: 

1. Provide a high standard of service on present lines. 

2. Provide adequate maintenance and improvements on rail lines and equipment so that a high standard 

of service can be maintained.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about this 

particular resolution. The resolution is a very important one for the Province of Saskatchewan dealing 

with the matter of rail line abandonment. The resolution is important because if it passes this House, as I 

anticipate it will, it will have the effect of communicating to the Federal Government authorities and to 

the railways, inasmuch as they are involved, the united voice of the Saskatchewan people on the matter 

of rail line abandonment. 

 

Rail line abandonment in a wholesale way will have a tremendous impact on the economic and social 

lives of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. The economics of the situation are very clear. If rail 

lines are abandoned we can expect, naturally as a result, closure of country elevators. As a consequence 

of that we can expect that our farmers will have to look to alternate methods of hauling grain to market 

and to points where it can be delivered to market. This will undoubtedly mean trucking. It will mean an 

increased 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1663 

expenditure in terms of the truck units that will have to be bought by them. It will mean, undoubtedly, 

on the part of the Provincial Government increased expenditures on highways in order to carry those 

trucks and that, indirectly, at any rate, comes right back onto the farmers. It will mean, as well, longer 

distances to haul and that, of course, means increased costs in terms of gasoline and in terms of man 

hours and so forth and the economic ramifications multiply. 

 

From a social standpoint rail line abandonment is an equally serious threat to the people of 

Saskatchewan. In the Province of Saskatchewan over the last several years we have seen almost on a day 

to day basis announcements of closures of a variety of functions in our small towns and villages which 

are an integral part of our Saskatchewan way of life. 

 

An example is the closure of post offices now followed by applications by Canadian Pacific and 

Canadian National Railways over a four or five year period for massive closures of stations and removal 

of agents. Small towns in Saskatchewan, in my experience, quite naturally view each one of these 

closures as the beginning of an end for a way of life for a community which has been such a part of the 

Saskatchewan scene. And if you see rail line abandonment added on top of this, Mr. Speaker, and you 

see the closure of country elevator points coupled on top of closures of post offices and station agents 

and the like, the tendency for larger and larger farming units, one can see that this trend to centralization 

will have profound social effects on the face of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it is incumbent on all of us as MLAs, as interested citizens in the future economic and social 

development of our province, to ask ourselves the basic question: Do we want Saskatchewan to organize 

itself economically and socially in larger centralized units with respect to the family farms, which I 

submit means fewer family farms, a few large family farms, which means fewer towns and villages, 

which means a smaller rural based population, which means, in effect, a centralization, a concentration 

of economic and social activity in several larger centres of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Do we want that for the Province of Saskatchewan in 1975 or 1980? Can MLAs say, well, we don’t 

want it but it is inevitable? Should the people of Saskatchewan adopt the attitude that there is nothing 

that can be done to stop the wave of technology that the CPR and the CN placed upon the people of this 

province, that it is inevitable? Do we as MLAs say that the costs of production, the costs of keeping the 

family farmer are such that it is impossible to keep the family farmers as basic to the scene of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, that it is inevitable? Inevitable that we are all going to move to a trend of 

bigness, a trend of increasing centralization, a trend to larger and larger units? 

 

If we say that it is inevitable, that it is more efficient, that technology demands that of us, we start from 

that sort of philosophical base, then I submit that we are conceding as MLAs that Saskatchewan as we 

have known it sooner or later, and I submit very much sooner, will go by the board, that we don’t want 

to preserve the social and other institutions which are the basic framework of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I, for one, Mr. Speaker, don’t want to see that. I, for one, 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1664 

want to approach my analysis of the problems of station closures, of rail line abandonment, of closures 

of post office, the business of larger farms, I want to approach it with the bias that there is a social goal 

worth preserving. That there must be some very strong overriding economic reasons, overpowering 

economic reasons to convince me that the Province of Saskatchewan’s rural face should be changed and 

chanted so radically before I accept it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — For the Canadian Pacific and the Canadian National railroads, for some of the 

people who are associated with them and in the involvements with respect to grain handling and the like, 

quite obviously, there are powerful economic reasons for rail line abandonment. 

 

When you are a marketing supervisor or an operations manager, or a vice president or even a president 

of Canadian Pacific or Canadian National the one thing that you have to look at is the profit and loss 

balance statement and unfortunately that statement doesn’t show the social and political objectives that 

all of us MLAs should be striving for in this Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Unfortunately the history of this province has been that when the CPR and the CN sit down in their 

corporate board rooms and corporate tables to judge what is going to happen in future economic 

development for the Province of Saskatchewan the social concerns are totally non-existent. And there 

has been no one in the past from Government or from communities to bring to the attention of the 

railways what that social cause and what those economic objectives of our province are. 

 

In the few short months that I had anything to do with railways and transportation policies, Mr. Speaker, 

nothing has frustrated me more than the attitude of the Canadian Pacific and Canadian National 

railways. It is not to say that they are not pleasant or courteous or well informed and, in fact, very often 

can mount what at first sight would seem to be strong arguments for increasing centralization. But 

nothing, generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, has frustrated me more than dealing with the railways of the 

country of Canada, railways which have long ago abandoned their stated objective in history, in any 

event, of being the nation builders of this country. 

 

What happened is the concept that the Canadian National and the Canadian Pacific were, contrary to all 

of the aspects of geography that almost compel us to go north-south in our trading, north-south in our 

culture, north-south in our economics, in order to counter that, the railways were to be used and to be the 

nation builders, east-west against geographic odds. What happened to the idea that railway companies 

had more than just a duty to their shareholders to produce a profit? What happened to the idea that 

railway companies were there not only to provide efficient transportation but were there as an 

instrument of national unity or of the interests of Canada, even those here in Western Canada which is 

small in population and economically and in many ways dependent on Eastern Canada. 

 

What happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the entire philosophy has been lost in the corporate board rooms of 

the Canadian 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1665 

Pacific and the Canadian National. They have the ear of those agencies, those instruments of 

government federally, which are sympathetic to that point of view. There is no one to speak from 

Western Canada for the family farmer, for the small village, for the way of life that all of us on this side 

of the House want to preserve in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, one way that we can in a non-partisan way speak in the interests 

of all of the people in this province, and I say to a large extent in the interests of Canada, is by passing 

this resolution and passing the amendment to the resolution which I think strengthens the intent of the 

resolution. 

 

I say to the Opposition that little is achieved with speeches about rail line abandonment in 1962 to 1964. 

Little is achieved by speeches as have been delivered by Members opposite accusing this Government of 

introducing this resolution as a political ploy. Little is achieved by contradictory speeches on the 

opposite side which condemns farm organizations out-of-hand or almost seemingly out-of-hand for their 

position on rail line abandonment. 

 

I don’t think there are necessarily blacks and whites in the situation. And if we communicate to the 

people of Saskatchewan that this resolution is nothing more, nothing less than a political ploy, I am 

saying that those who would argue that, are only doing one thing and that is communicating to the 

railways that we are not standing united. And if we don’t stand united on this, divided we will fall. That 

is a disservice to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this problem is a problem of long standing history in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. In 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965 the whole matter of transportation was again 

rearing its head by way of proposed legislation. 

 

The Government of the day in 1964 and 1971 was, of course, the Liberal Government. The Liberal 

Government of that day endeavored to do some things with respect to rail line abandonment. I give them 

credit for that. But it is my contention, Mr. Speaker, that there were two or three major areas of failure 

during those years of 1964 to 1971 which placed the Province of Saskatchewan now in a very difficult 

predicament. 

 

In my judgement, perusing the documentation that I have had an opportunity to look at, one failure was 

the bias which the Liberal Party of the day had toward the 1967 National Transportation Act. Mr. 

Speaker, you will know that in 1967 a new National Transportation Act under which certain rights and 

certain grievances can be remedied was written for Canada. That National Transportation Act was based 

on the philosophy that rail rates and that rail lines and rail service could be maintained on the principle 

of competition, competition of one mode of transport versus another. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1666 

I believe that the Liberal Government, those Members who were Members of that Government sitting 

opposite, in their belief in the principle of competition supported that general approach in 1967. And in 

so doing they failed to recognize a major gap in the principle of competition as a means of controlling 

this problem in Western Canada, namely, that there is no competition for the farmer and for the shipper 

of this province. Namely, that trucks in this western part of Canada are dominated by the rails, that our 

trucking industry is very small, that in all forms of transport we are controlled by the rails which act in a 

monopolistic fashion. 

 

But on the matter of rail lines, more specifically, Mr. Speaker, I think that the errors of the former 

administration were, in fact, very glaring in two or three areas which makes it very difficult now for us 

to cope with the problem. 

 

First of all, this matter of maintenance. I think the amendment is a good amendment. I urge all Members 

of the House to support it. But I want to remind the Members of this House that it was during the period 

of 1967 to 1971 approximately that the railways decided to adopt their policy of non-maintenance of rail 

lines as a part of their case build-up prior to 1967 for rail line abandonment. Part of their approach was 

to be that rail lines were in disrepair and disuse and that therefore the rail lines should be abandoned. 

 

I want this House to know that I know of no record of written contact by the former Government on this 

issue of rail line maintenance when the matter was, in fact, the policy of the railways from 1964 to 1971. 

Now they introduce the amendment. And, of course, I say I welcome that but the fact of the matter is 

that in 1973 it is very difficult for us to counteract, after periods of several years of non-maintenance, 

non-maintenance which buttresses the argument for rail line abandonment by the railways. 

 

Now there is a second problem. Mr. Speaker, I put it in these terms. On May 4, 1967, that is now six 

years ago and in the middle of the Liberal regime, this whole matter of rail line abandonment finally 

came to a resolution. On May 4, 1967 the Federal Government, a Federal Liberal Government passed an 

Order-in-Council which guaranteed much of the prairie rail network to January 1, 1975. So that as of 

that date the politicians in Western Canada could feel, I think they felt secure, that to January 1, 1975 

much of the rail line network would be protected. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there was short run relief only in that May 4, 1967 Federal Liberal Government 

decision. What has been the result? First, the Provincial Liberal Government on May 4, 1967 and 

thereafter failed to recognize the threat of massive rail line abandonment after January 1, 1975. 

Somehow the Government of the day felt that 1975 was an eternity away. It was at least eight years 

away. It would at least get them by the provincial election of October 1967. It would at least tell the 

farmers of Saskatchewan as they went into the provincial election of October 1967 that rail lines were 

now protected by virtue of the Order-in-Council of May 4, 1967. And because they weren’t concerned 

about 1975 and beyond, the result, Mr. Speaker, was that when we took office no major policy was 

being developed as to what this Government was going to do for Western Canada after 1975. That was, I 

think, one of the major errors of the 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1667 

party opposite. 

 

A second failure, to my judgement, is also very significant. After this Order-in-Council was passed in 

1967 Members will know that the Grains Group was established to study this problem of rail line 

abandonment and the delivery system of the whole of Western Canada, country elevators and the like 

which is all tied into it. That was established in 1969. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can find no steps taken by the former Government wherein they asked to participate in 

any such studies. Mr. Speaker, I can find no evidence from the former Government to show that the 

voice of the Saskatchewan farmer would be heard in that 1969 study which obviously had huge 

ramifications now for all of the economic and social fabric of Western Canada. To me it is inconceivable 

that a Provincial Government which had an ally at that time in the Liberal Government in Ottawa 

instrumental in setting up the Grains Group knowing that the likely consequences were going to be of 

immense proportion economically and socially. To me it is inconceivable that somehow the voice of the 

Government of Saskatchewan was not to play a part in that, not only not to play a part but there was not 

even an attempt that the voice of the prairie farmer should be heard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And what was the result, Mr. Speaker, and what do we face now in 1973? The 

result was the Grains Groups was set up as everybody knows. It worked in virtual secrecy. It worked up 

until about October or November of 1971 with virtually no input from any Provincial Government that I 

know of. It has input from some of the farm organizations, the Wheat Pool, the rails and a few other 

commodity groups. But there was no input from the elected representatives of the people. There was no 

input from 1969 to 1971 from the Liberals opposite. And when we got into power and I went down to 

talk to a few people with respect to the Grains Group I was told there wasn’t going to be any input and it 

wasn’t until the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) and several others 

and other circumstances which forced a rethinking on the part of the Grains Group that the result was 

that the report was given to us in confidence in late 1971. But the point is, Mr. Speaker, that we were 

given the findings, we were presented with the findings. We weren’t given a chance to work towards 

those findings. And what is happening now? We see here railway companies in some areas, even our 

farm organizations working in concert with the railway companies. We see a possibility of shrinkage in 

lines and shrinkage in country elevators in their economic interest and a buildup in Western Canada of 

propaganda to brainwash the farmers of this province and Western Canada that rail rationalization, 

country elevator schemes, abandonment and the like are in the best interests, socially and economically, 

of this province. 

 

The Province of Saskatchewan’s voice was silent in 1969 and beyond. 

 

Now there is a third point also, Mr. Speaker, that I want to draw to the attention of the Members. I said 

that the May 4, 1967 Order-in-Council ended rail line abandonment proposals to 1975. But the key word 

to the Member from Moose Jaw North 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1668 

(Mr. MacDonald) is that much, not all, but much of the rail lines are protected. What is important in the 

May 4, 1967 Order-in-Council of protection is that it didn’t protect, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t protect 1,010 

miles of rail lines in the Province of Saskatchewan. And the situation simply is that today there are 1,010 

miles or over 1,000 miles lying still unprotected by that Order-in-Council of 1967. Mr. Speaker, the 

railway companies could by law abandon these lines. They have refrained from doing so because they 

say that the Grains Group investigation must be in before they will act on what they legally can do now 

on those 1,010 miles of rail lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a comprehensive list but if those 1,010 miles of lines, if the railways pick up 

their legal right to act, they are affecting 126 elevator points in Saskatchewan. They are affecting 255 

elevators. They are affecting, roughly speaking, 7,500 permit holders, 7,500 farmers of the province. 

They are, in effect, affecting 14 million bushels in elevator storage capacity which could be lost. They 

are affecting our villages, our hamlets and our town residents nearly 10,000 in number, Mr. Speaker. 

That is the effect of 1,010 miles of rail lines left unprotected, basically at the mercy of the railway 

companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that the former Liberal Government erred seriously when they didn’t bring to the 

attention of the Federal Government, their political allies, that there were over 1,000 miles of rail lines 

left unprotected. They erred in not bringing to the attention of the Federal Government the concerns of 

those 10,000 people, the concerns of those 7,500 permit holders, the concerns of those elevator points, 

concern for the entire social and economic fabric of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Where were the Liberals in 1967 on rail line abandonment? That was when the basic policy decisions 

were being made. Where were the Liberals provincially? Where were the Liberals federally, Mr. 

Speaker? In fact, for that matter, I don’t believe that there was any statement by any Federal Liberal 

politician on rail line abandonment until the recently concluded federal election in October of 1972. I 

don’t think there was a statement prior to October 1972. Can anybody think of one by a federal 

politician? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Not one! And what happened in October of 1972 was that the Prime Minister 

realized that he was in political trouble in Western Canada. The Member from Regina shrugs as if that 

statement is untrue. Nothing could prove the truth of that statement more than the result of October 31, 

1972. I mean if he didn’t think he was in political trouble at that time, surely, he must have realized that 

he was in that two or three week period from the time he made the statement to the time the vote was 

taken that something went wrong because the Liberal popularity went completely down. I don’t want to 

get side-tracked on that issue. 

 

I am only saying, Mr. Speaker, that is the first time that I can recall that there has been a move by 

Federal Liberal politicians in this area. The Prime Minister said that there would be no rail line 

abandonment without the prior consultation 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1669 

of the Governments of Saskatchewan and those provinces affected. And that is the basis for this 

resolution because he said it in print and publicly and we want this House to stand united with respect to 

this position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I close my remarks as I started them. I think this resolution contains a fundamental 

question about how we want Saskatchewan to develop for the future. I invite the Liberals to join us in 

saying that there is a way of life, that there is a system that has served not only Canada but the world 

very well as the bread basket. It is a system socially and economically that we must work to protect. We 

invite them to join us in declaring that we can’t as legislators preside over the destruction and 

decimation of Western Canada but rather we want to be the builders of family farms in Western Canada 

and not to be those who have been elected to see them disappear and small towns and villages die as 

well. I think this will be the consequence of the massive abandonment as is contemplated now. 

 

I want to hasten to add the position of the Government is not to say that no line can be abandoned. We 

all know that there are some lines which from every standpoint, the political objective, the economic and 

the social objective, and I don’t mean political in a partisan sense, should be abandoned. And there will 

have to be a rationalization of the country delivery system. I commend the Pools and the farm 

organizations for studying this matter and involving their membership. We, as the Government of 

Saskatchewan aren’t adopting the attitude like ostriches with their heads in the sand that nothing must 

ever change. If there is any such misconception, let me dispel that notion. 

 

In fact, we are studying this matter very actively, the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) has the 

former Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Horner working full time on rail line abandonment, its 

economic and social effects. We say that if an alternate service is needed by way of trucking, the costs to 

the farmers and to the communities in Western Canada must first be determined before any steps are 

taken. We say that as a Saskatchewan Government we want a voice and an input before rail lines are to 

be abandoned. We need until 1980 to analyze the problem. Not that 1980 is any magic date. We think 

the problem is of such immense importance that we need that amount of time in order to adjust our 

thinking, in order to adjust our farm organizations, in order to make all the necessary adjustments so that 

the people of Saskatchewan get as good if not better service than they had earned in the past. That is 

what this resolution says. I urge all Members of this House to support the amendment and to support the 

main motion, to put aside political comment, to rise above the matter of partisan points of view as have 

been enunciated by the Member from Lumsden (Mr. Lane) and the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) 

and to get on with the job making sure that Western Canada has a strong, healthy and vital role to play 

for all of Canada. I am going to support both the amendment and the resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I hadn’t intended to get into this 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1670 

debate but I think that following the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) possibly there will be a few more 

people wanting to enter the debate. The Attorney General didn’t disappoint us. He came out with his 

usual contradictory and grandstand style. He continually urged this House that we must not stand 

divided, that we must put our politics aside and then he discussed nothing but politics for the whole 

speech. He urges us to put politics aside and then spends 15 minutes talking politics. Where were the 

Liberals, he said, and what were they doing and what they didn’t do and how they erred. He asks us to 

put politics aside, that we must stand united. It is the kind of contradiction that we have come to expect 

from the Attorney General and that we get every time that we hear him. 

 

I was a little disappointed in his style today. He only attracted 15 Members from his side of the House 

and one of the occupants of the gallery is still asleep. He said that the attitude of the CPR and the CNR 

is a little frustrating at times, and I will agree. But the attitude of the NDP opposite is frustrating all the 

time. He talked that political speeches and political resolutions won’t do any good. This is the only thing 

that the NDP has ever tried. He talked about the public hearings that the NDP had in the early 1960s. 

This is just a political ploy. At the same time these public meetings were being held the NDP hoped that 

rail lines would be abandoned so they could blame the Federal Government and use it as a political 

issue. I think they may be doing the same today. The NDP keep coming up with a short-sighted and 

narrow attitude towards the questions of rail line abandonment and the present resolution is the same. 

Government Members should realize that no lines were ever abandoned except under an NDP 

Government. That is a well known fact in this and to put a short-sighted motion on these books that says 

that no more, nothing until 1980 and then I suppose it is all right what ever happens. That is not the right 

kind of a motion. The right kind of a motion is the amendment that offers some solutions to the problem. 

I don’t think that the Attorney General can expect this House to be united with the Members of this 

House until a resolution is offered that is a little more far-sighted. I think that he should talk to the 

farmers. The farmers aren’t as short-sighted as this. Farm organizations aren’t as short-sighted as this 

resolution is. Ask the Wheat Pool if you went to the meeting last Friday in Saskatoon. Farmers aren’t 

even talking with this type of an attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that after the remarks of the Attorney General I should like to ask leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 50 – An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972 be now read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Michayluk (Redberry): — Debates on Bill 50, The Natural Products Marketing Act have 

gone on for some time. The Minister of Agriculture 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1671 

and the Members who have participated thus far have put forward some arguments for support of or 

opposition to this legislation. The Hon. Members who spoke in support demonstrated with convincing 

facts in favor of orderly marketing of natural products and particularly for the establishment of the Hog 

Marketing Commission to create permanency with respect to the price and sale of the hogs produced in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt), who is not in his seat, Mr. Speaker, in his far ranging 

rhetoric kept swinging from his usual position of the extreme right to the unusual left in support of the 

Canadian Wheat Board. He remarked that the farmers were the hardest up under the Wheat Board up 

until the initial price of wheat went up to $1.70 per bushel. 

 

To the Hon. Member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, the word compulsory is a very repulsive word. Might 

I be permitted to pose several pointed questions to the Hon. Member from Rosthern? By making specific 

reference to the seven years when the Hon. Member was in the Executive Council and the Treasury 

Benches, was there no compulsion in the legislation under Bill 2? Was there no compulsion in Medicare 

and hospital deterrent fees? Was there no compulsion in the five per cent tax on meals? Was there no 

compulsion in levying hospital charges on estates of the unfortunate Saskatchewan residents who died 

while institutionalized in our mental institutions? It appears to me that the Hon. Member wants to wash 

his political linens white in very muddy and dirty Liberal water. Mr. Speaker, he made reference that 

this Government is putting the hog producers into a straight jacket by not giving an opportunity for a 

plebiscite. This Hon. Member from Rosthern thinks that Divine Providence has given him and his party 

the supreme privilege to make decisions respecting the working conditions of working people, the sick, 

the hungry, regardless of the changing economics, without recourse to better their lot. And particularly 

under Bill 2. This, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member demonstrated to our working people by the 

implementation of Bill 2 by his Liberal Government. No vote. To the Hon. Member for Rosthern this 

was not repulsive. This was not putting the working people into a straight jacket. This, Sir, was the rule 

of law, the law of the mighty Liberals. The Liberal law of suppression of preventing the common 

ordinary working people to bargain for the sale of the only commodity they had, their hands, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, were I, by some supposed miracle of coincidence to find myself sitting among the 

privileged elite on your left I would hang my head in shame when suppression and freedom are 

mentioned. The Hon. Member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, is obsessed with socialism, in hating it. That 

is, in his view everyone who has contributed or wants to contribute to the improvement of the economic 

position of the farming community is an outcast and has no right to rectify or to try to rectify the 

injustice. To the Hon. Member from Rosthern, Mr. Boden, president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Agriculture, Mr. Turner, the president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and I suppose the new Minister 

of Agriculture, the Hon. Eugene Whelan, are all socialists because they are trying to help the farmers 

and put them into a better economic position. 

 

The Hon. Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes), speaking in favor of this Bill, demonstrated that the 

fluctuations in the price of wheat under the Winnipeg Grain Exchange worked against 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1672 

the average producers. I can recall the price of wheat fluctuating or changing twice in a day. A farmer at 

mid-day had to make a decision whether it was the morning or the afternoon price that he wished to sell 

his grain for. Wheat sold early in any new year brought the highest return and this is not the crop year 

but the new calendar year. This was, Mr. Speaker, when the prices, during and immediately after harvest 

when the farmers had to sell to meet farming operating expenses, were the lowest. In some instances the 

price differential between the October and March price was as much as 60 cents per bushel under the 

Winnipeg Grain Exchange. These were the days when the free enterprise friends of the gentlemen 

opposite, the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, reigned supreme in the grain business. 

 

To the Hon. Member for Rosthern, he defended the sale of rape on the open market, all that he has to do 

is go over the price of rape over the last full crop year and the present to note the varying price changes 

for that same commodity. 

 

May I, Mr. Speaker, give some examples of the rape prices to the Members of this House. In the 

1971-72 crop year, on August 30 of the crop year one year ago which ended July 31 of this year, the 

rape price was $2.24½ per bushel. Not $4 per bushel that my hon. friend from Rosthern gave. In 

December, three or four months later, the price of rape was $2.16½. In April it was $2.32 and in July, 

the end of the crop year, rape sold for $2.16 per bushel. Then let’s take the 1972-73 crop year. In 

August, the first month of the new crop year, the morning price, again we have two prices per day – in 

my village of Krydor, the morning price for rape on that date was $2.17, the afternoon price was $2.20 

per bushel. Let’s go on to December. The price of rape per bushel was $2.80, February $3.86, nearing 

that $4 mark that my hon. friend from Rosthern quoted in his speech the other day. On March 16, the 

day on which the Hon. Member for Rosthern spoke, rape was $3.42¼ at the Wheat Pool elevator in 

Krydor. Even if a farmer lives in a designated area he may have received 30 cents more per bushel, 

depending on where you are. But that’s not in your area, my hon. friend from Rosthern. 

 

Why should the prices vary in this manner? A bushel of rape is a bushel of rape whether it is in August, 

November, December or in March. Because the sale and the purchase of rape is presently on the open 

market the philosophy of my hon. friend applies, boom or bust. He believes that if he is able to hold a 

bushel of rape until December and is not obligated to sell it in October or September when it is 

harvested he is to receive $1.35 more per bushel than the farmer who is compelled to sell rape in 

October at a lower price. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — What about the Bill, Dick? 

 

Hon. Mr. Michayluk: — I am talking about the Bill. There is no reason why there should be that 

differential. 

 

The Hon. Member from Rosthern and most of the Members that have spoken suggested and he was 

quite firm that the farmers should be given the right to make the decision. As a matter of fact, the 

Member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, stated that when the Wheat Board came into being it was brought 

in on a plebiscite by the producers of wheat. Were the producers of barley, oats and rye given that same 

privilege? No! It was brought 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1673 

under the Wheat Board without any plebiscite. I would hope to see the day, Mr. Speaker, when rape and 

flax will be brought under the Wheat Board in the same manner as oats, rye and barley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, with specific reference to the establishment of the Hog 

Marketing Commission for the protecting and stabilizing of the sale of hogs and their prices, this has 

long been overdue. The Minister of Agriculture, acting on a request from the Hog Producers’ 

Association, the Saskatchewan Swine Breeders, the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the National Farmers’ Union indicates the desirability and the 

concurrence by the members of those organizations for the creation of such a commission whether the 

Liberals want it or not. These are farm organizations, requests came from these organizations. I must 

compliment the Minister on taking action on their behalf. Farmers, Mr. Speaker, and particularly the 

producers of hogs, have suffered from the vagaries of fluctuating prices ranging from 16 to 44 cents a 

pound. Hog prices fluctuated with the law of supply and demand. I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Hog Marketing Commission for Saskatchewan hog producers should stabilize and give permanency to 

the marketing and the price of this vital industry. 

 

Not only will the establishment of a Hog Marketing Commission in Saskatchewan create stability here 

but also in our neighboring provinces of Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario where marketing agencies have 

been in operation for some time. Mr. Speaker, until recently Saskatchewan hogs were being used to 

force down prices in the three provinces that I have just mentioned. Where marketing agencies have 

been in existence, it is rather evident, Mr. Speaker, that low prices elsewhere tend to lead to lower prices 

in Saskatchewan or in our neighboring provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that the setting up in the province of the Hog Marketing Commission is 

timely and necessary. It is evident from the Members opposite that they are opposed to the manner in 

which the commission is set up. There are, Mr. Speaker, and there will be considered efforts to malign 

and attack the Minister of Agriculture and the commission for the bold step forward to provide to the 

genuine hog producers an orderly and stable system of marketing their product. The days of the 16 and 

44 cent per pound fluctuation in the hog prices could only be resolved by an organization of this type 

and that is the Hog Marketing Commission. This would give security and stability to the hog producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members opposite are opposed to the setting up of a commission without a 

plebiscite. This to me, Mr. Speaker, is yet another puny effort to drag out the red herring of compulsion 

which they use in every instance and which, for one reason and only one, is politically motivated. Mr. 

Speaker, with your permission and the permission of the House I want to read into the records of this 

Assembly from a letter appearing in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix by a young concerned hog producer 

who lives in my constituency. It appeared in the Star-Phoenix, I can table that letter if you so wish. I 

haven’t got the copy from the paper. It appeared under the title “The Key to Stable Hog Marketing”. I 

quote: 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1674 

At the Saskatchewan Hog Producers’ Association annual meeting I spoke in favor of the recently 

announced Hog Marketing Commission. Obviously my remarks met with violent disapproval. One 

producer shouted, “How much is Messer paying you?” And another, “I bet you don’t know what a pig 

looks like.” I have devoted a great deal of time and money in the past ten years to establish and to try 

to maintain a viable hog unit. During this period I faced fluctuations that varied from 16½ to 44 cents 

per pound. This price variation is enough to discourage any young person from venturing into this kind 

of industry. In 1970-71 the price average was 20 cents per pound. It is interesting to note the consumer 

price was not that greatly affected. Bacon, for example, was still $1.10 per pound. That may explain 

the presence of the people from the meat packing industry and also the commission buyers and 

truckers at that meeting. Undoubtedly, these people are concerned about the possible loss of profit to 

themselves. 

 

This is a hog producer speaking. 

 

My only wish is the Saskatchewan Hog Producers’ Association would show the same concern for the 

profits of individual producers. In ten years I followed with interest the achievements of the 

association. I am quite convinced that their chief purpose is to halt any policy that could strengthen the 

position of the individual producer. I would summarize their achievements for the producer by saying, 

“They could be placed neatly into the corner of a pig’s eye.” The Hog Marketing Commission made 

possible through the Federal Government’s Natural Products Marketing Bill could be a welcomed 

vehicle to promote and export our product throughout the world. If the Hog Marketing Commission is 

extended to include the Western Provinces as was suggested, it could open new export markets which 

our province cannot solely maintain. This export market I feel is the key to a stable hog industry in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opinions expressed in this letter are in the minds of all genuine hog producers in this 

province. It is for this reason that I will heartily endorse and support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I commend the Minister of Agriculture for 

introducing to this House the amendments to The Natural Products Marketing Act, amendments that I 

feel further strengthen this Act, an Act which we, the younger farmers of this province, really do need 

and really do appreciate. I think every young farmer in this province who has his head screwed on the 

right way is really thinking about this type of action. We need this type of action and we support it 

completely in principle. If we are to rebuild agriculture and rural life in this province we must have 

complete orderly marketing in this province and we must have firm commitments by both the producer 

and the purchaser of all supply, demand and quality of the products produced in this province. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1675 

If you will permit me. Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to wander a bit to expound on some of the 

problems that we, the younger farmers, and some of the older farmers are facing in this province. Flax 

was selling for $3.09 a bushel when I first sold mine this fall. The young farmer or the not so well off 

farmer cannot hold until February or March. He has certain commitments to make in his community if 

he is going to walk down main street with his head held up. Thus the poorer farmer is forced to sell flax 

at $3 a bushel while his neighbor who is well established and has a large collateral base can hold out. It 

is really shameful to me to see some of these people holding out to get $5 a bushel while they owe 

people in the small towns amounts of money for fuel, machinery and whatever. 

 

When we look at hogs, Mr. Speaker, the same thing holds true. True you cannot hold your hogs once 

they have reached 190 to 195 pounds. What you can do is go out of production for six months or a year 

if the prices aren’t attractive to you. The young farmer or the poor farmer who is not well enough 

established with a collateral base cannot afford to do this. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Neither can the big farmer. 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Even beef needs a serious look in the future, Mr. Speaker. How are we going to 

achieve firm commitments? The only way, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, is through licensing or permits. 

The amendments to this Act and what they facilitate will permit the different commodity boards or 

agencies to issue cards or licences or whatever you want to call them, similar to the Wheat Board 

registration plates that are now used. Why then, Mr. Speaker, are certain groups opposing the issuing of 

these cards or licences? This registration will be at no charge in most cases, it will simply give the 

boards or commissions the records of production and supply and quality that we so badly need if we are 

to capture the export markets that we deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, meetings have been organized across this province lately, not by hog producers, but it 

would appear to me that they are being organized by a certain grain commodity group if the personnel 

who are organizing them and chairing these meetings are any indication. At these meetings, Mr. 

Speaker, there has been complete misrepresentation of The Natural Products Marketing Act. It is 

completely misleading to the farmers, the information that has been given out at these meetings. When 

certain people are there that have the ability to correct the misrepresentation they are not even afforded 

the opportunity to use a mike. I don’t think that we can put up with this type of action by disinterested 

groups or what should be disinterested groups in my opinion. The thing that they are forgetting is that 

nowhere in this Act does it give the commission the power to control production. And this is one of the 

keys to the difference between a commission and a marketing board. 

 

If the people who are so violently opposed to the Hog Marketing Commission would take the time to 

read the complete Act they would find that part 3, section 22 and 23 of the Act itself are the real guts to 

the Hog Marketing Commission. And maybe then they could discuss the thing on an intelligent basis. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1676 

Every young farmer in this province, Mr. Speaker, must demand, first of all, that all grains be under the 

Wheat Board or a similar grains board. In my opinion we can not permit the fluctuations in price and the 

gambling to continue whether it be with flax, rye, rapeseed or wheat on the future wheat market. 

 

I think for a second point we must establish a national feed grains policy with a feed bank situation and 

only through guaranteeing feed stocks can you guarantee a reasonable amount of livestock production. 

We can also guarantee a basic market for feed grains by having a feed bank and feed grains policy. 

 

The United States has found that this is the only real answer to stabilizing production and prices. This 

Act is the first step in full realization of these goals, Mr. Speaker. The stakes are too high to continue the 

gamble that we have permitted in the past. 

 

The new generation of farmers want a reward for their capabilities and good management. Marketing 

commissions and boards can certainly assist them in receiving their fair, and I stress the word fair, 

return, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know it is amazing that the people of the province agree that sharing costs is about the best method 

to finance health programs, education, municipal and nearly every service to our population. But why 

then are the Palliser group and the Rapeseed Association, to name only a couple, so opposed to pooling 

and negotiating revenues from our production? It could be, Mr. Speaker, that the Grain Exchange has a 

hand upon the steering wheel in most of these organizations and is also chipping in for the gas. 

 

I think that this truly represents the real goings-on in some of these organizations. We, the young 

farmers, are tired of selling our flax or our rape early in the year at ridiculously low prices to pay off our 

creditors while the well established farmers with good collateral can hold for better markets usually 

receiving double the return for their crops than what the unestablished person does. 

 

This is an insane system, Mr. Speaker, on which to build a stable agricultural Saskatchewan. Action is 

needed now and amendments to this Bill are the first step. 

 

Compared to the Canadian Wheat Board Act, this Natural Products Marketing Act contains relatively 

few controls, yet only the Hon. Dave Boldt has guts enough to show his true colors in opposing this Bill. 

His colors, Mr. Speaker, I think truly represent the attitude of both the Liberal and Conservative Parties 

and this attitude our people of Saskatchewan cannot allow to continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, compulsion they say is the reason that they oppose The Natural Products Marketing Act. 

Yet I just returned from the SARM convention where they passed resolutions calling for compulsion in 

establishing a warble free province and other resolutions dealing with compulsion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, due to the fact that I was at the SARM convention I did not fully prepare a speech and in 

closing I will support the motion wholeheartedly. 



 
March 15, 1973 

 

 

1677 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is still very obvious that the Members opposite don’t know the 

difference between trying to improve farming and trying to control farming. 

 

It is the position of the Liberal Party that if the farmers want to give up absolute control over their 

farming operations to the Government or to any delegated authority that they should have the right to 

vote before they give up that right. It is that right that is taken away by the Members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We note the deliberate attempts to mislead this House by the Hon. Member for Redberry (Mr. 

Michayluk) when he refuses to give us the name of the person that wrote that letter. It certainly sounds 

like a very good NDP supporter, Mr. Speaker, because he is afraid to give the name. Could it be Mr. Ted 

Turner who wrote that letter? Could it be the Member himself who wrote that letter? We can think of all 

sorts of possibilities because the Member from Redberry was just too afraid to give the name to the 

Members of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government opposite is afraid to give the farmers a vote on this Bill. Why do they fear 

the people? That is the question that is going throughout this province right now. The Hon. Member 

from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Hanson) who just sat down says that any young farmer who has his 

head screwed on the right way needs all the help he can get. I say, Mr. Speaker, any young farmer who 

loses his tractor in a dugout needs all the help that he can get and that is precisely the help that he is 

asking for. 

 

Our policy and our position is very simple and the position of the farming community is very simple. If 

the farmers are going to give up the control of their farming operations to the Government or to any 

marketing board they should have the right to vote on whether they wish to give us those rights. And 

they should have that right in spite of the way the Members opposite are afraid to have discussion at the 

meetings. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) goes around to his carefully operated and controlled 

meetings and what happens? People are not allowed to speak. And yet when someone else has a meeting 

opposing the Bill they are evil people, they don’t represent the farmers and they don’t have the right to 

speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have much more to say on this particular piece of legislation as will the farmers and 

the people of Saskatchewan, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o’clock p.m. 


