


























































Hansard: January 31, 1973


103 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

5th Day 
 

Wednesday, January 31, 1973 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. A. Taylor: (Kerrobert-Kindersley) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to at this time introduce to you 
and through you to the Members of this House a group of Grade Eight students from the Kindersley 
School, sitting in the west gallery. There are about 30 students accompanied by two of their teachers. 
They are an energetic group of students who have just travelled some five hours on a bus to get here 
leaving at 5:00 o’clock this morning, which is, I think, before most of us were up and at our work. The 
only thing they suffered they told me by the time they reached here were hunger pains. We do hope, 
however, that the students have an enjoyable and interesting trip to our provincial capital and that their 
visit to the Legislature will be informative and pleasant. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all Members of the 
Assembly will join me to wish them a very safe and a happy trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K.R. MacLeod: (Regina Albert Park) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the 
Members of the Assembly 100 Grade Eight students from W.C. Howe School in Regina. They are 
accompanied by their teachers Messrs. William Dumanski, Murray Schmidt and Ron Kelln. They are 
going to listen to the lofty deliberations of this august body and then take a tour of the building, after 
which I shall have the pleasure of meeting with them. I hope they enjoy their stay and ask that we bid 
them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Dental Auxiliaries 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant: (Regina Whitmore Park) — I understand that currently there are students being 
trained as, I believe the title is, dental auxiliaries, if that is the correct title. I should like to ask the 
Minister if the program for the utilization of these students when they graduate has been formulated and 
if so if it can be made available to the Members of this House? 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek: (Regina North East) — Mr; Speaker, the program as such has not been 
formulated. We have established an advisory committee on dental care. The committee is at the present 
time holding public hearings and after the committee has completed its study it will be submitting a 
report to me. I expect by March 31st. Following that a policy will be formed. 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
104 

Special Committee on Business Firms 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane: (Lumsden) — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the 
Hon. Premier. I am going to indicate to him, I am assuming he doesn’t have it on his desk, a notice that 
was put on the desk of some of the Members, “Notice of Meeting, date Tuesday, January 30th, 1973 at 
9:00 o’clock a.m. — Special Committee on Business Firm” In light of the Government proposing and 
backing the idea of intersessional committees of the Legislature and the fact that when the Members of 
the Opposition attended that meeting at 9:00 o’clock a.m., what does the Premier intend to do about the 
utter arrogance of the Business Committee members on the Government side who don’t bother showing 
up and we can’t even get a quorum to carry on this business. We note too, Mr. Speaker, and we ask the 
Premier what he intends to do about the practice of the Members opposite when the Session is sitting 
that members of the committee do not get paid and what he intends to do about this no-pay — no-show 
approach of the Business Committee members? 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, I think Members who have been here yesterday and 
today will appreciate the dilemma which this Premier finds himself in. Yesterday I was upbraided 
because I was talking to members of the Agriculture Committee and today I am upbraided because I do 
not command attendance at a meeting of the Business Committee. This Committee is a committee of the 
Legislature. It is not a committee of the Government. Now I am well aware, Mr. Speaker, that on several 
occasions members of the committee have not been as diligent as they might be. I am told for example 
that at a radio committee meeting yesterday there was not a quorum because of the absence of some 
Opposition Members. Yesterday, I take it there was not a quorum because of the absence of members of 
the Agricultural Committee. I certainly will look into this matter so far as our Members are concerned 
and I ask the Leader of the Opposition to look into it as far as his Members are concerned. I am very 
sure that the committees who have been so diligent in the past will continue to be so in the future. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon 
Nutana South) and the amendment thereto by Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie). 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned debate yesterday I had occasion to 
remark upon a number of the comments of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) and of the 
Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) in the course of their contributions to this debate. I do not wish to go 
over that ground again. I do however, wish to make one comment. I had occasion following yesterday’s 
sitting to look at some of the clippings with respect to the Roumanian Tractor Plant referred to by the 
Leader of the Opposition. I also had occasion, Mr. Speaker, to listen to a part of the legislative broadcast 
yesterday when the Leader of the Opposition was speaking. I heard him say on the broadcast and I do 
not think I misunderstood him that, in his words, the Blakeney announcement had announced the plant. 
The phrase used 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

105 
 

by the Leader of the Opposition was that there had been an announcement that the plant would come and 
that it had been done by Blakeney. 
 
May I point out for the benefit of this House, and the benefit of everyone in Saskatchewan, that I have 
not announced that there will be a Roumanian Tractor Plant, that Mr. Thorson has not announced that 
there will be a Roumanian Tractor Plant, that no other government official has announced that there will 
be a Roumanian Tractor Plant. Every announcement made by anyone on behalf of the Government made 
perfectly clear that no final deal had been made. We made it abundantly clear that negotiations were 
under way with respect to a Roumanian Tractor Plant and that no deal had been completed. It was clear 
throughout from every announcement made by the Government that the construction of a plant 
depended on matters not yet decided, notably a Department of Regional Economic Expansion grant. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to announce that there will be a plant until I am reasonably sure that 
such will be the case. I don’t want to follow the custom of the previous government in announcing 
industries that never materialized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stood in this House when announcement after announcement was made of asbestos pipe 
plants in Regina, of a Volkswagen plant in Regina, of a heavy water plant in Estevan and on and on and 
on. As a matter of fact when I sat on the other side of the House I used to have a section of my speech 
which I used each year called the phantom industries and I used to gather up the announcements that had 
been made that had not matured. I think premature announcements serve no useful purpose. None came 
from our Government or its officials, none came from the Roumanian Government or its officials. I 
regret that announcements which have apparently misled the Leader of the Opposition have come from a 
multitude of other sources. 
 
I propose to follow a policy of announcing a new industry when there is some probability of its coming. 
This is not to suggest that we will not make announcements concerning negotiations but I want to make 
clear now as I have done in the past that announcements don’t equal industries. If they did, Mr. Speaker, 
in the years between 1964 and 1971, Saskatchewan would have been the industrial heartland of North 
America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I particularly do not appreciate any attempt by the Leader of the Opposition or any 
other person to suggest that we were following what I think is a discredited practice of the Government 
that he was a Member of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition spoke of development of jobs and of industry and outside the 
House he called the Throne Speech a socialist document. May I commend him on his powers of 
perception, because I regard that description as a compliment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether there is really much point in attaching labels to 
the politics of the 1970s, but if the Leader of the Opposition wants to deal in labels I’ll accept 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
106 

that one. What is significant is that the Throne Speech and the policies it outlines can be traced directly 
to our party’s election program put before the people before the last election, our New Deal for People. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney — Our New Deal for People clearly calls for developing our resources for the benefit of 
the people of Saskatchewan and for using public enterprise as one of the methods of such development, 
and in the Throne Speech we announce our intentions to proceed along those lines. The New Deal calls 
for development of new ways of making it possible for more farmers to operate more family farms more 
successfully. In the Speech from the Throne we outline an extension of the kind of development we 
propose in agriculture, compare the promise and the action. Small business assistance, tourist 
development, northern development. Yes, Mr. Speaker, if the New Deal for People was a socialist 
document, then so is the Speech from the Throne. This Government is prepared to step in with public 
action and public enterprise wherever that stands to improve the lives and the living standards of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I say to the Leader of the Opposition and to all the people of Saskatchewan that 
sharing the ownership and the fruits of development are things that people of this province believe in. I 
have stood in this House on other occasions and outlined our strategy of development; most people have 
understood it and I think clearly, but for the benefit of the Leader of the Opposition, let me say it again. 
 
First, we believe that economic development is of first importance in Saskatchewan, but we don’t 
believe in pursuing it at all costs. Development projects must meet three basic criteria. First, the fruits of 
development must be fairly distributed; secondly the public should not be called upon to unduly to 
subsidize development over the long haul; thirdly the environment must be adequately protected. 
 
Given these guidelines, let me outline our approach to the problems of economic development. First, the 
pursuit of development must be more than going after the big glamour projects, like pulp mills and 
potash mines. Why? For one thing there aren’t many to be had. Second, they are usually capital 
intensive, they consume vast amounts of capital investment but employ relatively few people. 
Sometimes, as in the case of the Prince Albert Pulp Mill they involve putting large amounts of public 
money at risk. Clearly, a more diversified strategy is required and that strategy must be soundly based 
on the reality of Saskatchewan. That reality is that agriculture is our basic and most important industry. 
However you measure it, in employment, in number of enterprises, or in value of production, agriculture 
is our basic industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — So the first element in our strategy is to do what we can as a Provincial Government 
to make farming as rewarding as 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

107 
 

possible for as many families as possible. There are new measures in the Speech from the Throne that I 
will refer to later. 
 
The second element of our strategy is to build on the first. Not only is agriculture the biggest producer of 
primary wealth in the province it is also the biggest consumer of manufactured products. We have to 
build on those hard facts. We can build by seeing if we can process right here in Saskatchewan as many 
.of our agricultural products as possible and second by producing here in Saskatchewan as many as 
possible of the things that agriculture uses in production. Certainly we can produce for a continental and 
world market, we have shown that. Let us be sure that as we send our products to the world market, let’s 
be sure that when we are going after the markets on the grand scale we don’t overlook the local markets 
on the small scale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s been our approach and I think we have been having some success. 
 
On the agricultural processing side let me mention a few. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has expanded 
their rapeseed processing plant at Saskatoon, that came into production in May of 1972. Agra Industries 
undertook in June of 1972 to build two new facilities, a complete packaging plant and doubling of their 
refining capacity. After all this equipment is installed Saskatchewan in the new year will have its first 
packaging plant for margarine and shortening in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Expansion of Intercontinental Packers which has been going on over the past three 
years has tripled the size of the packing facility and has created employment for 135 new people. The 
cost was $4.5 million. 
 
The Dairy Producers Co-op has set up manufactured milk plants at Saskatoon and Yorkton. The Yorkton 
plant alone which will be in production this year will have capital costs of close to $3 million. Lake 
Athabasca Native Fisheries Co-op, is a fish processing plant completed last July. This plant employs 40 
people, all Indian and Métis. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — All Federal money! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition suggests that some of the money came 
from the Federal Government. That, of course, is accurate. In some cases, a great deal of the money 
came from the Federal Government. We are not in any sense ashamed to accept Federal Government 
money or any other money in developing Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, there have been many other developments, two new feed mills at Bruno 
and Lanigan, an expansion of an alfalfa dehydrating plant at Arborfield, meat processing plants at 
Watson and Regina, a distillery expansion at Weyburn, just to name a few, and a few which process 
Saskatchewan agricultural products. 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
108 

On the side of making products for the provincial prairie markets we have had similar success. We know 
that every industry we can generate which can produce products here to replace products formerly 
imported means jobs, more production and more returns. So there are a number of industries which have 
been established or expanded. At Shellbrook, a little trailer factory to make trailers for horses and cattle. 
In Regina, Verlage Systems — five new employees — manufacturing amplifier systems. In Regina and 
Saskatoon, Westank — an expansion involving close to 100 employees. At Yorkton, Beaver Lumber 
Company established about eight months ago a plant for production of prefabricated houses, and that 
employs 38 people. There are many others; at Kindersley, Boychuk Manufacturing — oil field products; 
Arcola, A. & G. Welding Limited — oil field products; Oxbow Industries — steel enclosures; North 
Battleford, M & M Fabricators — prefab home plant addition; Moose Jaw, Canaday’s — another 
expansion and 20 new jobs. Of course IPSCO at Regina has a major expansion underway which will 
mean 250 new jobs. 
 
Let me say again for the benefit of the Leader of the Opposition, we are building a more stable and 
intensive agricultural economy. We are promoting with some success the development and expansion of 
more processing of farm products and more manufacture of goods used in farm production. We are 
promoting the development and expansion of production in Saskatchewan for the prairie market of those 
products which we otherwise would import. We have taken steps to expand tourism and as we 
announced in the Speech from the Throne, we have taken steps to create more jobs and greater returns 
for Saskatchewan in the use of our forest products. 
 
Certainly we look to Saskatchewan businessmen to provide leadership in much of this development and 
we are willing to work with them, we are anxious to work with them. We look to the co-operative 
movement to become more and more involved in new ventures. But where home-grown private or co-op 
initiative is lacking, or where the choice lies between sending private profits out of Saskatchewan or 
retaining public returns here at home, we don’t hesitate to consider the path of public enterprise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And that, Mr. Speaker, sums up our development strategy. 
 
There are growing indications that our new development strategy is beginning to bear fruit. More. and 
more people are seeking jobs and more and more people are finding jobs. It looks as if the huge 
population losses which we suffered in 1969 and 1970 and 1971 have been slowed down — they have 
already been clearly slowed down very sharply. In our first year of office, the population loss was about 
half what it was in their last year of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — There is every evidence that the population loss has slowed still more. I will refer a 
little later to what has happened in our major cities. Apartment blocks are full once again. Ask the 
people in Saskatoon and ask them in Regina. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

109 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Housing starts are booming, apartment block construction is started up once again. 
Our work force according to both Statistics Canada and the Department of Labour is on the rise. I know 
that any figures for a short term can be misleading but I looked at the figures for the last quarter of 1972 
and the number of people holding jobs in Saskatchewan at the end of each of those months was on the 
average 7,000 higher than a year ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — If, Mr. Speaker, we are losing population it is a little surprising that we have 7,000 
more people at work. Now 7,000 jobs is not enough, but it is progress. Those sitting across the way, Mr. 
Speaker, would like to forget but many will remember the wild and irresponsible promises that their 
party made years ago, not about 7,000 jobs, but about 80,000 new jobs — 80,000 jobs which proved to 
be imaginary jobs — jobs which were bad dreams for the people of this province as they had to leave 
this province in numbers never before equalled in the peacetime history of this or any other province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — What would the people of Saskatchewan rather have, Mr. Speaker, 7,000 real jobs or 
80,000 pipe dreams? You know the answer as well as I. The people of Saskatchewan want to forget 
those empty promises, those seven lean years, those seven gone years, the seven Liberal years. They 
want solid progress, they want solid progress like they have seen during the last 12 months and Mr. 
Speaker, under our Government they will get that progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I said earlier that the core of our development strategy is a prosperous and healthy 
agricultural economy. Our Government has already taken a number of steps to preserve and develop the 
family farm in Saskatchewan. The Land Bank Commission created last year, under a hail of abuse by 
Members opposite is a pioneer effort which is already having an impact on family farm transfer. Much 
has also been done to help farmers expand their livestock enterprises and to intensify farm production. 
But, by and large, we are not yet solving the problem of one very important group of agricultural 
producers. These are the farmers who don’t quite have enough resources of land or machinery or 
livestock or other capital to make the leap into a viable farming operation. This is particularly the case 
with many young farmers trying to get started. We have decided that we are going to do something to 
meet this problem and we are introducing a new agricultural incentives act which will launch a brand 
new program called FarmStart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — My colleague, the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
110 

will be saying more about FarmStart, I just want to sketch some of the basic thinking behind it. Our 
objective is to create the kind of conditions which will ensure the future of rural Saskatchewan and the 
farm communities which serve it. We are moving in two broad directions. First, to make possible for the 
agricultural resources of this province to support as many farm families as possible and second, to 
improve the economic strength and the comforts and amenities of our villages and towns. Item one, 
keeping as many farmers as possible, is what FarmStart is all about. This program is designed to 
encourage more intensive agriculture through expansion of livestock enterprises, through other intensive 
farming operations. It is directing this help to those who need it most in a very practical way by 
subsidizing interest rates and by providing earned grants to farm operators who can’t otherwise become 
economic. More livestock, more farmers, more family farms, more business for small towns and 
villages. We don’t say that every farm in Saskatchewan will survive, but we do say that we must bend 
every effort to keep the largest possible number of viable family farms alive and economically healthy. 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that this is fundamental. 
 
We have taken some direct steps to improve life in the small communities and to improve economic 
opportunities because we believe that the small communities depend on the farms and the farms depend 
on the small communities. We have done a number of things, some may seem relatively modest, all add 
up to an interesting package. 
 
To help the businessmen in small towns we have instituted a rebate system on beer sales to improve the 
returns to smaller hotels. We have launched a small business branch to provide technical help and 
management assistance to small businessmen. We have extended SEDCO loans to commercial 
establishments, small commercial establishments, for the first time. This action has been welcomed. We 
have received applications from and agreed to loans to some very small businesses, to a stamp and gem 
store in a village of just over 100 people; to a ready-mix concrete business in a village of 500; a loan to a 
TV repair shop in one of the smaller towns. Loans have gone to other businesses like service stations, 
confectionery stores, trucking operations, motels, to name a few. Some of these are undoubtedly risky 
loans, some of them may well produce losses, but we think we should take those risks in order to keep 
small businesses in small towns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Of course, one very concrete and practical step to help the small businessman was to 
make him eligible for property tax relief through the property improvement grant, up to $130 last year 
and Mr. Speaker, more this year. The opportunity to assist small businessmen was almost totally ignored 
by the government of the party opposite when it was in power. Mr. Speaker, that has been changed. 
 
What are some of the other steps taken by the Government to strengthen small communities. Two very 
concrete steps, Operation Main Street and Operation Open Road. It is all very well for the Member for 
Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) to heap scorn on these programs but I think he will find that they are pretty 
acceptable to people in smaller centres of Saskatchewan. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

111 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In a different way our developing community college program will benefit small 
communities by decentralizing adult education. 
 
The Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) has pointed out that the criteria for nursing homes have 
been changed to allow some nursing homes to go up in smaller centres which could not earlier qualify. 
 
And finally, one can’t ignore the impact which our winter works program over the past two winters has 
had on improving recreational facilities and other community owned resources in dozens and dozens of 
villages and smaller towns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I’ve been around this province, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve visited rinks and swimming 
pools in villages and towns and I can tell you that the people in those centres very much appreciate the 
assistance they receive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, small town merchants are getting a better deal, farmers are getting 
better service, the people in rural Saskatchewan are getting a better life because of the concerted actions 
of this Government to build the agricultural industry and improve our small communities and the 
services they are able to offer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — As the Speech from the Throne indicates, we will take major new efforts in this 
direction because, Mr. Speaker, we believe that the future of Saskatchewan depends upon the farm 
economy. Ours is not a policy of getting people off the land. Ours is not the policy of the Liberal Party 
and the Task Force Report and the new Small Farm Development Plan of the Federal Government. Ours 
is a policy of keeping people on the land, of having the largest possible number of viable family farms. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s our policy and that’s the one we propose to follow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, may I now turn to another area of development. I find as I go about the 
province that a subject of great interest to many people is our northern timber areas, and how we are 
using and protecting this resource. I am sure you will recall this subject played a pretty important part in 
the election of 1971. We in the NDP fought and fought hard against the deal which the previous 
government has made for another giant pulp mill in the Meadow Lake area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
112 

Mr. Blakeney: — I’m not going to replay that campaign except to remind you what the issues were as 
we saw them. We said that the Athabasca Pulp Mill deal was a bad deal and we said it was a bad deal on 
three counts. It was a bad deal financially because the Government took too great a risk for too little 
equity. It was a bad deal ecologically because of potential pollution and forest management practices 
had not been checked out. And it was a bad deal economically because it would produce too few jobs on 
a net basis and at too high a price in investment per job. Clearly the Liberal policy on forest 
development was to invite people from outside Saskatchewan and indeed from outside Canada to come 
and help themselves to our resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — That was and is the policy of the Liberal Party. That is not the policy of the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And we set out to change that policy. So one of our first acts as a government was to 
cancel the Athabasca deal. And knowing what I know now, there is not the slightest doubt in’ my mind 
that this was the correct and only step to take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We set about to see whether or not Saskatchewan’s resources of timber couldn’t 
produce more for the people of Saskatchewan. The situation which we found ourselves in was this. The 
great bulk of the cutting rights in our accessible commercial forests had been assigned to three operators, 
Simpson Timber in the east, Prince Albert Pulp in the centre and Meadow Lake Sawmill in the west. 
These operators were producing essentially two products, wood pulp and studs. Neither of these 
products requires larger diameter trees. Yet the allowable annual cuts in the assigned areas included 
large quantities of wood in the larger diameters, nine inches and up. 
 
So we began to ask some questions and here are some of them. Are there any alternative uses to which 
all or part of our forest resources can be put? And if there are and if we can compete in the production of 
these alternative products, how do these other uses compare with studs and pulp? How do they compare 
in value and in manufacture, in number of jobs per cord of timber used, in returns to the province? 
 
We engaged some consultants and we asked them to examine our forest resources, to take a look at our 
present timber use, and to make recommendations. They have given us a preliminary report and from 
this report we think it is already clear that we have been pretty unsophisticated here in Saskatchewan. 
Should we cut up a l0-inch saw log up into studs? I’m told it’s against the law in the State of 
Washington. I’m told it’s not even done in the interior of British Columbia where their timber is much 
larger than ours. But it is being done in Saskatchewan every day and in large quantities. 
 
We are not getting as many jobs as we should from our 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

113 
 

forest resource. We are not adding as much value in processing as we could. And we are not getting as 
big a return for the people of this province as I think we are entitled to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Let me discuss one way of making better use of our larger timber. There is a strong 
indication that our forests can support a spruce plywood industry on a sustained yield basis. We can 
produce a competitive product at a competitive price and we can add many new jobs in the forest 
industry. 
 
Let me compare as an example the number of jobs in a plywood mill compared with a stud mill. The 
measuring rod is employment per cord of log input. In a stud mill about two hours of employment per 
cord. In a plywood mill about four and one-half of employment per cord. This means on the basis of 
wood used, a plywood mill employs more than twice as many people as a stud mill. I’m not talking 
about substituting a plywood mill for a stud mill. The ideal situation would be an integrated situation, 
the stud mill would use smaller logs plus the cores from the plywood operation. The plywood mill 
would use logs nine inches in size and up and both would contribute chips to the manufacture of pulp. 
That’s what we want to see. The smallest possible waste of timber, the largest possible number of jobs, 
the reserving of areas for development by native people, and the highest value of product for each cord 
of wood. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Precisely what form a new development will take, where it would be located, how it 
would be organized, these are questions currently under close and active study. But I can tell you this. 
Preliminary discussions have already been held with senior officers of Simpson Timber Company, 
Prince Albert Pulp Company to discuss the Government’s urgent concern that we improve the use of our 
timber resources. I am pleased to say that the officers of both companies recognize the importance of 
getting the maximum from the resource and our talks are continuing. And I will tell you this too, as I 
told them, that we are seeking a major role in the future development of forest products manufacturing 
in Saskatchewan for the public sector. We would see a greatly enlarged role for the Saskatchewan forest 
products of which the Saskatchewan Timber Board is a division 
 
You may know that the Saskatchewan Timber Board has underway an experimental lumber operation at 
Sturgis using strictly poplar lumber to manufacture furniture core stock. The results look very 
encouraging. Plywood and specialized poplar are not the only possibilities. We think that more prime 
spruce may be able to be made into dimension lumber. And that’s a higher value product in terms of 
jobs per cord than either studs or plywood. You know, to make pulp or studs out of prime white spruce 
is to make hamburger out of T-bone steaks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we think we 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
114 

can produce or market these top price products, produce chips as a by-product, provide the chips to the 
mill and not in any way hurt the pulp mill at Prince Albert. Some rearrangement of existing cutting 
rights may be necessary. These are now under consideration by the parties concerned. We believe that 
we can see our forest products much more a factor in the economic life of Saskatchewan than they have 
been in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in addition to looking at better use of trees harvested, we have 
taken steps to improve forest harvesting practices. Mr. Speaker, the Liberals permitted and defended 
clear cutting over large areas and that has been stopped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Cutting can now proceed in relatively small blocks or strips. We have taken steps too 
to protect the North Saskatchewan River. The Liberals permitted and defended the dumping of virtually 
untreated mill effluent into the river with potentially very dangerous results. Mr. Speaker, that too has 
been stepped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We are proud to say that we have taken steps to protect our natural heritage. 
 
Let me turn to the Churchill River system. I want to say something that I have said over and over again. 
That river system is a great natural resource. Before many years it will be the basis not only for growing 
forest industry but if we are wise, it will be a haven of unspoiled nature in an increasingly polluted 
world. 
 
The Liberal policy was to sacrifice the Churchill. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Nonsense! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Let me recall again their proposal for that river as part of the proposed Athabasca 
Mill project. Let me report again what we reported in this House before, and make your own judgment 
as to whether my statement was nonsense. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — It is nonsense! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — It was planned that the Athabasca Pulp Mill designed as one of the largest single line 
pulp mills in the world, far larger than the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. It was planned that that mill was to 
discharge its effluent into the tiny Beaver River which drains into the Churchill River system. During 
the winter months the volume of effluent from the mill would have been just about equal to the flow of 
water in the river. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Ohhhh! 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

115 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Just let me say that again. The volume of effluent which would have been poured into 
the Beaver would have been just about equal to the water flow in the Beaver. Just get a picture of that! 
Downstream from the river, half water and half malodorous black chemical pulp mill waste. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Shame! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Federal and provincial pollution experts said that at least four major studies would 
have to be completed before there could have been any reasonably clear idea of the pollution and 
environment problems of that mill. And the reports said that. Yet, the former Government, the remnants 
of which sit opposite, Mr. Speaker, was in such haste to announce the project, in such haste to announce 
it for election purposes, that they shoved aside their own consultants and they shoved aside their 
officials, they ignored their serious warnings and they signed on the dotted line. The studies had not 
been done and long before the necessary studies could possibly have been completed, the commitment 
to the mill would have been irrevocable. Just how serious that would have been is revealed by a 
newspaper clipping by a senior federal government official speaking in Saskatoon last February. I quote 
from the Star-Phoenix: 
 

‘The Beaver River is not large enough to assimilate the effluent from a major pulp mill,’ a federal 
environmental official Friday told delegates attending the Canadian Society of Wildlife and Fishery 
biologists meeting here. K.P. Lucas, Assistant Deputy Minister for the Federal Environmental 
Department said ‘the river which eventually discharges into the Churchill River system would not 
have been large enough to absorb the pollution from a proposed 1,400 ton a day craft pulp mill. There 
is not a chance the federal guidelines would have given proper protection to the Beaver,’ he said. 
 

It is entirely possible that this deal if it had gone through would have put us in this impossible dilemma. 
We could have been faced with the impossible dilemma of having to choose between having either $180 
million pulp mill, railway line and town site standing idle, or a continuing heavy public subsidy of an 
elaborate and expensive effluent treatment operation, as a price of having one of the largest pulp mills in 
North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the consultants hired by the Government itself and the consultant 
reports filed in this House made clear that there was a substantial possibility that the Beaver River could 
have been polluted and indeed the Churchill River could have been polluted right down to Hudson Bay. 
That’s what the consultants said. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — If we hadn’t taken any precautions! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, this is how the Liberals proposed to deal with the Churchill River. 
Without hearings, without consultation, 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
116 

without even studies, they proposed to make the Beaver River and its parent the Churchill an industrial 
sewer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Our approach to the Churchill is very different. Clearly the river has recreational 
potential. Just as clearly the river has importance to those who live along it. Clearly too, it has power 
potential. Are all of these uses actual and potential compatible? Are some of them? We don’t know. And 
that is why we are asking the Department of the Environment to do a comprehensive environmental 
impact study on proposals for recreational development and power development on the Churchill. We 
are asking them to study and report on the likely effect on the Churchill, we are asking them to permit 
the fullest possible public consultation. 
 
We in Saskatchewan must decide and decide soon how we wish to use the Churchill River. To fail to 
decide is to leave the river to haphazard development which has proved so disastrous in so many places. 
This Government believes that all uses must be considered and a rational and conscious judgment made. 
To do less will be to fail to keep pace with our children and our children’s children. So we are going 
ahead with a major environmental impact study. And we want all interested parties to put their point of 
view. Native groups, forest operators, fish and game groups, environmental protection groups . . . 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Hog producers? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — . . . industrial groups. All should have full opportunity to be heard. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — And ignored! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We think this is a responsible way to be heard. We think this is a responsible way to 
act. Members opposite may cast scorn at hearings. They certainly didn’t suggest any when they were 
going to pollute the Beaver or the Churchill. But we think there should be hearings. \ 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Why don’t you do something about it? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We think that people should be given a chance to be heard. We think this is a 
responsible way to proceed. And we believe that it will be welcomed by the people of Saskatchewan 
both by those of us who are here now and by the generations yet to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago I listened with great attention and interest as the 
Governor-General read the Speech from the Throne at Ottawa. I was most intrigued by what I heard and 
by some of the things that the Prime Minister said later, particularly about the West. And the other night 
at the evening event following our own opening here in Saskatchewan as we looked back at the early 
days of the territorial government, 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

117 
 

at the hundred years since the founding of the North West Mounted Police, I was struck by the fact that 
history really does repeat itself. It might almost be put in the language of a fable. Back in 1872 things 
were happening in the West and the message went back to Ottawa that something had better be done — 
something had better be done about establishing law and order in the western territories. And Ottawa 
with its ear to the political ground and its eye on future expansion listened to the message from the West. 
And the North West Mounted Police was established in 1873. The Federal Government moved with 
unusual speed and concern. But over the next one hundred years those in the valley of the Ottawa 
became even more engrossed in the financial heartland of Canada and they listened less and less to the 
West. Our pleas went unlistened to. Indeed, at one point when western farmers had storage bins bulging 
with wheat and they sought help from Ottawa, the eastern leader of the day was quoted as saying, “Why 
should I sell your wheat.” And discontent grew among westerners as none of their messages to Ottawa 
were heard. Until, as it came to pass, in 1972, one hundred years after the first territorial council called 
out and was heard, a second message was sped on its way, in late October and it penetrated, yes even to 
those on high, it penetrated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — There was discontent in the West. And so it is that in 1973, one hundred years after 
the founding of the North West Mounted Police, the leaders of the East have embarked on a second 
voyage of discovery of Western Canada. They’ve already discovered that Westerners don’t like the 
freight rate structure, they discovered that we have problems with regional economic expansion, and 
they discovered that all is not well with transportation in the West. Next July, so it is written, the leaders 
of the Federal Government and the governments of the four western provinces are to meet in the West to 
discuss western economic opportunities. One thing, Mr. Speaker, is crystal clear. All of the sophisticated 
improvements in communication we have seen in the last one hundred years, microwave, Anik satellites 
and broadband don’t mean a thing when it comes to getting a message to Ottawa. What it takes is a little 
old-fashioned election. 
 
On this second voyage of discovery, Mr. Speaker, Federal Liberal Cabinet Ministers have even 
discovered that Saskatchewan has a provincial Liberal leader . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — A provincial Liberal leader, not many followers, but a leader . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And the Leader of the Opposition was given the VIP treatment in Ottawa just a few 
weeks ago and when he came back the Hon. Leader of the Opposition told us of all the changes in the 
wind, and what he and the Liberals were going to do for the West. Mr. Speaker, we know what the 
Liberals are going to do for the West, we know what the Liberals did for the 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
118 

West. If they intended to do anything for the West we know and everybody in Saskatchewan knows they 
would have done it before the election and not after. The Leader of the Opposition hasn’t changed; the 
Prime Minister hasn’t changed; the Liberal Party hasn’t changed. What has changed is that there is a 
minority government in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And if the Liberals want to stay in power they have the New Democratic Members of 
Parliament, who have the real interest of the West at heart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, up until October 30th when that message went to Ottawa, the Leader of 
the Opposition was entirely unsuccessful in convincing his Ottawa colleagues to pay any attention to the 
West. Now what has made him suddenly so persuasive? I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, what suddenly 
made him so persuasive — 31 New Democrats in Parliament. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — If the West gets a ‘new deal’ from Ottawa it’s not because the Liberals have changed. 
It’s because the balance of power has changed, Mr. Speaker. Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, whatever be the 
reason I welcome the fact that the West has been rediscovered and I assure the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition and you, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan that our government will do its 
utmost to get the best deal possible for Saskatchewan and the West when we meet in conference, 
probably in July. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, one of the subjects which will be discussed and which will require some 
painful discovery at Ottawa, is the attitude of Westerners and the people of Saskatchewan in particular 
to the Department of Regional Economic Expansion, popularly called DREE. 
 
During the Federal election campaign I made some pretty sharp criticisms of the administration of the 
DREE Grant program. I pointed out that in the first two years of operation, from 1969 to the end of 1971 
(two and a half years), 30 per cent of the DREE grants went to the Atlantic provinces, 20 per cent to the 
Western provinces, 37 per cent to Quebec. And then I pointed out a curious thing, I pointed out that 
something had happened to the DREE program on the way to the election. Because in the first three 
months of 1972 the DREE money was awarded on a very different basis. Instead of 30 per cent, Atlantic 
Canada got 13 per cent and instead of 20 per cent the four Western provinces got 7 per cent and instead 
of 37 per cent, Quebec got 75 per cent. 
 
Now the Prime Minister reacted to these comments of mine, and he made two general responses to my 
criticisms. One response was, in effect, that these comments should not be made 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

119 
 

because they are to use his word, ‘divisive’ and harmful to Canadian unity. He is quoted in the Regina 
Leader-Post of December 2nd, 1972, as saying: 
 

The DREE program was attacked from many quarters and for reasons which should make Canadians 
ashamed and by people who wanted to make it look like it was designed only for Quebec. 

 
The second response was that my figures gave an inaccurate picture. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very 
serious question for Western Canadians and I wish to deal with the points raised as fully and 
dispassionately as I can. 
 
I am going to ask the indulgence of the House to take a little time on this because I regard it as a serious 
matter. 
 
I want first to make one definition clear. When I talked about DREE grants I was talking about DREE 
grants under the Regional Development Incentives Act and the Special Area program. The context made 
this perfectly clear. I was not, for example, talking about the spending of the National Capital 
Commission at Ottawa which happens to be administered by the Department of Regional Economic 
Expansion, nor was I talking about the spending by PFRA on dams or community pastures; that’s also 
administered by the Department of Regional Economic Expansion. I was talking about the grants to 
industry and the context of my remarks, including references to grants to IBM and Union Carbide and 
Procter and Gamble, make this clear beyond question. I was using the term DREE grant the way 
everyone else in this province uses it. I know of nobody in Saskatchewan, who when he talks about 
DREE grants, means spending by PFRA on community pastures or dugouts, or the like. 
 
I want to turn first to the general charge that the remarks about the uneven distribution of the DREE 
grants are divisive. Now I believe that the Regional Development Incentives Act program started out as 
a program for all Canada and that after a time a strong change of direction in favor of the Quebec region 
was evident. I believe that this was unfair, unfair to other regions and I said so and I say so and I’m not 
ashamed to say so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The Prime Minister replied that no responsible politician in Quebec is complaining 
about the West getting two-price wheat, or 2,000 hopper cars. True. Because these are regional 
programs, declared to be such. Nor is any responsible western politician complaining about Quebec 
getting large ship building subsidies, or the Maritimes getting large Cape Breton Development 
Corporation spending. These too are regional programs, declared to be such. The Regional Development 
Incentives Act on the other hand, was announced as a program for all disadvantaged regions, but as time 
went on it seemed to become increasingly a program for the Quebec region and perhaps Nova Scotia. 
 
Now let me now state the obvious. Our quarrel is not with the Province of Quebec, our dissatisfaction is 
not aimed at any racial or linguistic group. Indeed, I suspect that many recipients of DREE grants in the 
Quebec region were companies 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
120 

owned by English-Canadians or Americans. Our case is simply this. We are, in many ways, as 
disadvantaged as Quebec. Indeed, in every year since DREE grants came into being per capita income in 
Saskatchewan has been lower than in Quebec. During the years 1968 to 1971 inclusive per capita 
income in Saskatchewan averaged 80 per cent of the Canadian average; in Quebec 89 per cent of the 
Canadian average. Measured by per capita income we are as disadvantaged as the Quebec region. 
 
Only the fact that very large numbers of people left Saskatchewan in the years 1968 to 1971 and 1972, 
has kept our employment rate down. When many people leave a province serious problems result which 
don’t show up in the unemployment charts. Problems that mean that more help is needed to attract 
industry, not less. So in terms of job opportunities we were in the years since 1968 every bit as 
disadvantaged as the Quebec region. If Quebec needed industry, and I don’t deny it, then so did we. So 
we say this; that the DREE-RDIA program was meant for all provinces suffering from regional 
disparity; that we are such a province; that our need is as great as the Quebec region; that nonetheless 
the program was changed to benefit the Quebec region preponderantly. We say that this was done as a 
matter of government policy and that this was unfair to Saskatchewan. We say further, that in our view 
this federal policy is divisive and that to reveal the facts is not divisive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I’m personally particularly distressed at any implied suggestion that to criticize the 
administration of DREE is somehow to be anti-French. Our government has given and continues to give 
full support to efforts by the Federal Government to meet the legitimate language and cultural 
aspirations of Canadians whose first language is French. We will continue to do so. But this does not 
mean that we should not protest against the economic discrimination from which the West, and Atlantic 
Canada have suffered at the hands of Ontario and Quebec for nearly a century. To consider our 
criticisms as anti-French is to totally misunderstand them. Such misunderstanding does indeed divide 
Canada and is likely to be far more divisive than any public discussion of the DREE programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that Mr. Trudeau’s responses to my criticisms fell under two general heads. 
 
First, that they were divisive — I have tried to deal with that response. 
 
Second, that the figures did not bear out my criticisms. I will now turn to that response. 
 
Mr. Trudeau responded by quoting in his Regina speech figures of per capita spending by DREE saying 
that they amounted to $55 per person in Saskatchewan and only $36 per person in Quebec. To this 
response I make two points. My first point is this — I was speaking throughout about the grants to 
industry, the RDIA grants. Mr. Trudeau in quoting per capita figures did not do that. He included all 
spending by the Department of Regional Economic Expansion; spending by PFRA on community 
pastures, on dams, on drainage projects and perhaps — I can’t figure this out for sure — the head office 
expenses of PFRA here in Regina. Now that is simply a bad argument. It is the 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

121 
 

reddest of red herrings. It is, to say the least, a faulty argument in the course of a debate on whether 
incentive grants to industry are fairly distributed, to talk about the spending on PFRA pastures, a 
program which has been going on for decades and almost by accident is included under the Department 
of Regional Economic Expansion. I reject the Prime Minister’s figures as not relevant to this argument. 
 
My second point is this. As my criticism made perfectly clear, I was not objecting to the administration 
of the industry grants up to the end of 1971. Indeed, the whole thrust of my objection was that what was 
previously a national program had become to a very large extent a regional program. I said, “something 
happened to the DREE program on the way to the election.” I went on to contrast the 1972 program with 
the programs of earlier years. Now it is true, that up until late 1971 the DREE program seemed a 
program for all disadvantaged regions. So the money actually paid out looked not too unfair, because 
most of the money committed since the 1st of January 1972 had not been paid out, when I was making 
my comments. And so Mr. Trudeau quoted the money which had actually been paid out. But I was, and 
am, much more concerned about future commitments, commitments made after the first of January 1972 
but not paid out. Everybody knows there is a time lag between committing money and paying it out 
under the DREE program. Sometimes a couple of years. It is perfectly clear that, based on the 
commitments being made in 1972, Saskatchewan was being virtually shut out of the program. 
 
Now let me illustrate. I will quote figures for grants offered by DREE and accepted by the industry, but 
not paid out, under the RDIA and special area programs. For the five months from January 1, 1972, to 
May 31, 1972, of the $65 million of grant offers the percentage of grants for Quebec and Saskatchewan 
are as follows: 
 

Quebec — 59 per cent or $38 million; 
Saskatchewan — 1.5 per cent or less than $1 million. 

 
And this trend continued after May 31, 1972. My figures indicate that for the period from July 7, 1972, 
to October 16, 1972, DREE made a total of 263 offers to all industries in Canada. Of this number, the 
total in Quebec and in Saskatchewan are as follows: 
 

Quebec — 177; Saskatchewan — 1 
 
For the period from January 1972 to September 1972 the comparable figures are: 
 

Quebec — 609; Saskatchewan — 10 
 
The trend of these figures for the whole of 1972 compare most unfavorably with the figures for 1969, 
1970 and 1971, as far as Saskatchewan is concerned. Certainly, contrary to what Members may think 
there was no lack of applications. We believe that these figures are substantially correct. We believe that 
they do show that the administration of the DREE grants did change and change in a dramatic way. It 
changed not only to the detriment of Saskatchewan but to the detriment of a number of other provinces 
as well. Perhaps it was an unfair inference to suggest that the change came about because an election 
was on the way. Perhaps that inference was unfair, but then again, perhaps it was not. 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
122 

Mr. Speaker, I have dealt with this exchange with the Prime Minister, not with a view to scoring 
debating points, but with a view to making as forcefully as I can two points which I am sure will be 
agreed with on both sides of the House. 
 
Our objections to the administration of the DREE programs are in no way, and I say, in no way, 
associated with being anti-French or anti-Quebec. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — To dismiss them as somehow part of a Western backlash is a grave mistake. Our 
objections are based on our belief that our province is being unfairly dealt with in the administration of a 
major federal program which was announced to be for all regions, all regions suffering economic 
disadvantage and which should be for all such regions. 
 
We may be mistaken in our analysis, but if we are, we ask that our objections be met head on by the 
Federal Government and not be dismissed with statements which are capable of the interpretation that 
our objections are merely the divisive statements of Western Canadian bigots. We don’t regard 
ourselves as such. We are not saying that the Prime Minister said we were. I am saying that that 
inference is possible to be drawn. 
 
I hope the Prime Minister did not mean that inference to be drawn, for nothing could be more 
destructive of Canadian unity than to characterize the economic grievances of Western Canada as being 
motivated by any racial animosity. They are not so motivated. There is regional animosity. There is 
widespread feeling that Central Canada, Ontario and Quebec gain most of the advantages of national 
economic policies. That feeling is a fact and it is a fact to be grappled with and it is a fact which very 
largely explains the election results last October. It is a fact which must be a key basis of discussion 
between the Federal Government and the four Western provinces. 
 
Our sense of grievance concerning national tariff policy is well known. So is our feeling concerning 
transportation policies and freight rates. And then when we saw a regional industrial development 
program going to benefit primarily industry in the central heartland of Canada, which already has the 
bulk of Canadian industry, it seemed to us in Saskatchewan to be a galling new example of Canada’s 
discriminatory national economic policies. 
 
As the second voyage of discovery proceeds we will make clear in the strongest possible terms that 
DREE must change, that Western Canada must be given its opportunity to develop industry, in our way 
using our methods and with our fair share of help from the Federal Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, that is the message that I want this Legislature to send to the present 
Prime Minister and to any Prime Minister who may succeed him whatever his political stripe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

123 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the party that sits to your left, the Liberal Party was in office in this 
province for seven years and they were elected on a platform to reduce local taxes. Year in and year out 
they talked about oppressive taxation and some of the Members who are now in the seats over there 
went up and down this province talking about oppressive taxation, about 600 new taxes — slogans 
which they may well dust off lacking as they do any new or fresher ideas. 
 
They were elected in 1964 and they began to give to the people of Saskatchewan their program. And for 
the people of Saskatchewan there began the seven lean years, the seven gaunt years. And for nobody 
was it leaner or gaunter than the property taxpayer. Mill rates went up and up and up. In rural 
municipalities they spiralled. In the rural municipality of Fertile Belt, for example, the mill rate for 
school purposes in 1964 was 35 mills; by 1971 it was 49 mills. In the towns mill rates soared. The town 
of Bengough the mill rate for school purposes in 1964 was 28 mills, in 1971 — 43 mills. In the cities 
mill rates went into orbit. In the Moose Jaw Public School District, for example, the mill rate for school 
purposes in 1964 was 26 mills; in 1971 — 47 mills. And the only relief given was the Homeowner 
Grant, which in 1971 reached the grand total of $70 per year for homeowners, $70 per year for farmers 
and nothing at all for small business premises. 
 
In seven years total per capita taxation in this province doubled. New Democrats said that we would 
meet the problem head on. In our program for progress our “New Deal for People” we said we would 
launch it during our first term of office and we said this: 
 

New Democrats recognize that taxation is necessary, but in a democratic society taxes should be 
levied on the principle of ability to pay. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Citizens are entitled to maximum value for dollars spent in terms of service rendered. 
If new revenues are required they should be raised from resource royalties, income and corporation taxes 
and other taxes related to ability to pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In the field of taxation we said a New Democratic Government will sharply reduce 
property tax mill rates for basic school operating costs on homes, farms and small business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the program of the Party opposite when they were out of office was, 
“We will cut oppressive taxes.” Their program when they got into office was, ‘raise and double the 
taxes’. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our program when we were out of office was as I have quoted. We will increase 
corporation taxes, income taxes and royalties and we will cut mill rates. That was our 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
124 

program when we were out office and that is our program when we are in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We believe that property tax for school purposes should be sharply reduced and we 
have done just that. Last year we increased school grants over $11 million. Mill rates for basic school 
purposes were stabilized at an average of 43 mills across the province. Homeowners, farmers and small 
businessmen received the Property Improvement grants of not less than 13 mills. Rather than a top grant 
of $70, homeowners received a top of $78, farmers a top of $195, small businessmen — who got 
nothing from the government opposite who now say we are running a war on business — small business 
who got nothing from that government got a top of $130. 
 
Last year we increased resource royalties and we paid that money to local ratepayers. Now that was a 
tax shift a shift away from taxes on homes and farms and a shift to taxes on resources. New Democrats 
say that that is a shift in the right direction. 
 
The Throne Speech calls for a further shift. It calls for increases in income and corporation taxes so that 
school grants and property improvement grants can be increased again. This will be a further tax shift, a 
shift from property taxes to taxes better related to ability to pay. New Democrats believe that the 
property taxes for school purposes must be sharply reduced and we will act on that belief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will find out whether Liberals support this policy, we will find out when they come to 
vote on the Bills with respect to income and corporation taxes. But whether or not Liberals support that 
policy, New Democrats support that policy and we support it proudly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to a different subject. I want to record my sense of 
profound relief that the war in Vietnam appears to have come to an end. There is good ground for hope 
that the United States’ involvement has come to an end and some ground for hope that all major 
hostilities will cease. This, I am sure, gives deep satisfaction to all Members of this House. This has 
been a cruel war, a senseless war, a war dangerous for all mankind. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, some of us in this House have felt for many years that the involvement of 
the United States was a tragic error in pursuit of a policy which was wrong; wrong politically, wrong 
strategically and wrong morally. And as the years have passed, the results of this policy, results 
infinitely sad for so many people, have revealed themselves. More and more people particularly in the 
United States have called for a change. This call has been heeded, a truce has been signed, and now it 
rests with us to assist the rebuilding of this ravaged land. 
 
It may be asked: What is our responsibility as Canadians? I believe we have a responsibility if for no 
other reason than 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

125 
 

that we are relatively rich, and riches carry its own obligations. But there are other reasons. In some 
sense we were a tacit ally of the United States. We were part of their error not in the sense that we 
participated in the decisions, but rather that we participated in carrying out the decisions participated by 
supplying arms and strategic goods and supplying them in contravention of our long established policy 
of refusing to supply such arms to either side in a war in which we are a neutral country. 
 
And leaving that aside we have a further responsibility. We have long been in the forefront in asserting 
that third parties — middle powers like Canada — can play a valuable role in preserving world peace. 
Our forces have served with distinction in the Near East, in Cyprus and elsewhere. We cannot 
reasonably refuse to take part in yet another peace attempt, although this one may be the most difficult 
and least promising of all. 
 
I hope that we will shoulder our share of the task. I compliment and approve of the decision of the 
Government of Canada to participate in the peace keeping operations, even though some of the ordinary 
courtesies which Canada might expect have apparently been ignored; even though the job of peace 
keeping may be thankless and indeed may well-nigh be impossible. What we can do we should do. 
Again I compliment the Government of Canada on their decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Every person everywhere has a stake in seeing that the whole of Indo-China is rebuilt 
to a state of peace and prosperity. Every Canadian has a stake in seeing the United States recover from 
the deep wounds which this war has inflicted on that nation. These tasks can now begin. We look 
forward to 1973, if not with confidence, nevertheless with more hope of peace in the world than for 
many years past. 
 
Before I resume my seat, Mr. Speaker, let me say a few words about what I trust will be a subject which 
will not cause any division in this House. I refer to the celebration this year of the 100th Anniversary of 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
The RCMP is, of course, a Canadian institution. The centennial of the force will be celebrated from 
coast to coast and not only in Saskatchewan. But the RCMP and Saskatchewan have had a long and 
historic relationship which gives this province a very special interest in the event. 
 
The early members of the North West Mounted Police who arrived on the Prairies only two years after 
the Homestead Law was passed are credited with making the settlement of the Canadian West relatively 
peaceful, in contrast to the legendary lawlessness of the American West, a lawlessness which has given 
us the tradition of the cowboy stories but which must have been a pretty unpleasant lawlessness to live 
under. 
 
But more than that, early records show that the local detachments of the force were not just the arm of 
authority. They became part of the frontier spirit of co-operation which made every man his brother’s 
keeper. The early mountie helped the settlers fight forest fires, he carried the mail, he 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
126 

brought aid to the sick and injured. This earned him a respect which has endured to the present day. 
 
In 1882 Regina became the headquarters of the force, an association which continued for nearly 40 
years. The RCMP as a federal force came into being in 1920; the headquarters were moved to Ottawa, 
but Regina continued to be the training centre and remains so today. 
 
Let me note in passing that the Government of Saskatchewan and the RCMP have always had very close 
association. From 1906 to 1917 the North West Mounted Police were a force which, by contract, 
enforced provincial as well as federal law in Saskatchewan. This pioneering relationship was one which 
was to set a pattern which other provinces have followed, particularly since 1928. 
 
We are going to have a whole series of events to mark the year. The Minister of Industry and Tourism 
will mention some of them, but here are some. There is an RCMP Caravan, a travelling display of the 
RCMP’s history which will tour the northern United States from March to May. The RCMP band and 
musical ride will tour extensively in Saskatchewan. The RCMP will be featured at historic sites, 
provincial parks and campgrounds throughout the province. And, of course for Saskatchewan the 
celebration will reach its climax on July 3rd, 4th and 5th when the Royal Couple pay an official visit to 
this province. We look forward to that event, as I am sure all Saskatchewan does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite you and Members on both sides of the House to join me in saluting the RCMP and 
in inviting the citizens of Saskatchewan to make this a gala year in honor of the first 100 years of that 
historic and colorful force. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, he Speech from the Throne set out the concern of our government about 
the control and use of our energy resources. I believe this concern is shared by all thoughtful Canadians. 
That concern is felt most strongly about our oil and gas. Our government intends to act on that concern. 
 
During the 1950s the CCF Government took steps to secure supplies of natural gas for Saskatchewan 
citizens. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation bought gas, developed gas wells and is even today 
engaged in joint ventures for the exploration of natural gas. 
 
The Liberals and their friends have a different philosophy. During their seven years they did little or 
nothing to add to the gas reserves owned by the SPC. In fact they sold resources of gas in a deal which 
was clearly exposed in the Crown Corporations Committee as a sell-out of our resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Our choice as citizens of Saskatchewan is simple. We can act so that all of our gas 
reserves and all of our oil reserves are owned by outside and largely foreign companies and have our 
reserves used as these foreign companies think is best for them. Or, we can act to see that some of our 
oil, some of 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

127 
 

our gas, is owned by us and is used in the best way for us and for our children. That is our choice. 
 
The Liberal Party has chosen as between foreign oil giants and the Saskatchewan people. They chose the 
foreign oil companies. The Leader-Post has chosen. To the surely modest proposal that the people of 
Saskatchewan through a Crown corporation might be one of the groups exploring for oil and gas owned 
by the people of Saskatchewan they, the Leader-Post editors have reacted in a characteristic way. 
 
In an editorial in the Leader-Post of Saturday, January 27, 1973, they said this: 
 

Those who value the modern-day principles of a free economy in which it should be a government’s 
role to supplement private business rather than dominate it, tend to see those initiatives as an attempt 
by government to get a toe in the door which will lead in time to complete state domination of all of 
the basic supports for the Saskatchewan economy, including agricultural production and processing, 
potash and metal mining, petroleum and the forest industry. 

 
Only the Leader-Post in one of its more paranoiac moments could construe a proposal for an oil and gas 
corporation to explore for our own oil and gas to ensure reserves for our own people as the first toe in 
the door which will lead in time to the complete state domination of agricultural production. 
 
But then the Leader-Post has over the years seen sinister plots in all sorts of proposals. In proposals for 
public automobile insurance, proposals for a public hospital plan, proposals for public medicare. 
 
We can at least say this for the Sifton Press editorials on economic issues, they are consistent. They 
always oppose Saskatchewan control of Saskatchewan resources. They always favor control of 
Saskatchewan resources and Saskatchewan business by outsiders. That is not surprising. After all these 
papers are not owned in Saskatchewan, their bosses, too are outsiders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we of the New Democratic Party do not make the choice of the Liberal 
Party, we do not make the choice of the Sifton editorial writers; we make a different choice. We choose 
a different road. It may be a road less travelled but it is a road which can lead to a better society. One 
where we here in Saskatchewan are not mere hewers of wood or drawers of water but where we in 
Saskatchewan own at least some of our resources — our resources of oil, gas and timber. Our efforts 
may fail. There is a risk. That is a risk we think we should take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And if we fail, it will be in the cause of developing Saskatchewan resources for 
Saskatchewan people. 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
128 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make clear as I have done on other occasions that in launching 
an oil corporation we lay no blame on the present oil companies. They have operated by the accepted 
rules of the game. Fault, if there be any — and I am not sure there is — lies with the people and their 
governments. Whether or not there has been fault in the past, we think it is time to take a fresh look at 
the future. We see real prospects for developing Saskatchewan oil and gas, by Saskatchewan people for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We acknowledge that our effort may be limited. We acknowledge that the effort may 
be risky but we believe that the effort and the risk are fully justified and we believe that the people of 
Saskatchewan will agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, there were two other subjects which I intended to touch upon. I want to 
give other Members a chance to participate in this debate. I proposed to say something about freight 
rates and rail line abandonment and something about housing. I will seek another occasion in this House 
to direct remarks particularly on the matter of freight rates and rail line abandonment. 
 
I have dealt with many aspects of the program outlined in the Speech from the Throne. I believe it to be 
a program for progress. It is a program which asks Saskatchewan people to fight for their fair and just 
share of economic rights. It asks them to fight for those rights. It asks them then to join together to build 
this province into a better place, to the place where we all want it to be; where the young are 
encouraged, where the weak are protected and where men of good will can build a way of life which is 
distinctly our own, which bears the clear stamp — Made in Saskatchewan. I believe this Throne Speech 
is a step along that road, and because I believe it is a step and a long step along that road. I will oppose 
the amendment and warmly support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A.R. Guy: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, we have listened for an hour and a half to the Premier of 
this province. I am sure that those who took the time to tune in today were disappointed. The approach 
that he took was negative. It was contradictory and it was filled with half truths. One would have 
thought that the Premier of the province would have listed more of the supposedly progressive steps that 
his Government has taken. Instead he took the time to criticize Ottawa, to try and make his criticism of 
DREE palatable to the people of Saskatchewan. I know that after the federal election of October 30th he 
received volumes of mail that criticized him for his attitude during that campaign. It is surprising to hear 
the Premier today stand before us and try to justify his position in regard to DREE grants, when only a 
few months ago he was crawling on his knees, in fact, I think 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

129 
 

he still is crawling on his knees to Ottawa to get a grant for his friends from Roumania. If he thinks that 
Ottawa after the unwarranted criticism which has divided this country from one end to the other that he 
has made in regard to the DREE grant will be given a grant, he will be sadly mistaken. Not only that, 
Mr. Speaker, the Roumanians had no intention of coming to this country in the first place. 
 
Hon. G. Snyder: — Afraid of socialism? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Yes, I wouldn’t be surprised that they are afraid of this type of socialism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — If you compare the socialism of Roumania with the socialism of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan is too far left for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — No, Mr. Speaker, the Premier can stand here today and try to justify his position that he 
took in the federal election and that of his leader Mr. Lewis but the biggest joke of the afternoon had to 
be when he stood here and said, “These 31 New Democrats,” with I think 17 per cent of the vote, “are 
going to make those Liberals in Ottawa stand up and take notice.” 
 
Well I think the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) made it perfectly clear after his visit to Ottawa, 
Mr. Trudeau could sit there and insult the leader of the NDP hour after hour, day after day, month after 
month. And then when it was all over could say, “Mr. Lewis you get down and wipe my shoes for me,” 
and Mr. Lewis would be on the floor wiping his shoes because he is afraid to face the country again 
because he knows he would be wiped out. To have the Premier of any province in Western Canada 
whether it is Manitoba, British Columbia or Saskatchewan where the NDP are in power even to suggest 
that the Federal Government is afraid of that small band of NDP that have been returned through 
accidents rather than through any wish of the people, I say is the joke of the afternoon. 
 
Then of course the Premier went on to mislead the public as he usually does and I think it is unfortunate 
that he uses radio time to mislead the public. He said this afternoon — whether he did it deliberately or 
not I am not sure, I rather hesitate to claim that he would make such deliberate misrepresentation. But if 
you check the records and we all know you have to check the tapes because the other day the Premier 
made it very clear he doesn’t take any responsibility for anything that he says that is reported in the 
newspapers. He doesn’t believe in what is reported in the Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix. I don’t know 
whether he even believes what is reported in the Commonwealth. I hope not, because if there ever is a 
misleading paper in this province, it has to be the NDP organ known as the Commonwealth. But he 
stated and you can check the tapes and if I am wrong, I will apologize to the Premier. He left the 
impression, in fact he said, the Property Improvement Grant was increased so everyone got $130. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: At the top! 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
130 

Mr. Guy: — Oh yes you did, Mr. Premier! You said that the Property Improvement Grant last year was 
$130. Well if that is true I should like to know where the difference between $78 and $130 is for me. I 
got short-changed by the Premier of Saskatchewan What he didn’t say of course was that the majority of 
the people of this province got an $8 increase because the grant from the Liberals was $70, he added $8 
and then tried to take credit for the whole $78 and has been unsuccessful in doing so. I hope the Premier 
did not intentionally mislead the public that were listening today because I don’t think that he is that 
type of man. 
 
But he is a very contradictory type of person. He said the Prince Albert Pulp Mill is too big a risk for 
public funds, that is why we couldn’t support it. The Athabasca Pulp Mill we couldn’t support because it 
was bad financially, it was too big a risk for the people of Saskatchewan. Then about ten seconds before 
he took his seat he said, “But we are going into the oil industry.” We are going to drill holes at $150,000 
each with public money. But there is no risk involved there. Well, Mr. Speaker, if you think that the 
people of Saskatchewan are naive or gullible enough to suggest that there is a difference between 
investing money in a pulp company where the resources are already proven and in an oil exploration 
program where the resources are not proven, I think you are going to have some problem in trying to 
convince the public that you are on the right wicket. Maybe our brilliant young Member from Estevan 
(Mr. Thorson) who comes from the oil country will be able to shed some light on this but if his 
performance last year is any example I think he will have some problems convincing the people of 
Saskatchewan also. 
 
Then of course the Premier went on to say that he was the friend of industry. The friend of business. 
Industry doesn’t forget that it was only a few weeks ago that he spoke to the Canadian Petroleum 
Association. Was he their friend then? No, he threatened them on the same basis that the Minister of 
Industry threatened them last year. He admitted today that he had threatened Simpson Timber and Prince 
Albert Pulp on the same basis. If they don’t do what the Government of Saskatchewan wants them to do, 
they can be prepared to see some of their leases taken over. They can see harassment like they have 
never seen before. Then of course he said the Athabasca Pulp Mill would have destroyed the Beaver and 
the Churchill Rivers. Then in the next breath he said, “But if the Liberal Government had proceeded 
with the plans to provide effluent control, it would have cost too much.” In other words, one minute he 
is saying they were going to destroy the Churchill then in the other he said they had a plan they had a 
program of control but it was going to be too expensive. Now it can’t be both, it has to be one or the 
other. I am sure glad he has got some concern for the Churchill and the Fond-du-Lac Rivers today, 
because he sure didn’t have any last summer. There were survey crews in Stony Rapids from the Power 
Corporation that cut down trees, and strewed garbage from one end of the lake to the other. They spent 
hundreds of thousands of dollars of the taxpayers’ money and now today all of a sudden, because of the 
Athabasca by-election, because of the hue and cry that has been raised by environmentalists and the 
local people, they say, oh yes, but we are going to do a study first. We are going to do an environmental 
study. Why, if you are going to do an environmental study didn’t you do it first and save the taxpayers 
of this province the hundreds of thousands of dollars in drilling holes, and in 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

131 
 

finding construction material. They spent it during the election campaign because they wanted to show 
that there was activity. But it backfired and the Attorney General can’t stand the truth. 
 
An Hon. Member: He can’t stand you! 
 
Mr. Guy: — We always knew he was a little allergic to the truth but we thought that he could sit and 
take it like a man. Well, since they have all gone I should like now first of all to congratulate the mover 
and the seconder, who did a good job attempting to support a document which the high priced planners 
of this province should be ashamed to place before the public. You know I don’t want to take away from 
the mover and the seconder their efforts in this regard. But throughout that document particularly in 
reference to the federal scene, I could see that fine $22,000 hand of John Burton writing paragraphs of 
those two speeches. All I am going to say is that if that is the best that he can do for $22,000 that the 
taxpayers are not getting a New Deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I should also like to congratulate the three new Cabinet Ministers. I must say that I was hoping that my 
MLA would have been included in that new rank of Cabinet Minister. But I want to say to him not to 
give up hope, because I understand from statements made at the New Democratic Convention in 
December or November that the Premier sort of left the impression that there would be new 
appointments either after the Session or very soon there on. So I would say to those who were 
overlooked like my good friend from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) who has been in here since 1960 
and I am going to have more to say about his role in Uranium City if he comes back. Don’t give up hope 
you may have an opportunity to get into this Cabinet but I think the former mayor of Regina is too right 
wing to get into this type of a Cabinet. In fact, I wonder why he even wants to get into that Cabinet when 
their approach to the problems of Saskatchewan is as they are. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to participate in the Throne Speech 
Debate. I think you will remember last spring there were many disbelievers sitting to your right, who 
thought that I had made my last speech in the Legislature. You know, you will recall Premier Blakeney 
said, “If the Member comes back he will be the first to be unseated in a controverted election and 
re-elected at the subsequent by-election.” I think that the fact that he delayed calling the by-election until 
the last possible moment meant that he also recognized the old saying that ‘there is a first time for 
everything’. 
 
Wes Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) and I am sorry he is not in his seat, was so sure of my demise 
that he wasted the time of the Legislature one day reading a poem that he had written as an ode to what 
he believed would be my last appearance. I hope the Member for Nutana Centre will be as anxious to 
write a poem of welcome back as he was to write one for my farewell. Then other Members, and I am 
not going to name them all, they all got into the act. They said ‘now you see him now you don’t’, ‘Bye, 
Mr. Guy’ and so on. It was quite enlightening at the time. I think the most prophetic comment of all 
came from a Member who entered the Legislature the same year that I did, back in 1960, the Member 
from Regina North West 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
132 

(Mr. Whelan). If you check the Debates and Proceedings you will see on page 189 the following words 
of wisdom. “If the Member from Athabasca will get on his feet and ask how the next election in his 
constituency will turn out, I will tell him. My answer is that he will get every vote that he deserves.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — I was pleased that the Hon. Member spent a considerable time helping me get the vote that 
I deserved, which was obviously more than the NDP candidate deserved. In fact, the Member from 
Regina North West was in Uranium City for two weeks. He was the big organizer up there. 
 
Mr. Steuart: He slept in the Union Hall. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, this is what I was going to say. I think he got confused, because after two weeks in 
Uranium City he really didn’t know whether he was coming or going because the polls opened at 9:00 
o’clock in the morning, and at 10:30, good old Ed came out of the Union Hall where he had slept, into 
the sunlight, rubbing his eyes and scratching his ear and he realized then that 19 carloads of Liberals had 
gone to the polls and he didn’t even have his brigade organized. 
 
Well, on election night and subsequently after another recount, I was pleased to see that — well I’ll tell 
you, it was a lot more a result of having Ed there than it would have been if he wasn’t — there are 18 
more votes that I deserve than in the previous election, one year earlier. This time I want to thank the 
supporters of the Athabasca constituency for their hard work and confidence in sending me back for my 
fifth consecutive time. In fact, I would ask all Members opposite, old ones, new ones, how many of you 
ever doubled your majority in one year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — You know, I should also be remiss if I did not thank Dave Steuart, Leader of the Liberal 
Party, my colleagues here in the Legislature, my supporters throughout the province, who gave their 
time and energy to turn back the socialist hordes that swarmed over the constituency like locusts from 
July 1st until election day. I’m glad to be able to say that the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) who is 
laughing there today so much, participated in the campaign. In fact, here is a return which showed that 
he spent, oh no, that’s not him. But as I was saying, well you know, I ended up with thirty votes. If the 
Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) had spent two weeks up there I am sure that I would have been 
good for 50. 
 
Mr. Meakes: — That’s why I didn’t go! 
 
Mr. Guy: — That’s why he didn’t go, he said. Well I appreciate that, Frank, and I’ll do the dame for 
you when you have a by-election, I’ll come up there and give you a hand. 
 
You know, never in the history of this province was a by-election so poorly organized and carried out. 
You know, one 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

133 
 

would have thought that the Premier of this province and the Attorney General would have taken 
particular pains to see that it was run properly in view of the fact the previous election was declared void 
due to irregularities. But this was not the case, I guess maybe Roy didn’t have any influence because I 
know that he wanted it run properly. Instead, from the day that the by-election was called it was almost 
as if the NDP knew they didn’t have any chance to win and the Premier and the Attorney General did 
everything in their power to lay the grounds for controverting the election before the people ever had a 
chance to cast their vote. We had a running battle from day to day trying to keep the election officials 
operating within the terms of The Election Act. Now everyone who knows anything at all about the 
Athabasca constituency — and it doesn’t include the Attorney General or the Minister of Health — 
recognizes that the size and the transportation facilities, the mobility of the people, make it difficult to 
hold elections at any time of the year. They also know that these problems are increased the closer you 
get to freeze up, with its unsettled weather and shorter days. But the Premier and the Attorney General 
showed their ignorance or else they didn’t have any concern for the residents of the constituency or for 
those whose responsibility it would be to carry out the by-election, because you know . . . 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Were you up there Roy? 
 
Mr. Guy: — No, he didn’t or we should have had 60. Although Premier Blakeney had from the middle 
of May of last year to set up the election machinery and prepare for the by-election, do you know that he 
didn’t even appoint a returning officer until the day that the writ was issued. Then he expected the man 
appointed, who was from Uranium City, who knew nothing about running an election . . . 
 
Mr. Steuart: A man of the cloth! 
 
Mr. Guy: — . . . and who had never been in any other polls of the constituency, to travel the vast 
expanse of the constituency to find DRO’s, poll clerks, enumerators, rent polling places, enumerate, type 
and distribute voters’ lists and make arrangements for the advance polls, all in 28 days. Now I’ll tell 
you, for 28 days confusion reigned supreme and the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. 
Bowerman) didn’t help it any. And I want to make it clear that it was through no fault of the returning 
officer, no way, the full blame of this fiasco must rest squarely on the shoulders of the Premier who was 
responsible for allowing such an unnecessary chain of events to develop and for waiting until the last 
possible moment when the weather was at its worst to call a by-election. 
 
You know, some local NDP supporters after the election were disenchanted and they came to me and 
they said, “You know I’m glad you won because the Premier held off for as long as he possibly could 
because he wanted to bring the Federal election into the Athabasca campaign.” Because they said that 
the Premier believes that if you can get the Federal election and the Provincial by-election running 
together that the Indian people are going to be confused. Well I’ll tell you that the people up there 
showed whether they were confused or not. 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
134 

I’m glad the Premier has come in and I don’t want to have to go back and say what I said about him 
before, but I want to say this, that he has to accept the full responsibility because he didn’t call the 
by-election and he didn’t appoint a returning officer until the day the writ was issued. You know, I find 
that rather strange and I’ll tell you why I find it strange. I’ve lost my glasses and I might not be able to 
see, but I’ll tell you why I find it strange. I picked up the Gazette of January 12th and I find in there that 
there have been some returning officers appointed — one for Regina North West; one for Saskatoon 
City Park; one for Saskatoon Mayfair. I’ll tell you what’s happened — all of a sudden in each of these 
constituencies he found people that needed some additional funds. They have been put on the payroll of 
the Provincial Government. There is not going to be a by-election in anyone of those seats in the 
foreseeable future, especially in Regina North West. There isn’t going to be so far as we know and not 
only that but I will wager, Mr. Speaker, that the boundaries of those constituencies are not going to be 
what they are today. So why would the Premier of this province appoint returning officers in these 
constituencies years before an election is anticipated and yet in Athabasca he wouldn’t appoint a 
returning officer, in a far more difficult seat, until the day he announced the by-election? Well, I know 
the answer — I hate asking my own questions and giving my own answers, but I am going to — he 
wanted to controvert that election from the day he called it because he knew he couldn’t win. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — I’ll tell you, if anybody walks in his sleep, it had to be the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan because he spent more time from June 1st until the election day sleeping in the 
constituency. In fact, if he had done some work they might have been able to elect their member. Well, 
you know, Mr. Speaker, to compound the confusion the Premier sent his special assistant, Don 
MacMillan, who also doubles as the Assistant Chief Electoral Officer — there is no Chief, to help the 
returning officer and it was like the blind leading the blind because Don knew even less about elections, 
he knew less about the Athabasca constituency than the returning officer, and he knew nothing. He knew 
nothing at all. And I say that in due deference to the Assistant Electoral Officer because he again was 
part of a plot by the Premier to controvert the election before there was ever an opportunity for the 
people to vote. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Is he a part of it? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well he had no choice. The Premier said, get up there and help add to the confusion, and 
he did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — I’m sure from the conversations that the Assistant Electoral Officer and I had during the 
campaign that there was no confusion as to who were unbiased civil servants and who were unbiased 
Liberal candidates and so on. I think that was all clearly defined before the campaign was over. But I 
would say this, that this contempt by the Premier and his Cabinet and the NDP, for the people of the 
Athabasca constituency played no small part in the final result on election day. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

135 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there are about 55 minutes until I have to call adjournment for today, because 
it’s Wednesday, but if I was to take the time of this House to recite all the problems we had in the 
irregularities that the Government tried and did get away with, it would take the full six days of the 
Throne Speech Debate. Therefore, I am only going to refer to a dozen or so of the most glaring 
discrepancies that occurred and I do this only to show the type of man the Premier is and the lack of 
conscience of the NDP political machine that we were dealing with. 
 
You know, the setting up of the operation of the polls was disgraceful. Pelican Narrows had an advance 
poll in 1967 and 1971 to serve more than 400 voters. This year there were 300 additional voters to be 
served because of the road that was completed to Sandy Bay and do you know that this year when we 
asked, “Are you going to have an advanced poll in Pelican Narrows as has been the procedure in the 
past?” we were told, “No.” 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — Why? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, I don’t know but I have my suspicions. In spite of repeated arguments the answer 
remained “No” and when one looks at the results of 1971 you can only guess why the poll was refused 
— it was 75 per cent Liberal. 
 
Mr. Lane: — What about Black Lake? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, Black Lake was another Liberal poll that was promised an advanced poll by the 
returning officer but the day the advanced poll was to open it was cancelled. It was cancelled! It was 
cancelled without any consultation with the three other candidates. And in Uranium City even the 
advanced poll did not open on the first night that it was supposed to as it was proclaimed in the 
proclamation of the Government. In La Ronge they opened one hour late. Now the NDP tried to use the 
excuse of a plane accident, which delayed the ballots but . . . ah ha! the Premier laughs. I wish he had 
been on the plane. It would have shocked him a little perhaps. But I’ll tell you, that that is no excuse 
because the only reason that those ballots were on that plane was because they tried to use an illegal 
ballot in the first place. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Did you know all this, Roy? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Roy knew it but he turned a deaf ear to it. He needs one of those hearing aids that are 
going to be provided free by the government. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Who engineered . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — I don’t know, I think it was the Member from Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) the way he is 
talking. 
 
Cree Lake South, which has always had a poll as far back as any Member of the House can remember, 
had its poll proclaimed on the proclamation that came from the Government, but then the Assistant 
Chief Electoral Officer refused to set one up and when 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
136 

I asked him why, he said, “It costs too much.” So we figured out what it would cost and it would cost 
$50 to set up a poll in Cree Lake, but $50 was too much for the NDP Premier and his Government to 
give the franchise to the people there. But they wasted hundreds and thousands of dollars in unnecessary 
flying, enumerating and reprinting of ballots, all due to mismanagement and poor judgment. And when I 
asked the Assistant Chief Electoral Officer where are these people going to go to vote, I was told that 
that was their problem and who ever wanted them to vote could make the arrangements to have them 
vote at any other poll. 
 
Then, in Pelican Narrows there were 15 to 20 people who lost their right to vote because they had to 
leave at 9:30 in the morning for a doctor’s appointment which had been arranged for several weeks in 
Flin Flon. But the polls in Pelican didn’t open until 11:30 — 2 1/2 hours after the time set by the 
Premier’s proclamation. In La Ronge the nursing home was refused a poll, the patients then were also 
refused the opportunity to vote during election day at any of the regular polls and when I asked the 
Assistant Electoral Officer why, this was the action that was being followed, he told me that he had been 
in touch with the Attorney General and that was the advice that he had got from his office. And then a 
poll was set up at Anglo-Rouyn Mines the day before the election. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Wake up, Herman! 
 
Mr. Guy: —You know, we were not advised and we would never have known that there was a poll at 
Anglo-Rouyn until one of the residents phoned in and asked if we wanted a scrutineer out there. A 
voters’ list had been done two days before with a big typewritten line underneath saying, “No revision 
required.” 
 
Mr. Lane: — No scrutineer? 
 
Mr. Guy: — And you know the enumeration was as bad, or worse than the poll organization. In La 
Ronge, Uranium City and across the constituency hundreds of voters were left off the list. The best deal 
was in La Ronge where they took four polls, and put them on one list, if a fellow had had a bicycle or a 
good fast car he could have voted four times before anybody found out. It all happened where the NDP 
polls are in La Ronge. I don’t know why they didn’t make it that way for the other polls. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Is that how you won? 
 
Mr. Guy: — No, because we were honest enough. We said to the Chief Electoral Officer, we will not 
stand for such shenanigans and we hurt ourselves because the polls had to be redone and we never even 
got the voters’ list until the Saturday before election day, which was contrary to the Act. 
 
Then you know, they also tried to set up a poll at a transient road camp where it was obvious that 
anybody there was not a resident of the constituency and this was done just four days before the 
election. The voters’ list was compiled secretly and then again it claimed that there was no revision 
required. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

137 
 

Mr. Steuart: — No revision? 
 
Mr. Guy: — No revision required! Well, thank heaven reason prevailed and we were able to have that 
poll thrown out where it belonged. 
 
But you know, perhaps the most glaring attempt to controvert the election was in the printing of the 
ballots. Now you can check, Mr. Speaker, with the legislative record there of the legislation and it states 
clearly that the names appear on the ballot with the surname last. The Premier is looking as if he doesn’t 
believe it. And I don’t think that maybe he does because I tell you I am going to read in a few minutes a 
letter which came from the Premier to the people of Athabasca constituency and on the bottom it 
showed a sample ballot where the surname was first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, yes! That’s our Premier, that’s our good friendly friend of the people. New Deal, New 
Deal for People. But the Act does state clearly that the surname will be last unless otherwise agreed to in 
writing by all candidates within one hour after the close of nomination and none of the candidates 
agreed to change the legal form as outlined in the Act. 
 
The first we were aware that all was not right with the world was when all the NDP literature came out 
with the surname first. I have several examples. Here is one here, “Dalby, Bob.” Here is another one, 
“Dalby, Bob.” Then, here is another one, “Dalby, Bob.” Oh, here is the one that really takes the cake. 
Here is a picture of the Premier and “Dalby, Bob” and “Bowerman, Ted,” sitting around and it says: 
 

Dear Northern voter: I am writing to you on behalf of Bob Dalby. 
 
But here at the bottom it says, 
 

Yours sincerely, Allan Blakeney. 
 
And then there is a sample ballot, “Dalby, Bob.” Now who are you voting for Bob Dalby or Dalby, 
Bob? How do you know? All I suggest is, Mr. Speaker, that when this appeared on the Premier’s letter 
that he knew the plot that was going on to controvert this election. He knew that he was not working 
within the confines of The Election Act, and I think that he should be ashamed of himself but by his 
laughter over there I guess he doesn’t assume any responsibility for being an honest and forthright 
Premier that the people of the province will look up to, admire and enjoy. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Herman doesn’t believe you! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well Herman was only up there for a few days but he was too busy playing Bingo! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — He’s not even Catholic! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well you know we waited. Sure enough the official 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
138 

ballots came out printed with the surname first. Well, we were naturally pretty upset. We took it up with 
the Assistant Chief Electoral Officer. He said, “Oh, yes but it’s not my fault. The ballot error is the 
printer’s fault.” It appeared in the Leader-Post on September 19th. He said that the order in which the 
names of the candidates in the Athabasca by-election appear on the ballots is the result of a printer’s 
error. If he had kept his mouth shut there he would have been ahead of the game. But he didn’t, he went 
on and he said, 
 

Mr. McMillan said the printing firm contracted to print the ballots had made a mistake in listing the 
candidates’ surnames first 

 
He said he had ordered the names to be printed Christian names first with one exception. With one 
exception! I wonder who it was. When you look at all these, what was the one exception that he had 
asked to have printed wrongly — Dalby, Bob? Well, Mr. McMillan said that he had ordered the ballot to 
be printed in the manner agreed to by the candidates. Well, this of course was absolutely false as I stated 
earlier. There was no suggestion that the Act would not be followed in regard to the printing of the 
ballots. But what really disturbed us is when we brought it to his attention and said, “If you use those 
ballots you will automatically controvert this election before it ever begins.” When we asked whether 
the ballots would be reprinted he said he did not think there was time since the advance polls were to 
open on Wednesday. Well thank heavens, Mr. Speaker, reason prevailed and the ballots were reprinted. 
Can you imagine any government or political party knowingly printing the ballots in an illegal manner 
and then asking the candidate to support them in their wrongdoing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the irregularities that I mentioned are the frustrating aspects of the campaign but there are 
also some amusing ones and I want to take just a few moments to outline them to the House. I am sure 
that those Members who did not have the opportunity to come there and participate and there were very 
few of them who did not, I must admit. Well, one of the most amusing to those of us working in the 
campaign but probably not to the taxpayers of the province were the number of civil servants, 
Government Ministers, assistants, MLAs who were actively involved in the campaign through one guise 
or another. We got to know some of them pretty well before the campaign was over and I should like to 
take this opportunity to say ‘thank you’ to all of them on behalf of the Liberal Party and myself for a job 
well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — The first one that we have to recognize of course is Mr. Bill Allen, the Executive Assistant 
to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. For a salary of $10,500 his Minister must have felt that 
winning the Athabasca by-election was one of the main aims of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, for he was campaign manager for the NDP candidate and spent the full 28 days in the 
constituency at the taxpayers’ expense. You know he did such a good job of losing the Athabasca 
by-election that they promoted him to be Provincial Secretary of the NDP. We say, thank God, because 
now his expenses will be paid by the NDP and not by the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

139 
 

Mr. MacDonald: (Moose Jaw) — Don’t bet on it! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Yes, that’s a good comment. 
 
Then we have Jason Shaw and Tony Wood who was a former defeated NDP candidate, both for the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan again, regular workers in the NDP committee rooms, putting up 
posters, giving out literature . . . 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Tearing ours down! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Yes, and tearing ours down, again paid for by the taxpayers’ money. 
 
You know many of the NDP MLAs assisted in my victory — some more than others. I have already 
mentioned the help I received from the Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). Others were 
equally helpful. The Rev. Don Faris, MLA for Arm River, Legislative Secretary to the Minister of 
Education and chairman of the committee studying the liquor legislation, was a regular visitor in my 
constituency from June until election day. 
 
Mr. Faris: — I learned a lot about liquor. 
 
Mr. Guy: — I missed that comment but I am sure it was a good one and he will have an opportunity . . . 
 
Mr. Faris: — We’ll get you a hearing aid. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, I have to get a hearing aid. I’m going to wait until I can get one free. I don’t know how 
long I have to wait. But I think that toward the end of the campaign even he was getting confused, 
because on the Sunday before the election he attended our meeting in Pine House. Oh, yes, he arrived 
there on Saturday, his arms full of communion wine only to find that Pine House was 100 per cent 
Catholic and his services were not required. However, by the time of our meeting on Sunday afternoon 
. . . 
 
Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of personal privilege, I take it the Member intends that as a joke 
but if he is seriously accusing me of taking any wine or liquor into Pine House I want to challenge him 
and have him withdraw his remarks. It is absolutely untrue. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will take the Hon. Member’s word for it. It is surprising that on his 
arrival that there was also a fair amount of “giggly” that appeared on the scene which can be 
documented by several sources. But if he says that he didn’t bring it over for his Sunday School service I 
will certainly take his word for it. However, all I want to say is, by the time of our meeting on Sunday 
afternoon it was obvious that whatever had arrived had not gone to waste. But our meeting wasn’t a 
complete loss, however, we did have a confession period where one of the Northern Advisory Council 
members told us he was working for the NDP, he had always been an NDP and he was proud to be 
working in the by-election at the taxpayers’ expense. 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
140 

He admitted that he was supposed to go from settlement to settlement explaining the role of the new 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan but that his Minister had told him to concentrate on the political 
angle during the election campaign. Freddy Thompson is the man in question. He was appointed to the 
Northern Advisory Council by the Hon. Minister, Mr. Bowerman, who is shaking his empty head and 
who assured us only a year ago in this same Legislature that these were not political appointments and 
that on being paid from the public purse he was working on behalf of everybody, not just the NDP. Thus 
his confession made the Rev. Mr. Faris a little uneasy as well as the people from Pine House who were 
attending the meeting and knew that it was not right to be using his public position for the benefit of the 
NDP. Well I have to put some of the blame on the MLA from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) who also 
attended the meeting. It was the Member from Meadow Lake who happened to say publicly that Mr. 
Thompson had worked for the Tories, federally, in 1968 and it was at this moment that the Northern 
Advisory Council member took violent exception to this remark and confessed his active involvement in 
the by-election campaign on behalf of the NDP candidate. But it is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that 
the NDP vote went down from 117 to 64 in the Pine House Poll as a result of Mr. Thompson’s 
confession and Rev. Mr. Faris’ Sunday School meeting. 
 
You know the Member from Prince Albert East (Mr. Feschuk), he’s in his seat, was a steady visitor in 
my constituency and his poll was Sandy Bay. On election day he was caught on the horns of a dilemma. 
There were only three vehicles in Sandy Bay, two were privately owned and one was owned by the 
Department of Natural Resources. By 11:00 a.m. one of the privately owned vehicles was working for 
the Liberals, one of the privately owned vehicles was working for the independent candidate and it was 
obvious that the NDP was not doing that well. However, I want to congratulate the Member from Prince 
Albert East, he rose to the occasion with great aplomb. He didn’t let the fact that there were the Liberals 
and the NDP beating him to the polls, he commandeered the government vehicle, covered the DNR 
insignia with NDP stickers, plastered the licence plate with mud and drove merrily on his way trying to 
make up for lost time. You know, Mr. Speaker, any other day it probably wouldn’t have happened but 
on that particular day the RCMP happened to be in Sandy Bay. They saw a stranger driving the DNR 
truck and they stopped to see who it was. Well, fortunately for the Hon. Member no ticket was issued for 
an obscure licence plate or for tampering with government signs, or for that matter for uttering threats, 
as a local supporter told me that he had told them that their new houses would be discontinued if they 
didn’t vote for the NDP candidate. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — You did that, Mike? 
 
Mr. Guy: — He did. Well, Mr. Speaker, these were the most obvious examples of the taxpayers’ money 
and vehicles being used in the by-election but they were not the only ones. In many cases some more 
subtle examples were actually the most obvious when it came right down to it. You know the use of the 
taxpayers’ money began long before the by-election was called. It actually began in the race for the NDP 
convention when Roy Myke, a member of the non-political Northern Advisory Council appointed by 
Mr. Bowerman became a candidate. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

141 
 

Mr. Steuart: — No one caught him working for the Government. 
 
Mr. Guy: — That would be a shame. He began visiting each community in the constituency on 
government salary and expenses on the pretext of discussing the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
In fact it stated here and this was issued last year by the Hon. Minister, “Advisory Council to seek 
information in the North.” Well, I must say that Mr. Myke certainly was seeking information but the 
information was how are the NDP going to do in the by-election. And I tell you if you think that it upset 
us, which it didn’t, it certainly upset the other seven candidates when they saw him running around on 
government money and government expenses trying for the nomination that they were trying to get and 
having to use their own money to finance. However, he didn’t turn out successful. But this gimmick of 
misuse of public funds came to my attention early in July. I toured many of the areas in the constituency 
and said, “Has Roy Myke from the DNS been in to hold a public meeting which was promised by the 
Minister?” And in community after community the answer was, “Oh, he has been here but we didn’t see 
him,” or “we never had a public meeting.” He only went to those he thought were NDP and he had little 
pieces of paper that he was trying to sell them. They said, “We don’t know what they were because they 
never asked us.” But it appeared that these little pieces of paper were to give these people the right to 
vote for him in the nomination which was to follow. So it is obvious that he was far more concerned 
about the NDP nomination than he was in explaining the role of the new Northern Department. And you 
know he might have been successful if Ray Jones hadn’t entered the picture. 
 
This was the most sordid story of the whole campaign, as was pointed out by my colleague, the Leader 
of the Opposition the other day. It is hard to understand, Mr. Speaker, how a Premier and a political 
party that supposedly, and I say supposedly with reservations, stands for human rights and civil liberties, 
would calculatingly and deliberately deny an individual a nomination for the NDP because he was of 
Indian ancestry. This callous and brutal action by the NDP perhaps did more than anything else to 
destroy any credibility that the NDP and Premier Blakeney might have had against the two-thirds of my 
constituency that are of Indian ancestry. 
 
You know other examples of the misuse of public funds were the continuing shuttle service between 
Regina and La Ronge and other northern points whereby ministers, executive assistants, deputy 
ministers, NDP MLAs and legislative committees, all visited the constituency on a regular basis. The 
three most regular Ministers, there is only one of them in his seat unfortunately, who were dubbed the 
‘troika’ by the local residents, were Bowerman, Kramer and MacMurchy, and only when we received 
the return showing the use of the executive aircraft for June, July, August and September will the public 
really know how much they spent on campaigning for the NDP. 
 
But you know I must not let this opportunity pass to thank the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) for 
his statement a few days before the election that under no circumstances would the road from Waskesiu 
to La Ronge be dust freed in the foreseeable future. His statement helped significantly in the late stages 
of the campaign. I know the Premier is shaking his head 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
142 

because he didn’t like it either. He kind of sabotaged the efforts that they were spending the taxpayers’ 
money on. And the Minister’s derogatory statements about Anglo-Rouyn mine was also very helpful 
during the campaign, particularly in the La Ronge area. You know, Mr. Speaker, the Social Welfare 
Committee had a meeting proposed for Uranium City in, I think, July, and it was rescheduled to a date 
after the by-election had been called. Even then the meetings in Uranium City were a disaster. No 
appointments had been made by the chairman of the committee. The only members of the public who 
appeared were those whom the social worker was able to drag off the street. But I am sure that the 
taxpayers of this province will be pleased to note that at one public meeting in Uranium City, of which 
the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) was one of the members at that meeting, that no one 
showed up and so here we had eight NDP and three Liberal Members with nothing to do. Well I tell you, 
again, I will give all 11 of them including my own supporters from this side of the House credit for 
being imaginative. They were in a hall where there was a bingo machine and they spent an hour and a 
half playing bingo. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Who was the caller? 
 
Mr. Guy: — So that they qualified to receive the per diem allowance for that day before the NDP 
Members got to the hustings to campaign. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Who was the caller? 
 
Mr. Guy: — I don’t know who was the caller, maybe the chairman of the committee, but certainly it 
was a successful meeting for those who won the bingo games. 
 
Perhaps the most bare-faced example of all time of the Government’s use of public funds to win a 
by-election was the tour of the Premier and his full Cabinet just days before he announced the 
by-election. You know not only did they try to gain some political mileage by going up into my 
constituency, but they also tried some financial gain because here were the posters, “Cabinet Ministers 
Northern Tour.” I’ll tell you there were thousands of them printed. Guess who printed them? Well I will 
tell you. It says “Printed by Service Printing Company, 1630 Quebec Street.” So not only did they hope 
to gain advantage by their tour but they also hoped to gain some financial support by giving the printing 
of the posters to Service Printing which is a privately owned little printing corporation, owned by the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Was it tendered? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, I am sure it was tendered. You know the Premier tried to justify the tour on a 
non-political basis. You know what he told the public? “This is just another series of Cabinet meetings 
that we have been holding throughout the province.” However, the people of Saskatchewan wondered 
why all of a sudden just days before a by-election, 11 meetings would be held in one constituency in one 
week, when only two or three had been held in the province in 14 months and there haven’t been any 
held since. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

143 
 

I am afraid the public of Saskatchewan are not that naive, Mr. Premier, that they couldn’t see through 
your flying circus. 
 
You know apparently the Premier was not satisfied with the reports that his Party faithful were bringing 
back. Time was quickly passing, freeze-up was approaching, so in an attempt to overpower and awe the 
people in the constituency the Premier took his whole Cabinet north. You know, Mr. Speaker, nothing 
could have helped me more. You know, up until that time the residents in my constituency had only seen 
one or two Ministers, many had never seen the Premier and Members of his Cabinet. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: — . . . seven year . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, they had seen you, they saw you many years ago. In fact they sent you back to the 
farm long before you ever came into the government. 
 
But you know many had never seen the Premier and some of the Members of his Cabinet and here all of 
a sudden for the first time they saw the Premier and all the Members of his Cabinet at one time. When 
they were told that these were the people who were running the affairs of the province, responsible for 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, responsible for abolishing the Indian and Métis Department, 
my success at the polls was assured. 
 
During that tour money was spent with wild abandonment. A typical example was on August 16th when 
the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) and the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) went to Pelican 
Narrows and Sandy Bay about 100 miles from La Ronge. You aren’t going to deny that are you Mr. 
Attorney General? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, I was there. 
 
Mr. Guy: — That’s right! And do you know what they did to get there? They rented an Otter on wheels 
which carries 11 people — two of them. They could have gotten a Cessna which carries three, but they 
wanted to go in big style so they rented an Otter, an 11 passenger Otter for the two of them. And it took 
them to an airstrip within about three miles of the village of Pelican Narrows. Well then to get to the 
settlement they needed a float plane. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Oh no! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, yes! The nearest float plane was three miles away. There was a company who has a 
base at Pelican Narrows. But where did they get their float plane from? They wired back to La Ronge 
and they got a float plane to come over and take them the three miles to Pelican Narrows. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Oh no! 
 
Mr. Guy: — And then they took the plane from Pelican Narrows to Sandy Bay, then back to La Ronge 
and what did the Otter do? The 11 passenger Otter went back to La Ronge empty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
144 

Mr. Guy: — Oh yes, that is the way they operated. Well I’ll tell you not only was it a waste of public 
funds — and the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek) is getting rather red, he was before but he is 
getting redder. Not only was it a waste of public funds but maybe the Attorney General doesn’t know 
but he broke DOT regulations, because the company from La Ronge had no right to pick up at that area 
and take people to Sandy Bay because it is a protected base. But that didn’t worry the Attorney General 
after all he is only the Attorney General to protect the laws and look after the regulations. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I can’t complain that much because both of them bombed in both places 
and if you don’t believe it look at the results at the polls. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — . . . airlines did . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, I don’t know who flew them, but you are admitting, Oh, I am glad the Premier 
admitted it. You know for a minute there was a cynical smile came over the Premier’s face that the 
Attorney General would never send back to get a plane to come from La Ronge over 100 miles away to 
take two of his Ministers three miles. But now he says, “Oh yes one of the La Ronge companies do that 
and they are interested to know that they were breaking regulations.” Well I am glad he has put on the 
records of the House exactly what I am saying. I hope that the microphone was turned on, it is wasn’t, 
turn it on and make him say it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well anyway following the flying circus by the Premier and his stooges, reports didn’t 
improve, so the next stage of the campaign in the election was called and became the promising stage. 
 
Day after day until after the election a new promise was made and a new goody was given. You know 
our workers reached the point when they got up in the morning — and I’ll say they got up before Ed got 
up — oh, he can’t take any more. Juts wait a minute Mr. Premier, I have just one more comment you 
will appreciate. Anyway the promising stage came and our workers who got up at 6:00 in the morning 
prepared to see Ed stumbling out of the Union Hall at 10:30 a.m. saying, “I wonder what the goody for 
today will be?” You know, unfortunately, the promises made a year earlier had not been kept so these 
promises were not taken seriously. They made a good effort. Here is a flash from the Minister of 
Education (Mr. MacMurchy): “La Ronge to get community college”. 
 
Well I’ll tell you that the way their school was being run it needed a community college like they needed 
several other things. They needed a school system that had a principal to control and bring some sense 
into the system that is what they needed. Maybe they are going to get it now because they got a new 
principal and do you know why? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well the old principal 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

145 
 

became Director of Education because he was the agent for the NDP candidate. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Oh, no! 
 
Mr. Guy: — When this great paper came out and I want the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) to see 
this, “Athabasca Advance.” “Bob Dalby is winning.” I wonder if he had been losing what they would 
have said, because I’ll tell you this was a great one. “The new department headquarters now moving to 
the North,” was one promise. Then they took away all the benefit of that headline by saying, 
 

39 people will be working at the department headquarters in La Ronge. This will grow to about 90 in 
the next year. 

 
And if there is anything that the local people of La Ronge don’t want, is a civil servant looking over 
their shoulders every hour of every day of every month of the year. 
 
But they didn’t stop there, they went on to say — and this is where the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) 
gets into the act. He didn’t want to be outdone because he couldn’t spend as much time up there as the 
other Ministers but he said, “NDP Government provides grants for better hospital services.” Well, now 
you know, Mr. Minister, you misled the public or you tried to. Thank heaven my colleague the Member 
for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) was up there to set the record straight. Those grants were exactly the 
same grants that had been provided by the Liberal Government. The fact that you were providing an 
additional grant was because the tender came in higher than it was expected and you had the 
responsibility. In fact, you had no alternative but to pay these additional grants. I am surprised at the 
Minister of Health for doing that. 
 
And then there is one where Bob Dalby is shaking his fist and he says, “$500 grant is a kind of action 
Bob Dalby supports.” This came from Ed. Tchorzewski, because he wanted to send some people to the 
Summer Games. Oh, it was only about three years ago that the Liberal Government had provided $1,000 
for exactly the same type of a grant to send students to sporting events. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: (Milestone) — Where did they go . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Here is a good one. “Fire fighters get 60 per cent more from the New Democratic 
Government.” Well all Members of this House know that I asked the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) 
about the fire fighters’ wages and the first reply was, “No, they are exempted because they live in the 
North.” It was only because we continued to go after him day after day that he finally agreed when he 
thought it would be politically expedient. 
 
Then there was, “Lower power rates help all communities served by SPC. Dalby says Uranium City 
next.” All I want to tell you is that we welcomed those lower rates and I am not making fun of that, but I 
am suggesting that Mr. Dalby had his nerve to say that Uranium City will be next when the SPC doesn’t 
even own the operation in Uranium City. He is going out on the limb when he takes that under his 
consideration. 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
146 

Then we had, “Uranium City to have Direct Dialing soon.” Have we got it yet? No! “Powerful local 
councils will be a reality,” Mr. Bowerman said. I read in the paper the other day where there has been 
one elected a few days ago and this was back in September that it was going to be a reality. Green Lake 
got a local council just the other day. Where are the rest of them, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: — Our record is still better than yours. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, don’t be silly. It shows that when you are up there you are politicking instead of 
listening to the people. You don’t know what is going on. But I’ll tell you that the best one of all came 
from my friend the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) when he said, “Regular Dental Service announced 
for Uranium City.” This is good! The Government was going to provide it. It wasn’t very long after that 
that I picked up a copy of the Northland News and the Municipal Corporation had an ad in it that said, 
“The College of Dentistry, University of Saskatchewan, has advised that two dental residents of the 
University Hospital will provide care in Uranium City.” 
 
It wasn’t completely the Government. Oh, I think that the Government had something to do with it. Yes, 
I think that the Government was going to pay a part of it. They weren’t going to pay all of it. But I’ll tell 
you what the Government was going to do. They were going to administer it, right? You were going to 
administer it. 
 
Mr. Smishek: — . . . is going to administer . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, I see it is going to be administered by the university. Oh, in other words it is not your 
program! 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Sure it is, the Government pays for it. 
 
Mr. Guy: — But who is going to administer it? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — We are going to pay for it and they are going to . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, you are going to pay for it and they are going to administer it. That makes a lot of 
sense. I am sure that the University would enter into a deal like that. They entered into a deal because 
you have said right here in this paper that it is a government service. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sure it is. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Yes, sure it is and that is why I believe it is. Because in the last issue of Northland News, 
January 18th an announcement, “The dentists will not be arriving in Uranium City until February. 
Watch for further notice.” And it was promised for the 15th of November and here in the middle of 
January you haven’t even got the administration set up for this program. 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

147 
 

The Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek) tried to take advantage of a political campaign to mislead 
the people of Uranium city. Shame on him! 
 
Well I am sorry that the Premier is gone because the best promise of all . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’m taking notes. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Are you, good! Well, the best promise of all was when the Premier was in Uranium City 
and he announced lower beer prices. His tour was immediately nicknamed ‘Beer Bust’. 
 
In association with these promises there was the stepped up advertising publicity campaign. All of a 
sudden the only newspaper in the constituency received the greatest pronouncement of government 
information that we have seen over the years. 
 
For three months they only had 347 column inches or about 115 per month, but in the month of 
September during the by-election it received 228 column inches, double what they had received months 
earlier. This was an obvious and blatant attempt to buy the support of the paper for the NDP candidate. 
 
Well I’ll tell you that the height of the ridiculous appeared in the August 15th edition, when they 
announced the time and the date of the Lloydminster hearing of the Legislative Committee to study 
foreign ownership. There is no agricultural land within 300 miles of Uranium City. If you think that the 
payoff has ended, you are wrong. January 18th, “Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission leasing land” 
appeared in the Northland News. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — How far can you go in this blatant attempt to pay off your political debts? 
 
You know a similar situation appeared in the Northern News Radio program each day over CKBI. 
During the month that the campaign was in progress each news cast was filled with political 
propaganda. And if that wasn’t obvious the programs started and ended with a voice clip from the NDP 
candidate. 
 
Well, finally, Mr. Speaker, election day came and election day went and in spite — in spite I say, but 
perhaps I should say more likely because — of the deliberate poor organization of the election 
machinery, the involvement of civil servants, Ministers, MLAs, the Premier’s flying circus, the 
promises, the advertising, the publicity programs, most of it at public expense, the NDP lost the election 
by a greater margin than they had a year earlier. 
 
Tomorrow I am going to bring to the attention of the public what it cost first of all to get into the 
by-election. It cost the Government of Saskatchewan more than $6,000 to create this by-election and 
they spent God knows how much more — I don’t suppose we’ll get the answer until after the session is 
over — to run the by-election plus all the advertising, publicity and trips that I have mentioned here this 
afternoon, and what did they get? 



 
January 31, 1973 
 

 
148 

I’ll tell you what they got. They got 482 less votes than they got the time before. There were 482 more 
people who voted against them after they had gone through all this ridiculous electioneering. People can 
be fooled, as Mr. Steuart said the other day. The Premier can fool the rabbits but you can’t fool the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I did and it was a very good quote. 
 
Mr. GUY: — But you know in the overall analysis, Mr. Speaker, everyone appears to be happy with the 
election result. I’m certainly pleased to be able to represent the constituency again. Bob Dalby has been 
hired to do a study for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, even though a similar study was done 
about three years ago by the Indian and Métis Department. The NDP official agent, Mr. Lindgren has 
been appointed Director of Education, he is certainly happy. Mr. Hammersmith, one of the candidates 
for the NDP nomination has been appointed as executive assistant to the assistant deputy minister of the 
DNS and his wife has been hired by the school board, they are certainly happy. Mr. Paroda, another 
candidate for the NDP nominating convention had his position reclassified at a higher salary. He is 
certainly happy. And Mr. Quant, the president of the La Ronge NDP has received a contract without 
tendering to provide propane for the new office building for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
in La Ronge. The only two who perhaps have been overlooked by the NDP Government in handing out 
of political patronage were the two candidates of Indian ancestry who originally contested the NDP 
nominations. This of course is not unexpected as the record to date shows the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan is not interested in hiring local people or people of Indian ancestry if they can avoid it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, since there are a few comments that I should like to make regarding the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan, the Throne Speech, the Premier’s remarks today, I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTION 
 

LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
 

Mr. R. Romanow: (Attorney General) — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might introduce a motion 
seconded by the Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper): 
 

That Leave of Absence be granted to the Hon. Member Notukeu-Willow Bunch on and from January 
30, 1973 until February 3, 1973 to attend on behalf of this Assembly, a National Prayer Breakfast in 
Washington, D.C. 

 
Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, could I just ask one question of the Attorney General. Is this at the expense 
of the Legislative Assembly or the Government? 



 
January 31, 1973 

 

149 
 

Mr. Romanow: — My information is that it is at the expense of the individual Member and not at the 
expense of the Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


