



















































Hansard: March 08, 1973


1466 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

31st Day 

 

Thursday, March 8, 1973 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce two groups of 

students that are here with us this afternoon. Firstly we have a group of 55 students from the Cochrane 

High School. They are accompanied by their teachers Mr. Brandt, Mr. Quinn and Mr. Bell. They are 

seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. The other group of students that are here from my constituency are from 

Imperial School, 80 in number and are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery as well as the west gallery and 

accompanied by their teachers Mr. Meyer and Mr. Wittner. I should like to extend an invitation and a 

warm welcome to the students and express the hope that so far they have had an enjoyable visit. I hope 

also that their stay this afternoon with us will be an educational and informative experience and that it 

will help them in their social studies. I hope they will be able to remember this day as a pleasant 

experience. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Pioneer Village Level Care Rates 
 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the 

Minister of Social Services. I have in my hands Sir, two letters from the Administrator of Pioneer 

Village Limited, Regina, Saskatchewan, directed to the guests in Pioneer Village. The first one begins: 

 

We have been instructed by the Department of Social Services announcing an increase on January 

31st, for Level III care from $310 to $391. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, less than a month later on March 1st, a second letter, where Level I care was 

increased from $180 to $200, an increase of $20, without any government subsidy. Level II care from 

$258 to $267, an increase of $9 with a government subsidy of $58. Level III care, a second increase 

from $310 to $411, an increase of $101. 

 

I should like to ask the Minister if this is accurate and is this the way this new program of grants to 

senior citizens is being applied to nursing home costs across the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, the Member has asked a question 

which contains a few inaccuracies. The grant in Level II, I thought he knew, was $54 not $58 

unfortunately. He is also quite aware 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1467 

that the Department of Social Services does not establish the rates in these homes, but approves the 

maximum rate which they may charge. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Same thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Not quite the same thing. There are at least two homes in the province where the 

municipalities are providing a subsidy. There is nothing to stop the Regina municipality from doing the 

same. The Member asks about the increase in two months. This may be true, I would have to check and 

find out. It is possible since the fiscal year-end is April, the grants went in the first of March. It could be 

that in the fiscal reporting of the home, the new rate for the coming year for a 12-month period would 

take effect in April. I might say that the Member had his facts fairly accurate on the amount of grants 

except for a few dollars. If he subtracts the $144 that will be given to senior citizens in Level III he will 

find that the senior citizens in that category will still be saving a considerable sum of money with this 

type of grant system. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately that is not the case in Level 

I, for example, the promised $18 increase in pension from the Federal Government is now being eaten 

away entirely by an increase in Level I care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Minister if he would table for us tomorrow the approved rates for 

all the nursing homes in the Province of Saskatchewan and all the special care facilities so we could see 

exactly what this great new program has done for senior citizens in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot assure the Member that I can table it tomorrow because the 

budget review has not been completed for all the level care homes in the province. I certainly have no 

objection to tabling it when I have it available, I should be glad to do so at that time. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

Purchase of IPSCO Shares 
 

Hon. Mr. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I undertook yesterday that I 

would make a statement about InterProvincial Steel and Pipe Corporation. I should like to do that now 

before the Orders of the Day are called. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has always held shares in InterProvincial Steel and Pipe Corporation 

Limited. Recently the Government has purchased additional shares. I wish the Legislature to know the 

circumstances surrounding the most recent acquisition of shares of IPSCO. The additional shares were 

not purchased with a view to gaining majority control of the company and the Government has no desire 

to have the present company ownership and operation changed. Therefore, the Government does not 

now intend purchasing any more shares. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1468 

We have the utmost confidence in the management of the company. We believe the company has a very 

good future. We are pleased that it has just recently expanded its production capacity at Regina and has 

also acquired the assets of the Canadian Phoenix Plants in Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

The company paid dividends to the province (commencing in 1970) which has so far totalled $250,250 

or 55 cents per share. These facts alone make the shares in IPSCO a good investment. There are other 

significant facts. 

 

The company has an authorized capitalization of five million common shares, of which 3,435,317 have 

actually been issued and 111,000 are reserved. Prior to November 1972, the Government of 

Saskatchewan held 455,000 of the issued shares and held an option which expires at the end of 1973 to 

purchase 60,000 shares out of those reserved. The 455,000 shares made the Government of 

Saskatchewan the largest shareholder in the company. 

 

On November 2, 1972, Slater Steel Industries Limited offered to purchase 886,000 shares of IPSCO at a 

price of $17.25 per share. The offer was made to all shareholders. The offer remained open until 

November 23, 1972. In the event that more than 886,000 shares were deposited with the company then 

the shares were to be taken up on a pro rata basis. As a result of the offer Slater Steel accepted 

approximately 35 per cent of the shares deposited. This resulted in the acquisition of 886,000 by Slater 

Steel which is 26 per cent of the issued shares of IPSCO. Slater Steel Industries Limited is located in 

Hamilton, Ontario. Approximately 50 per cent of the company is beneficially owned by British Steel 

Corporation, a British Crown corporation. 

 

Since the time of the Slater offer and up to March 3, 1973, the Province of Saskatchewan purchased 

288,200 shares of IPSCO. The average cost was $15.75 per share for a total of $4,540,062.50. As a 

result of the recent purchase the Province of Saskatchewan now holds the following shares: The original 

holding was 455,000; our purchases have been 288,200; the total is 743,200. These 743,200 shares 

together with the option to purchase 60,000 shares means that the Province of Saskatchewan controls 

803,200 shares or approximately 23 per cent of the shares outstanding and reserved. 

 

In the past the share holdings and the interest of the Government of Saskatchewan in IPSCO have served 

as a shield to protect the company from outside takeover. This threat was real in the early days of the 

company and there is always a potential that such a threat will arise. We believe it essential that the 

Government be in a position to provide protection. While there is no present threat, the Government 

wants to be able to guard against contingencies. We want to ensure that there will not be a time when 

this major industry in Saskatchewan can be closed or removed and the people of the province are not 

able to prevent it. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I emphasize that the major concern of the Government of Saskatchewan is 

that IPSCO continue to grow in the future as it has in the past, with the same management and sound 

business practises. We want IPSCO to continue to provide employment as a major part of the industrial 

sector of Saskatchewan and Western Canada. We believe that 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1469 

such is the prospect for the company. We believe that we have made a sound investment on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I could just ask the Hon. Minister 

a question before I make a comment. 

 

In all the figures that he gave us, I believe that he stated that the recent purchase of shares amounted to 

about $4 million, was that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — The exact price at $15.75 per share is $4,540,062.50. I may say, Mr. Speaker, I 

am arranging for copies of my statement to be distributed to all Members of the Legislature 

immediately. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I think it good that the Minister has cleared the air, because the rumors 

were all over this province, certainly all over Canada about what was happening to the shares of IPSCO, 

they turned out to be well founded. 

 

Again, this is within a short period of time. We have an announcement that this Government has 

invested $4.5 million in an on-going company that $4.5 million is the taxpayers’ money — not one new 

job produced, not one new cent of revenue for the province. They have invested it in a company that is 

very viable, that has had a very difficult history but in these last few years, thanks to strong management 

and thanks to the advent of a great deal of pipe line construction, has become a very strong company. In 

fact, the announcement was in the newspaper just two nights ago that they have acquired either the 

controlling interest or all the interest in two steel mills in Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

The question has to be asked by the public, just what exactly this Government is up to, $14, almost $15 

million of the taxpayers’ money has been invested in two on-going businesses, viable, we are told, 

strong — in the case of IPSCO — we know it is strong because their statements are public. We know it 

has been a very strong company (it has increased its strength in the last few years) and every indication 

is that it will continue to increase its strength. Now I am pleased by the statement of the Minister that 

they don’t intend to interfere in the management. Because I think if they did interfere in the management 

it would be a disaster. They have excellent management at IPSCO and they have an excellent future, 

with the future promising tremendous new pipe line development to bring the gas out of the Arctic and 

the Northwest Territories, a great deal of it will probably cross Saskatchewan to get to both Eastern 

Canadian and possibly Eastern American markets. With the process that IPSCO pioneered some years 

ago, with the help of our government, incidentally, of spiral weld, they are in a most excellent position 

to take advantage of this great opportunity. But the Government still has not answered the question, they 

have waved some vague threat of foreign takeover or an outside provincial government takeover, yet 

here is a company that has shown a tremendous strength and has in fact, 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1470 

added millions of dollars worth of assets to its holdings right here in the city of Regina. For this we are 

all, I am sure, very happy and very grateful. 

 

I should like to ask the Minister a supplementary question. I don’t know what the Government is up to, I 

don’t know what the point is. I don’t take very seriously the fact that the Minister gets up and casually 

says that there is a threat that this company might have been taken over and moved out of Saskatchewan. 

I don’t think that is good enough to invest $4.5 million of taxpayers’ money to produce no new jobs, no 

new revenue. We have got thousands of people walking the streets looking for jobs, that would take new 

investment and new industry, to casually say we did this to protect our people against some takeover that 

he doesn’t mention. I think he should say who was threatening to take this company over, exactly what 

the details are and give them to the Opposition, give them to the public. I should like to ask him as well 

when he stands up to tell us what companies were threatening to take this steel plant over and what plans 

they had to move it out of Saskatchewan, if in fact such plans existed? Does this have anything to do 

with the development of the Choiceland Iron Mine? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — May I respond more briefly to the several questions implied and explicit in the 

Leader of the Opposition’s statement. 

 

Perhaps the simplest and easiest way for him to understand this and for everyone to understand is that 

the Government has made no change whatever in its policy with respect to IPSCO. But the facts, as I 

outlined in my statement, did alter in terms of the shareholdings of the company and the significant fact 

is that while the Government of Saskatchewan, up to November 1972, was the largest single shareholder 

in IPSCO, after November 23, 1972 Slater Steel was the largest single holder of shares in IPSCO. We 

didn’t change our policy. We altered our position because the position of the shareholders had been 

altered in IPSCO and we think that is in the long term interests of the company and of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it inappropriate for me at this time to try to make any comment about the last statement of the 

Leader of the Opposition with respect to the Choiceland Iron deposit. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the question . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This was a Minister’s statement and we can’t debate. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am not debating, I am just asking if he might have overlooked the fact that I asked a 

question. He said, one of the reasons they paid out $4.5 million of taxpayers’ money to invest in a 

private business over which they don’t have control incidentally, was to avoid some takeover by 

someone else. Was there in fact someone in the wings who was bidding for this, or do you have 

knowledge of someone you could name who was in the process of taking this company over? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — I refer the Leader of the Opposition to the words 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1471 

which I used in my initial statement as follows: 

 

This threat was real in the early days of the company and there is always a potential that such a threat 

will arise. We believe it essential that the Government be in a position to provide protection. While 

there is no present threat, the Government wants to be able to guard against contingencies. We want to 

ensure that there will not be a time when this major industry in Saskatchewan can be closed or 

removed and the people of the province are not able to prevent it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — The Minister refers to the company . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I can’t allow this statement to be debated now. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I’m not debating. It is a question I am asking . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — They can be asked when he comes with his Estimates on Industry and Commerce . . . 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — It is a portion of his statement which I am sure he would wish to clarify. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I can’t permit a debate. The Minister makes a statement. We allow one of the 

Opposition to make a reply to this statement. We must proceed then we can’t allow cross questions. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask a question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister has stated that 55 cents a share was paid for IPSCO . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I can’t allow questions on his statement. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I will ask a question then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I could do but I won’t. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I think the point here is . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We can stretch the rules. But I am not going to stretch the rules at this time. We have 

had the statement. We have had a reply from the Leader of the Opposition. I allowed him to ask 

questions. I allowed the Minister to rise twice to further clarify the statement. We cannot continue to 

discuss the statement that way. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1472 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, with due deference, Sir, I don’t think that the statement is up for debate. 

I think the Hon. Member for Cannington just wanted to ask a question for clarification on a line on the 

first page of the statement. And surely that doesn’t contravene the rules or the principles of the Minister 

making a statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that further clarification should be taken up with the Minister or wait until his 

Estimates come. Because I don’t think we can debate statements back and forth this way. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, surely we haven’t got anything more important in front of this House this 

afternoon than the fact that the Government has within a week or ten days invested $16 million or $15 

million of taxpayers’ money in on-going businesses. And surely to God we haven’t got anything so 

important this afternoon that we can’t spend 10 or 15 minutes on this subject trying to clarify this 

statement so that when he does come up in his Estimates we can have some idea of what this statement 

means. I can’t think of anything more important in front of this House. The very fact the Minister stood 

up before the Orders of the Day and announced and it has gone all over this country, all over this nation. 

Surely a $4.5 million purchase of shares isn’t something we should just brush under the table. We 

haven’t asked three questions today. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask a question of the 

Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). What was the dividend payment made by IPSCO in the last fiscal 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I don’t have the exact figure he is asking in those 

precise words but I am sure that information is readily available in reports published by the company. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The statement is made that 55 cents was paid in the 

last three years. Now surely the Minister knows the dividend payment made in the last fiscal year by 

IPSCO. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, that after all is not Government business. That is the company’s 

business what the payment will be. But my information is that the total we have received by way of 

dividends on the shareholdings of the Government in IPSCO has been the figures I have given. Now the 

exact amount in the last fiscal year I do not have with me. I have some recollection, but I would rather 

not guess at it unless I have the figures before me to verify it. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1473 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Byers that Bill 

No. 57 — An Act to amend The Air Pollution Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I should like this afternoon to direct a few words to the 

Act which has been before this Assembly for some days now. And I believe that there are two particular 

questions that I wish to relate to the Minister at this time. I think I mentioned them in my original 

remarks. And I hope that in closing the debate that he will bring the information to this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I am sure that all Members in the Assembly favor a continuing attempt and I say 

‘continuing’ because much legislation has been over the years put on the books. Particularly regarding 

air pollution around many of the mines existing in Saskatchewan. That we are continuing to attempt to 

improve the quality of air which is our good fortune or lack of good fortune to breathe throughout the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Much of the pollution control legislation I think in the future will be a compromise between the 

necessity of being able to create jobs and work for individuals and the necessity of trying to provide a 

good and clean environment for the citizen of not only our own province but all of North America. 

 

I suggest that this will be a compromise because often the maximization of jobs would certainly not be 

conducive to having a good clean environment for all of us to live in. However, we are confronted with 

the need of creating work and, therefore, this compromise between having a satisfactory environment or 

the best possible environment and the need for industrial development is a compromise. 

 

This Bill I think is an example of need for that compromise. And I hope that — I would suggest that 

much of the good which can stem from this Bill will depend upon the way in which the Bill itself is 

administered. 

 

Two particular questions, Mr. Speaker, that I would refer to the Minister that I would think are certainly 

important questions for us to have answers to, if not immediately, certainly in the very near future. 

 

The first question I would ask is that under the new legislation, how much time will the various 

industries affected be allowed, before legal action is taken against them? The legislation provides for the 

licensing of many or all the industries as far as air pollution standards are concerned. The licensing 

aspect is a new aspect. But it is fairly obvious that a number of industries in Saskatchewan will not 

probably be able immediately to qualify under the pollution aspects as far as the regulations proposed 

here. Now the question is how long are these industries going to be given to be able to adapt to the new 

pollution control standards which will be coming into operation? Many of these standards have already 

been in operation for some lengthy period. But still I believe there 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1474 

will be new industries which will be required to put in new equipment before they will be able to obtain 

this type of licence. 

 

The second question, Mr. Speaker, is how many such industries currently exist? And what industries 

currently do not qualify under the licensing requirement? 

 

There are, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, a number of industries which are concerned about meeting this 

standard and how long and how much money it will take them in order to be able to qualify for the 

licence which the Minister has suggested they will be needing. 

 

Another important principle of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that it apparently allows different standards of 

air pollution in different areas of our province. And again, while this is laid out in the Bill, I think that I 

and my colleagues would like the Minister to explain precisely what he has in mind as far as this aspect 

is concerned. It seems like a desirable step forward because it is fairly obvious that a standard of air 

pollution over an extremely large city may have to be much more stringent than what the standard over a 

very, very wide geographic area in the country. It may well be desirable to have two sets of standards 

because it could be that the necessary cost or the dislocation of industry in the country is not desirable 

when one realizes that the problem of air pollution out in the country may not be nearly as important as 

the heavily settled areas of the cities. This appears to be a step in the right direction. But once again, I 

hope that the Minister would give us some indication as to how he intends to implement and make work 

the setting up of areas that will probably, as I understand the Bill, have different standards as far as 

meeting the licence requirements concerned. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate that I think that the Bill is a step in the right direction. But I do 

believe that much of its ability or desirable features will depend on the judgment decisions and will 

require compromise by the Government and the Minister involved in making the necessary compromise 

between trying to create a relatively clean environment and at the same time maintain job creating 

enterprises that are so badly needed. 

 

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Minister will present us with more information. 

While I believe, while I am sure that we in the Opposition will support this Bill, we will certainly watch 

for the manner in which the Bill itself operates and the manner in which the Government administers the 

new procedures that they have put forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I fully support this motion. I support it because I know 

of the pollution which can be caused by industry in this province. I support it because I am aware of the 

pollution caused by some of our potash mines. And it is in this last area that I want to make a few 

remarks. But before I go on I do want to say that I appreciate, along with others, the fact that the potash 

industry has been beneficial to this province. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1475 

I want to say that I think the Department of the Environment should be commended for taking this 

precautionary action before the situation gets out of hand as it has in many other areas of the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that this department take a serious look at the situation as it now exists near 

some of our potash mines. I know for a fact that near one mine in Hanley constituency air pollutants are 

causing hardships for some farmers. One farmer I know whose farm is located on the leeward side and 

adjacent to a potash mine has shown me the effects of these air pollutants on his machinery. The result is 

that this machinery has been eroded to such an extent that he has lost very heavily through terribly high 

depreciation. This situation is known to mine officials but no compensation has been paid in this case, 

and I doubt if it has in other similar ones. So it is with this in mind that I say I want to see some sort of 

agency of Government set up to deal with matters such as these so that those who cause such damage 

will have to pay their rightful share to those who bear the brunt of such practices. 

 

For those who may question my remarks in this regard, let me give you an example of an incident which 

will prove my point. A few years ago in the vicinity of the potash mine that I mentioned, a horse was 

tied on a long rope to a power pole. So heavy was the fallout that day, that the electric current actually 

reached the horse who was almost going berserk. 

 

While I am on the topic may I also bring the Minister’s attention to the practice of potash mines getting 

rid of liquid wastes by forced pumping at a depth of about a mile. Has any real study, Mr. Minister, been 

carried out as to what the effects of this practice may be in the long run? I should like to know how it 

may affect the water situation in the future near these mines — not how it may or may not have affected 

areas near potash mines in the United States. I am wondering, why couldn’t our own Saskatchewan 

Research Council be asked to possibly make a thorough study of this practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fully support this motion which shows once again that this Government is truly dedicated 

to keeping Saskatchewan beautiful and a healthy place in which to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Byers (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to close debate on second 

reading of this Bill, I should like to refer to some of the questions raised by the two Hon. Members. 

 

It is true as the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) indicates that this Bill does propose to 

set, by regulations, standards for air quality on an industry by industry basis. These levels will be set by 

regulations. The regulations have not at this point in time been drafted. And one of the reasons is that we 

are conducting and will in the months ahead conduct a more extensive program for monitoring air 

quality. There is a substantial amount of data that we want to collect before we draft the regulations that 

will apply under this Bill. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1476 

As a general rule, it will be our intention to endeavor to pattern regulations more or less along the lines 

of the emission standards or objectives for air quality that are presently accepted by the Federal 

Government. These objectives have been worked out in co-operation with the Federal Government and 

the various provinces. There may be cases where we will insist upon a higher standard for some 

industries than the Federal objectives suggest. There may also be instances where we would, because of 

our particular province, agree to go along with lower standards. We do have some regulations at present 

with respect to air quality. And as a general rule these follow the objectives set by the Federal standards. 

 

May I comment upon a couple of questions that the Hon. Member for Cannington has raised. And I 

think his questions can be stated: 

 

1. Will permits or licences be issued to companies that do not meet the required levels, and; 

 

2. How much time will these industries be given to comply with the requirements to obtain a permit? 

 

First it is our intention that once the levels are established that new industries will be expected to meet 

these required levels at start up. With regard to existing industries I don’t think it will be our intention to 

set down firm standards and require immediate compliance. It is intended that existing industries would 

be granted either an interim of a conditional permit which would permit that particular industry to 

exceed the required level of emission at least for a specified period of time. We would likely require a 

commitment from the company that it would commit itself to a program over a given period of time to 

reduce emissions so as to comply with the regulations. We expect to work out an agreeable time frame 

between the Department and the industry concerned. We would certainly take into consideration such 

factors as the financial implications that extensive emission equipment might have for that particular 

company. On the third question, will there be any industries that may not qualify under the proposed 

regulations? 

 

First, the regulations have not yet been set. We are continuing to gather more data through our 

monitoring program. I think you will recall the remarks I made about the proposed expansion of our 

monitoring system in the Budget Debate. Our mobile lab was ordered last fall, a mobile air monitoring 

lab, and it has not arrived as yet and, therefore, we are a bit handicapped in not having the equipment to 

do the required monitoring at this time. So our regulations are not fully set and they will not be until we 

have gathered in more data than we have at present. 

 

On the basis of the information that we now have collected through our limited monitoring program, we 

do not believe that there will be a substantial number of plants that will be unable to meet the regulations 

which we intend to draft. There may be some industries in the province that will be required to clean up 

their equipment but we do not anticipate that there will be many. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, that that answers some of the questions raised by the Hon. Members. We will 

provide more information if it is required during Committee. I move second reading of this 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1477 

Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Taylor (Minister 

of Social Services) that Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting Family Services be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, at the time when the Bill was introduced for first reading I 

wasn’t in and I don’t know what the Minister said. The Minister is not in at this time. I should like to 

direct my words to the Minister because he will close the debate and I should like some answers. There 

is lots of time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the Family Services Bill as it is spelled out, it only deals with one 

aspect of family life and that is whether or not the Minister will take care of a child or the family as a 

whole, one or more children. Surely, Mr. Speaker, family problems usually are not the children. As a 

matter of fact it has long been recognized and established that the children are the greatest blessing in a 

home and here when we read about family services the Minister is more or less just concerned with 

taking the child away from the parent. There is really nothing in the Act that spells out what the Minister 

will provide in certain kinds of services to help maintain a family setting. I find it hard to understand 

why the Minister does not spell out in detail what he intends to do in order to maintain the family 

setting. 

 

In Clauses 5, 6 and 7, three very short clauses, the Bill more or less states that the Minister may do such 

things as he considers advisable, that is, in maintaining a family setting. But there are some 80 clauses, 

maybe not all of them dealing with the same principle, but there are 80 clauses in the Bill which deal 

with measures after the child or children have been taken from the parent at one time or other. One of 

the major shortcomings of this Government is not putting into legislation or regulation in the welfare 

system spelling out clearly what are the responsibilities of the parents. Don’t encourage young people or 

older people, alike, to have children and then ask the taxpayer to foot the bill. 

 

There are many areas of concern that I have which could assist us in keeping the welfare budget down to 

a minimum, but if this Government believes and will adopt most of the Liquor Commission’s report, 

family life will definitely deteriorate. There is no argument about that. If this Government believes that 

lowering the drinking age to 18, which indeed they have done, then I can assure the Minister that there 

will be more problems. I should like to see the Government embark on an educational program which 

would be aimed at showing the responsibility to mothers in particular, be they wed or unwed, and 

parents that to have children spells out grave and sincere responsibilities, and that the Government 

should not always respond as a godfather at all times. I believe what the Minister is trying to do is to 

rectify a problem once it exists. We should try to prevent the problem but if there is a problem that does 

exist then I do not see much wrong with what he intends to do. I personally will not object to the Bill but 

certainly, as I said in my opening remarks, this Bill is a new Act that calls for family services and the 

only thing that it deals with 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1478 

is dealing with children where parents are unable and unwilling to care for the child, or are delinquent. I 

certainly cannot see that for solving family problems this Bill does any more than deal with one family 

problem. 

 

Mr. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I was trying to gather a few things together here 

when the Member from Rosthern was speaking. I have also read the Act and I want to say that I think 

the Member from Rosthern speaks with sincerity on the Bill. I have also read the Bill and studied it in 

some detail and I read into the Bill that this was going to be a Bill that would prevent, and give the 

Minister authority, to prevent family breakdowns. If you read the old Child Welfare Act, and I am sure 

that the Member from Rosthern has, since he was the Minister of Social Services for some time, he will 

note that there is a difference. The emphasis here is on prevention. There was nothing in the old Child 

Welfare Act that gave the Minister the authority to try and assist families when they were in need, not 

when a crisis has occurred but when they were in need so that they could go to agencies, could go to the 

Minister, could go to the Crown for some help. I think there is a real change in the emphasis in this 

particular Act. The reason I was not prepared was because I was going through the Star-Phoenix a little 

while ago and I think one of the reasons why so many of our families are breaking down was mentioned 

by the Member opposite and I have to agree with him — it is drinking. I want him to note also that last 

year we had a free vote, and I know he would have been more accurate if he had said, if this Legislature 

believes that we restore family unity, family standards, by lowering the drinking age, then this 

Legislature is wrong and not put the full blame on this side of the House. I voted in favor of lowering the 

drinking age and maybe I was wrong. I know you opposed it and maybe you were right. The Member 

from Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) opposed it and maybe he was right. Yes, he opposed it. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No, he didn’t. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, he did. Mr. Speaker, I should like to read to the Member from Rosthern what a 

Federal Minister has said about welfare payments, entitled, “Welfare Pay Disgrace.” 

 

Welfare Minister, Marc Lalonde, said Tuesday, the level of welfare payments in some provinces is a 

disgrace. Mr. Lalonde said that 150,000 mothers deserted by their husbands receive less in welfare 

payments than the elderly get in Old Age Pension benefits. 

 

We know the low financial standards of our elderly people and if the Member from Rosthern is saying 

that because this Government believes in raising the welfare benefits of our welfare family above the 

poverty level, if that creates family breakdowns, then I don’t follow his logic. Because one of the serious 

problems that families have, I think, if you will check, is poverty. But one of the things common to most 

welfare families and I am sure that if you will check (you must be aware of this and you simply can’t 

close your mind to it) that the majority of the people who are on welfare are people who originally were 

below the poverty line. One of the reasons 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1479 

indicated by the Senate Committee’s Report on Poverty and the Real Report on Poverty why we 

perpetuate poverty in our society is the way our economic system is set up from one generation to the 

next. We perpetuate, we make certain that these people will have family breakdowns by the fact that we 

permit poverty. Now you might not agree with that, but that, in my opinion, is one of the reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular Act, if you read through it carefully, you can’t help but note that the 

Minister is attempting to assist families before the breakdown occurs. And as I said before it gives the 

Minister authority to establish support programs and services to assist parents. That’s what the Act says, 

“To establish support programs and services to assist parents in maintaining a healthy, vibrant and viable 

family life.” That is the purpose of this Act. If the Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) did not read that 

into the Act then I think he misread the Act. That is what the Act is intended to do. All the other things 

simply state the means and ways which the Minister can use if there is breakdown, and how he can help 

a child. 

 

The main difference, in my opinion, between this Act and The Child Welfare Act, is that The Family 

Services Act emphasizes the importance of assisting a family to keep their children in their own home, 

rather than starting at a point of family breakdown and removing the children from the parents. If you 

listened to the Member’s speech from Rosthern and mine, you must conclude that we are not talking 

about the same Act. 

 

The Family Services Act assumes that the family is the most fundamental and essential unit in society, 

therefore, it is of interest to society that governments assist parents in maintaining a sound family 

environment. Greatly increased demands are being made on the family unit and its traditional family 

often resulting in complete family breakdown. Unless services are made available to these faltering 

families we can expect the percentages of divorces, separations and common law marriages to continue 

to increase. A Saskatoon lawyer recently indicated that one in two marriages in Saskatoon end in 

disaster. In my opinion I don’t see any improvement in this area unless we are prepared to provide more 

preventative services, unless we make premarriage courses compulsory and unless we can halt the 

present permissive attitude which is so prevalent, not only among our youth but among people of all 

ages. 

 

We’re convinced that saving the family unit is a worthwhile object. I believe this Government says, yes, 

and we have as an alternative, presented to this House, the new Family Services Act. This Government, 

in my opinion, is heeding the warnings and is acting now. As I have already indicated family breakdown 

is at an unparalleled high rate. Incidents of delinquencies have skyrocketed. Children and parents are at 

odds when the child is still dependent on them. Tremendous increases have occurred in illegitimate 

births in a population of unwed mothers whose average age is always decreasing. Ever increasing 

numbers of ‘so-called’ therapeutic abortions are taking place and we are witnessing a high incidence of 

experimentation with drugs by the upper and middle class children. The warnings are here, we must act 

now. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1480 

The community, its agencies and individuals are deluding themselves in thinking that they are honestly 

trying to cope with the problems facing the family. In reality families with problems, and here in my 

opinion is the main problem, families with problems are despised by the rest of society. They are 

ridiculed because they are unable to bear up under society’s demands. They are faced with the lack of 

appreciation of the problems of the underprivileged, the abused and the poverty stricken. We treat them 

with the attitude that families get the kind of life they deserve. I wonder how many of us, had we not 

been born in the circumstances in which we were born, wouldn’t be the ones that are abused today. It is 

not to our credit, it is because of the circumstances in which we were born. Until now, we have placed 

too much emphasis on remedial services, rather than preventive measures. 

 

It seems rather strange that society is quite prepared to foot the bill for remedial and rehabilitation 

services which are not only very costly, but their success has been rather small. However, society seems 

not willing to provide more preventative services. We don’t seem to mind paying for the high 

rehabilitative costs of such centres as Ranch Erhlo, Roy Wilson Centre, Boys School and penitentiaries, 

but we don’t seem to be willing to make those changes in our society and provide those services which 

could prevent many of our people from ending up in these institutions. 

 

I think that this Family Services Act is one step in the right direction. As I mentioned to this House two 

years ago, it costs this society about $11,000 a year to have one boy at Ranch Erhlo. $11,000 and we are 

willing to foot the bill after we have put the child through the mill. 

 

This Bill, in my opinion, could go a long way in remedying some of the difficulties that beset a family 

with problems. The Bill will enable the Department of Social Services to provide preventative services 

to families in order to forestall family breakdown. It will provide the Department, where breakdowns 

have occurred, to provide assistance to re-establish a family without placing the parent or the family in 

an adversary position. It will provide for protection and care of children when parents are unwilling or 

unable to provide adequately for them, and it will provide machinery for streamlining adoption 

procedures. 

 

I think we have, Mr. Speaker, to face reality. There are certain parents who will not accept their 

responsibility. I think the state is obligated to do something for these children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides more humane methods of bringing help to families where the removal of 

children for their protection is required. In The Family Services Act, however, the latter is a last resort, 

not a beginning point as with The Child Welfare Act. 

 

The Bill presupposes that the children can best be protected by supplying services to their parents rather 

than having the Department merely protect the children from their parents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Family Services Act places heavy emphasis on prevention, whereas The Child 

Welfare Act’s main thrust seems to be on the remedial and rehabilitation services. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1481 

In my opinion it is better to give assistance before a family breakdown. Prevention is financially cheaper 

than rehabilitation and it should result in maintaining more sound and robust families, which are the 

essential units required to build a viable and healthy society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I support The Family Services Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few remarks to direct to specific sections 

of the Act and what I regard as a weakness particularly in Section 52 of the Act, which is in part III 

under “Adoption of Children”. 

 

The part that I refer to, Mr. Speaker, is the requirement that no order of adoption of a child shall be made 

without the consent to adoption in writing of, in the case of an unwed mother, the mother only. The 

provision states then that the adoption order requires only the consent of the mother if the child was born 

out of wedlock, even if that mother should be under the age of 18 years. 

 

There is no provision under this Act for the consent of the real father of the child, regardless of the 

circumstances. Now in this day and age there are many people, in fact a large and increasing number of 

common law unions, where a man and a woman have lived together, in some cases for many, many 

years, who have children which, of course, are born out of wedlock. So if this Act is passed without any 

amendment the natural father might find that he was supporting a child for a number of years, but would 

have no voice of any kind if the woman, the mother of the child, suddenly decided to put that child out 

for adoption. 

 

I have sent to the Hon. Minister of Social Services a copy of a judgment. I prefer not to name the case, 

but for identification, it is No. 55 in the Court of Queen’s Bench at the judicial centre of Melfort. It was 

not a case that I had anything to do with, but it is a case that was drawn to my attention. In that particular 

case a man and a woman had been living for a number of years together out of wedlock, as a result of 

which two lovely girls were born. 

 

These children were brought up in that situation. The mother then decided to leave the home and took up 

with another gentleman whom she subsequently married. The Court of Queen’s Bench awarded custody 

of the children, not to the mother, but actually took custody away from the mother and gave it to the 

father. This is the situation whereof I speak and which I wish to make representation to the Minister and 

to the Government to alter. 

 

This father has, in fact, some responsibility with respect to those children he fathered despite the fact 

that he fathered them out of wedlock. This father actually tried to, and I believe, was successful in 

discharging his responsibilities. He went to court and got an order, giving those children to him and 

those children were not allowed to stay with the mother. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1482 

Mr. Speaker, this situation has been recognized in Ontario. In the case that I have given the example of, 

the mother, presumably under Part III of the Act, would have the power (the only authority) required to 

consent to their adoption, where the real father who showed far more responsibility than the mother, 

would have no voice whatsoever. This is recognized and rectified in Ontario. 

 

I refer the House to the Ontario Act, the Child Welfare Act of that province, chapter 64 of 1970, as it is 

amended, and which reads this way: 

 

An order for the adoption of a child under 18 years of age who was born out of wedlock and who has 

not been married shall be made only with the written consent of the mother, given after the child was 

seven days old, and where the child resides with and is maintained by the father with the written 

consent of the father. 

 

So the Ontario Act has attempted in a way to give recognition to the fact that there is a real father who 

may have real concerns for the child and whose consent may be required. 

 

The Manitoba Act says this (this is the Child Welfare Act) and I refer the House to Section 85 (iii), 

again enacted in 1970 and it provides this: 

 

A person applying for an interim order of adoption shall give notice of the application to the director, 

to the person whose consent of adoption is required, and, to such other persons as the judge may direct 

notice to be given. 

 

So in the cases where a common law union has occurred and where a father has accepted responsibility 

for a child this gives authority to the court to direct that notice be given to the father. The reason for that, 

Mr. Speaker, is this: It may well be that of all the people in the world the natural father may be the one 

who properly should be given a notice and maybe should be given the opportunity to apply for the 

adoption of these children. 

 

I am not suggesting to the Minister or to the House, and it would be unrealistic to suggest, that every 

father should receive notice. Quite apart from the fact that in many cases there may well be considerable 

doubt as to who the father might be. There are many cases where the real father has never acknowledged 

the presence of the child, has never really willingly accepted any responsibility with respect to the child 

and consequently ought not to be assumed would want to assume responsibility for a child that he had 

never even recognized or taken care of. 

 

On the other hand it is quite improper not to give some notice to the natural fathers who have, in fact, 

been supporting their children for many years, or who have been required or have willingly paid 

maintenance for those children. 

 

I recognize that it might be easier for the Minister of Welfare and social workers to have the Statute the 

way it is. But I suggest that it would not be difficult for the Minister to propose easy amendments, which 

would firstly give notice to the fathers who have been real fathers to the children, and secondly, 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1483 

to give full consideration to those fathers who wish to assume responsibility. 

 

The situation is very similar in common law relationships with that of regular marriages. A couple may 

have lived together for years and they have separated, the wife taking the children away, the father going 

his way, the wife going hers. Some time later the wife may decide that she cannot, nor maybe does not 

want to carry out responsibilities with respect to these children. If that should occur, the first person who 

should be given consideration and who should be consulted and who should be given notice is the real 

father who may decide that if the common law wife is not going to carry out her duties, then he should 

assume them, and he may well do so. 

 

I would suggest, of course, that in dealing with the father, the real father, the same considerations would 

apply. The court would be just as careful in selecting him as a parent, as an adoptive parent, as it would 

towards any stranger. But what I wish to make clear is that the Court of Queen’s Bench in this province, 

has clearly recognized the right of real fathers, even though they are not husbands, to have custody of 

the children even over the right of the wife to have custody. It is unrealistic not to deal with them in the 

same way when it comes to adoption. 

 

There are several other comments which will be very brief. That is, my regret that the Act does not 

advance with respect to other people interested in children. Nothing is more unhappy to a solicitor than 

to have a grandmother come to the office and tell how she knows very well that her grandchild is being 

abused, perhaps because her daughter isn’t strong enough to hold off an angered husband. But every 

lawyer in the province at one time or another has had one or more cases of a relative coming to the 

lawyer and saying, ‘I know that child is being abused; I have seen it, in some cases, with my own eyes’, 

and the lawyer has to say, with considerable unhappiness and frequently without any further productive 

work on his part for the rest of the day, that the grandmother or the brother or the sister has no real rights 

with respect to that child. 

 

I fully understand the problem of the Department when they receive notice of these cases. Which is the 

best for the child? I do suggest that the Department of Social Services might well consider recognizing 

the possibility that other people do have concerns about those children, because they care. 

 

The technical points that I draw to the Minister’s attention are, of course, that it is possible that you can 

be adopting a child up to age 18, you can get mothers who are under 18, giving children up for adoption. 

I observe that in Part III the adoption age is 18, whereas Section 2 says that in this Act a ‘child’ means a 

boy or girl under 16. I don’t push that further. I do suggest that there is some lack of recognition in this 

Act of the powers contained in the Queen’s Bench Act. 

 

In this Act a judge is a judge of a District Court. In the Queen’s Bench Act, of course, the judge is that 

of a different court and the Act gives to the Court of Queen’s Bench — and I will quote as closely as I 

can - 

 

The power to make such order as the court sees fit regarding the custody of an infant. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1484 

Now that is almost an exact quotation of the sentence as it appears in The Infant’s Act, giving 

unrestricted power to the Court of Queen’s Bench to give custody to such person as the court sees fit. It 

is pretty hard to imagine wider powers than that 

 

I invite the Minister to consider the dovetailing of those two separate substantive powers. Of the things 

that I have remarked upon today, the one that I regard as most important for today’s consideration is that 

the notice to natural fathers is important and the one that I would like to see put into the Act, if not here 

at this stage, then certainly in Committee stage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to rise for one moment on a 

Point of Privilege, if I may. 

 

I think when the Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) was speaking he made the remark that I had 

voted against a certain portion of the Bill related to 18 year-olds one year ago. And the Member for 

Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) had indicated that I had not. 

 

I will read from the record: 

 

I think that I have some very severe reservations in my mind in relation to 18 year-olds being able to 

enter beer parlors and, therefore, in terms of the basic principle of the Bill, I will support it but on that 

particular portion of the Bill in Committee of the Whole I will oppose it. 

 

And I did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very brief in speaking on this Bill. 

 

First of all, I would prefer to look at this as an optimist on this Bill, rather than as a pessimist. The 

reason for this is because I think that we have a reasonable Minister of Social Services. I believe that we 

are going to continue to have reasonable Ministers for that particular Department regardless of what 

political party is in power. 

 

I like this Bill in particular because it gives more leeway to the Minister to take preventative action in 

regard to families. Now I know that in travelling with the Welfare Committee this past summer and fall, 

that this was brought to our attention numerous times. There should be some provision for more 

participation by the Department, by the Minister, in regard to helping families before they completely 

break up altogether. 

 

I notice that there are situations where the present legislation or the regulations make no provision for 

this leeway. I think that it could help to preserve family units. I notice that there is provision for aid to 

families where there 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1485 

could possibly be a temporary disruption. It might be due to illness, physical or mental and in this way, 

parents could get their children back after a period of time. 

 

The Hon. Member from Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) mentioned something about common-law parents 

having children and the father having no say. In all probability the Member has a very good point there. 

I am just wondering what some of your colleagues may say to that, and I say this in all sincerity because 

I don’t think the Minister would want to be accused of promoting the break-up of families. The Hon. 

Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) mentioned something about drinking. I think if drinking is a problem 

at 18, it is my opinion and again with much sincerity, I think it is an indication that there was something 

deeper involved in that family prior to that age. In talking to various people in Hanley constituency, and 

particularly to clergymen, I can honestly say that I haven’t run across one that wasn’t completely in 

favor of the principle of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, May I say first just one or two words 

concerning the remarks of the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod). I have a great deal of sympathy 

for what he has said regarding the natural father in the case of an illegitimate child and can only say to 

him that I will take this under consideration and see if there is any way that we can be of assistance in 

this regard. 

 

Some of his other comments regarding the Queen’s Bench and so on I would have to get more technical 

advice on and will certainly take them under advisement. 

 

He spoke of child abuse and the need of the Department to recognize that those other than the parents 

might have a real concern. He mentioned grandparents, brothers, sisters. I agree with him. I think it 

would be very difficult to see just in what way he wanted a department to recognize this concern since 

any friend of a child has the right to report abuse. And the Department, of course, is then by law 

compelled to investigate and take whatever action is necessary. If there are other ways we would be glad 

to hear of them. 

 

Some of the other comments I think we can look at during the Committee of the Whole and we would be 

glad to do so. 

 

I was somewhat surprised at some of the comments made by the Member for Rosthern, not overly 

surprised but somewhat surprised. One comment was that the Family Services Bill does not solve all the 

problems. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have yet to discover any government that has reached the stage of total 

perfection. We may be close but not quite there where we could say that any bill would solve all the 

problems. I, for one, would not want to give that impression. I think I said during my original comments 

on this piece of legislation we did not believe it would solve all the problems in society. But we felt it 

was a large step in the right direction. Indeed if it solved all the problems it would be quite an omnibus 

bill which would cover far more than just family relations. The Member also said that there were only 

three sections of the 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1486 

Bill relating to the family, Sections 5, 6 and 7. I commend him on noticing that these three sections 

relate to the family. Section 8 also says any parent who through special circumstance of a temporary 

nature is unable to make adequate provision for his child or unable to provide services may enter into an 

agreement with the Minister. 

 

I suggest this also relates to a family. Section 17 which speaks of provision of services to the child 

within the family home in lieu of removal surely speaks to the services being provided to a family. 

Section 47 which speaks of the power of the Minister to enter into certain contracts is directly related 

surely to family situations. And Section 50 and one could go on and on. Section 50 is how the Minister 

may assist parents. Now surely parents are family — and there are other sections related to the family. I 

should like to suggest that much of the rest of the Bill is there because of legal and technical situations 

which the Members on the other side and on this side must surely be aware of. We are told that when it 

comes to court one must spell things out very clearly and very carefully. And this we have done and this 

amounts — we admit readily, to a large part of the Bill. 

 

The Member from Rosthern tried to encourage us, and I certainly accept his sincerity in this, and I join 

with him to encourage us to protect family life and to provide services to the family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that is what Bill No. 62 is all about. As I said it is probably not perfect. But it 

is a large step in the right direction. It seems to us on this side of the House that the family is the basic 

unit of society and a good society cannot be built on a bad base or foundation. It seems to us we have to 

do all within our power to assist the family. To help the family to grow and to develop and to become 

strong. We are trying to do this. The Act speaks of the Minister being able to provide grants for research 

into family life and this type of thing. This will be one way in which we attempt to try and deal with 

many of the problems in present day society. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we do have to face reality and part of the Bill does just that. Whether we like it or not 

there are families that have reached the point of no return, where a crisis has developed and the family 

has been broken apart. And someone has not only to pick up the pieces but protect the child. It seems to 

me that while we are attempting to work with the whole family the child who really cannot in many 

cases speak for himself, must be of primary importance. And the weight of the law must be on the side 

of that child, even if it means in the long run removing the child from the home. This I believe has to be 

a last resort. But it has to be a step which society is willing to take if it is to protect the long-term life 

and welfare of a child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we will get into a number of other areas during Committee of the Whole and I, 

therefore, move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1487 

Mr. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to clear up one comment that the Minister said I 

made. I don’t think I made it, I am sure I didn’t. That this Bill did not solve all the problems. I certainly 

know that there is no Bill in the world that will solve all the family problems. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill 

No. 54 — An Act respecting Children of Unmarried Parents be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. McPherson (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, there are a few things I should like to say on this 

Bill and that I would ask the Minister to consider. I know this is a Bill that we needed very badly in the 

province. There are several statutes covering it. But I think he has brought them all under one bill. This 

probably is good for the Department. 

 

What I should like the Minister to consider, Mr. Speaker, is in the case of a pregnant woman if she is a 

ward of the Government, I assume that the Department as a guardian could institute filiation proceedings 

as provided for in item 3 (i) (c). I would ask the Minister to look at this. If the judge subsequently 

discharges the alleged father named in the proceedings and absolves him of responsibility then I think 

the alleged father should be able to claim for the expenses provided for in item 3 (1). The Department 

should not be excluded from this responsibility. I feel very strongly, Mr. Speaker. I would also ask the 

Minister to look at item 23 (c) this also provides for an exclusion. I think the power, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Minister has taken upon himself is too much. I don’t think the Minister should have the discretion to 

decide the disposition of moneys in the trust account if a child dies. This is provided in item 22 (3). I 

feel that medical expenses, Mr. Speaker, should be paid from the account plus a reasonable sum for the 

child’s maintenance as decided by a judge and not by the Minister. And this is why I say the Minister is 

taking to himself too much power and I should like to see this changed. 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, that any moneys that are left in this account should automatically go to the father 

and not be forfeited to the Crown. If the Minister would look at this, Mr. Speaker, very carefully I feel 

that when we get it in Committee we can certainly discuss these items that I have brought up here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I shall merely say that we shall be 

happy to look at the suggestions which the Hon. Member has put forward and be ready to discuss them 

when the Bill comes up in Committee. As every one is aware I am sure there are a number of problems 

involved in the disposition of funds from the trust account to which the Member made reference. There 

are also problems regarding the recouping of expenses which he brought up. We will certainly be happy 

to take them under consideration. The Act is really the replacement of part 3 of the present Child 

Welfare Act and attempts to bring it up to date and separate it from The Family Services Bill. I think it 

ought to be separated. It is a Bill which deals with the situation quite different from the Family Services. 

I, therefore, move second 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1488 

reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 50 — An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Wiebe (Morse): — This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct my remarks regarding Bill 

50 – An Act to amend The Natural Products Marketing Act to some of the comments which have been 

made by Government Members opposite. In all three cases so far the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer), the Member from Pelly (Mr. Larson), the Member from Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding) have refrained 

from talking about the contents of the Bill that we now have before us. In each case the three Members 

talked about orderly marketing of the products produced by our farmers in this province. Each and every 

Member of this House I am sure is concerned about orderly marketing. We should like to see a program 

of orderly marketing that would benefit all producers of this province. And as far as I am concerned, Mr. 

Speaker, it should be one that has the full endorsement and full co-operation of all producers involved. 

And producers, Mr. Speaker, should have a say on how it will be implemented and how that commission 

will be operated. 

 

The approach to operating orderly marketing is the basic difference of the two political parties which are 

represented in this House. A difference in philosophy, a difference in the degree of involvement of the 

producer and above all consideration for the individual freedom of that producer. 

 

The Member for Pelly is correct when he states that we have had a Natural Products Marketing Act as 

legislation in this Province of Saskatchewan for a number of years. The Act was enforced during the 

CCF years prior to 1964. At this point I should like to take a look at how the two parties in this House 

have handled The Natural Products Marketing Act from 1964 until now. During this period both parties 

have sat in Government and have sat in Opposition. 

 

Let’s look at the status of The Natural Products Marketing Act under a Liberal Government from 1964 

on. That Government, Mr. Speaker, believed in the freedom of the individual. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The Government, Mr. Speaker, which believed in the right producer to have a say and a 

control of his own destiny. It was a Government, Mr. Speaker, which realized that the individual himself 

knew what direction he wanted to go. It was a Government which allowed that individual to make that 

decision himself. 

 

Under the Liberal Government The Natural Products Marketing Act said the following: 

 

Before a marketing system and all its controls could be implemented in this province, the producers of 

that particular product must first request that such a system be introduced. Then all producers would be 

informed about what that marketing system contains and how it 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1489 

would operate. After this had been completed it was mandatory that a vote be held by all producers 

involved. A vote that required 60 per cent of the producers to be in favor of such a system before it 

would be implemented. Once a marketing board or commission was established after a favorable vote, 

under a Liberal Government, the producers themselves would be the only ones who were on that 

marketing board or commission. The producers themselves would have the control of that board. And 

the producers themselves who have the control of how the regulations would be introduced under that 

board or commission. 

 

Let’s look at what has happened since June of 1971, when the NDP started to play around with The 

Natural Products Marketing Act. First of all the NDP decided that the individual producer should not 

have the right to vote. That a commission instead should be implemented. A commission that in effect 

would take the place of a marketing board. A commission that would have exactly the same powers as a 

marketing board, the only difference would be that a marketing board can control production where a 

commission cannot. Another difference is involvement. The producer would have the say, the producer 

would govern the regulations. Under a commission this Government does all that. This Government 

takes away that right to vote. This Government takes away any producer control or any producer 

involvement in what the commission does. The Minister of Agriculture and this NDP Government 

decided that they and not the producer should have a marketing commission. That big brother would do 

this without a vote. They have decided what is best for the producer and they do not want to confuse the 

issue by allowing a vote. 

 

They changed the Act in 1972 which denied the producer that right to vote. This Act also allowed the 

Government to appoint the Members to that commission. 

 

The Minister, in his remarks on March 1st, said that he wanted to listen to the producers. He attended 

one meeting as I mentioned earlier, in his home constituency. He hasn’t had the guts to attend another 

one in this province. He says that he is going to implement what the producers want and yet the 

meetings aren’t even completed and we see Bill 50 before us which gives him all the control that is 

going to be implemented under that Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — So what say have the producers had as to what that commission is going to be? Going 

back to last March 1st, Mr. Speaker, the day that the Minister of Agriculture moved second reading of 

The Natural Products Marketing Act, at least that is what it said on the Order Paper. One had to wonder 

just exactly what the Minister of Agriculture was introducing when he spoke that afternoon. He talked 

about everything else but The Natural Products Marketing Act. At first it sounded as though he were 

re-introducing The Land Bank Act. Then he changed horses and for a while it sounded as if the 

FarmStart legislation was to be introduced. He went on to talk about United Grain Growers and the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. We began to feel that after Premier Blakeney and the Member from 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1490 

Bengough (Mr. Lange) had purchased the CPR and the CNR that possibly Mr. Messer and Mr. Blakeney 

were out to buy the elevator companies as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Not so much, Mr. Speaker, for providing new jobs, or new industry in this province, but 

rather for accumulating control and ownership. An example of this is when the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Messer) talked about Intercontinental Packers. It showed that they were not concerned about 

providing new industries or new jobs, but rather this Government’s apparent desire to go into the meat 

packing process. To complement this action, they introduced The Natural Products Marketing Act to 

acquire the power to tell the farmer where he must deliver his products. He went on to say how this NDP 

Government spent $10.2 million for a meagre 45 per cent of the company. Paid more than three times of 

what the shares are worth. A very good deal, Mr. Speaker, for someone, but it is becoming very apparent 

as more light is thrown on the subject and the Premier’s refusal to answer our questions, that it was a 

very bad deal for the farmers and the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — One wonders, Mr. Speaker, why the Minister of Agriculture would neglect to talk about 

this Bill in light of the devastating effect it will have on the basic rights of each and every farmer in this 

province. 

 

It is true that he talked a bit about a marketing commission, but that was the same speech he used last 

year when he introduced The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972 — an Act that was one step closer 

towards the NDP Government’s goal to do away with the freedom of the individual. An Act, Mr. 

Speaker, where he misled the producers of this province. An Act where he and his Government have 

denied and taken away from the farmers of this province their right adequately to voice their opinion. 

Under that Act they have taken away their right to contribute their ideas and above all, they have taken 

away their right to vote for an orderly marketing system of their own products. 

 

Again I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture talked for about thirty minutes on 

everything else but what was contained in the Bill before us now. Why did he, by design, refrain from 

talking about Bill 50? Why didn’t he explain what Bill 50 contained? Why didn’t he explain what it 

could and would do, and what effect it would have on each and every farmer in this province? Could it 

be, Mr. Speaker, that he was ashamed of what Bill 50 contained? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Could it be that the Minister of Agriculture, who is himself a young, progressive farmer, 

who knows himself of the desires that farmers have for their independence and their personal initiative 

and desire for freedom; could it be, Mr. Speaker, that because of this he just could not find it in 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1491 

himself to talk about one of the most vicious pieces of legislation ever introduced into this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Legislation, Mr. Speaker, that is an infringement upon the basic rights and freedoms of 

every farmer in this province. 

 

Could it be that he could not find it in himself to talk about the strict controls, regimentations and utter 

power which this NDP government is building around themselves? Power, Mr. Speaker, not in the hands 

of the producers, but power in the hands of cabinet. Could it be that he could not find it in himself to talk 

about a Bill which is more devastating than the controversial Foreign Ownership Bill which he was 

forced to withdraw last year? 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture, who, I repeat again, is himself a young 

progressive farmer, knows the desires which the farmers have for independence and for their freedom. I 

maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture did not dream up the powers which this 

Government is asking for and that’s why he couldn’t talk about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Power which this Government is asking for can only be drawn up or drafted by the ‘big 

four’ in Cabinet. Mr. Speaker, just who are those ‘big four’ in Cabinet? First of all I think we have to 

look at an Eastern lawyer who is sitting in the Premier’s chair. He is flanked by two union henchmen 

from Moose Jaw South and Regina Northeast, with another lawyer from Saskatoon Riversdale in the 

centre directing traffic. These are men, Mr. Speaker, who know nothing about agriculture and the desires 

of the farmers in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — They have left the poor Member from Tisdale-Kelsey holding the bag. He doesn’t like 

what is in the bag and has refused to talk about it. 

 

Mr. Comer: — What did he talk about? 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Let’s just look at what the Member from Tisdale did talk about, Mr. Comer. Let me just 

quote a paragraph that the Minister made in his remarks: 

 

Our first and foremost concern as a government is to enhance the farm opportunities available to rural 

people in Saskatchewan in order to stem and in order to hopefully reverse the trend towards 

depopulation of our rural areas and the decline in our farm numbers. 

 

Well said, Mr. Speaker, but he said this, Mr. Speaker, just two short weeks after his Government called a 

halt to one of the greatest dreams and probably one of the greatest advancements in the agricultural 

industry this province could have 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1492 

ever achieved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — He called a halt and he sounded the death knell to the South Saskatchewan River 

irrigation project. The excuse given, Mr. Speaker, was that the rising costs were too high — 2.3 million 

dollars, one-fifth of the amount that they spent to purchase an industry that was already here. $10.2 

million on a processing plant that would not provide any more jobs for our people in this province. He 

called a halt, Mr. Speaker, to a program that would have increased the rural population of our province. 

This has already been indicated in the Rural Municipality of Rudy — the only Rural Municipality in 

Saskatchewan to show an increase in population, while all other municipalities have shown a decline. 

 

By this Government’s action the town of Outlook, alone, will lose 106 people. 

 

If this action, Mr. Speaker, is an example of this Government’s proposal to reverse the trend of rural 

depopulation, I sincerely hope that they put a stop to it. Any more programs like this and our rural 

population will be completely gone and we may as well turn Saskatchewan over to the buffalo, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Minister then went on to say how beneficial the purchase of Intercontinental Packers would be to 

Saskatchewan. His Government spent $10.2 million for an industry that was already here, one that 

would not provide any more jobs. I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that this was money that was thrown away. If 

his Government is concerned about the producers of our meat products, I maintain the money could 

have been spent more wisely. 

 

If the Minister of Agriculture is convinced that livestock production will have a tremendous gain in this 

province, then why didn’t he and his Government direct this money and energy towards that industry? 

They could have built or made money or loans available to individuals to construct smaller processing 

plants throughout Saskatchewan. Instead of centralizing the meat processing industry in this province, 

this Government should have directed incentives and direction to locate these smaller industries in some 

of our rural communities throughout this province. To do this, it would help to provide and stabilize our 

population in rural Saskatchewan. As well, it would have been of benefit to our producers of these meat 

products. Trucking and hauling expenses would be much less, which would mean much greater return to 

the producer when he delivered his animals. In turn, the cost of shipping the finished product is much 

less than shipping the live animal, another saving that could be passed on to our producers and to our 

consumers. 

 

Just one more example of the inability of this Government to formulate any meaningful ideas or 

programs for Saskatchewan, despite the fact of the huge research and planning staff which they have 

acquired. 

 

The Minister, Mr. Speaker, also went on to talk about everything else, but Bill 50. Instead he went on to 

criticize the Liberal Government of 1970, saying that because of their 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1493 

chaotic and unorganized marketing system, hog prices fell to an all-time low. Mr. Speaker, he stopped 

then. He didn’t go on any further, he didn’t go on to say that in NDP Manitoba, hog prices had fallen 

just as low, and Manitoba had a compulsory hog marketing commission which he is trying to put into 

this province. He didn’t go on to say that during that time the price of hogs in Saskatchewan depended 

almost 90 per cent on the price that was being paid for hogs in Manitoba. So if the price of hogs in 

Manitoba, in Saskatchewan had dropped to an all-time low, it wasn’t the fault of the Liberal 

Government in Saskatchewan, it was the fault of an NDP Government in Manitoba. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Just one more indication where this Government has tried to mislead the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the Minister of Agriculture will have an opportunity to close 

debate on this subject, if he doesn’t, which I hope, withdraw the Bill. The Minister then began to talk 

about the rights of the producers. I should like to quote a few more of his choice statements which he 

made when he introduced this Bill: 

 

It is the belief of this Government that producers must be able to, if they so choose, to control the flow 

of either their products from the time it leaves their farm until it reaches the hands of the ultimate 

consumer. 

 

Well said, again, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, there is no clause or provision in Bill 50 which gives 

the producer the right to choose or the mechanics for him to choose that control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — The choice, Mr. Speaker, is left up to the commission which is appointed by the 

Government, which means the Government is the only one who chooses. 

 

Here is another one of his choice quotes, Mr. Bowerman: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan takes the position that marketing boards or commissions should be 

established where producers indicate a desire for such an agency. 

 

Here again, well said, Mr. Speaker. But again his actions differ from what he says. He has denied the 

producers of any product their right to show their desire for a commission by refusing them that vote. He 

made that very clear last year when his Government amended The Natural Products Marketing Act and 

gave themselves the power to set up a marketing commission without a 60 per cent favorable vote. This 

again, Mr. Speaker, indicates the basic philosophy of a Socialist Government . . . ‘Big brother’ knows 

what is best for the little people and ‘big brother’ is going to ram it down your throats whether you like 

it or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1494 

Mr. Wiebe: — The Government Members opposite say that they have the support of the people for the 

actions which they have taken. I understand that there wasn’t one of them that was out at Lampman the 

night before last. If they believe this, Mr. Speaker, then again I say they can all be compared to an 

ostrich, standing unconcerned with their heads and ears in the sand. If they are positive that the people 

are listening and they are listening to the little people of this province, then why don’t they give each 

producer the right to vote and let him decide if he wants a commission for his particular produce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Minister got around to talking about what the Government’s 

real intent was and what their real purpose for introducing this legislation was. The Member from 

Tisdale talked about how his Government has been introducing large and fairly complex sets of 

legislative proposals and programs designed for agriculture. He went on to say, and again Mr. 

Bowerman, I quote: 

 

Each and every one of these programs fits into the total package as an essential and integral piece. 

 

What is that total package, Mr. Speaker? What is it that this Government is putting together piece by 

piece to form this package? 

 

Let’s take a look at that package — I believe it will show beyond a shadow of a doubt, this 

Government’s real intent. The foundation piece, or the first piece of this package, Mr. Speaker, was their 

intention to change the land tenure system in Saskatchewan. In other words, the Land Bank. To change 

ownership from the individual to the state. What does this piece do for this particular package? 

 

1)  it changes the ownership from individual to state; 

 

2)  the Government decides who will farm the state-owned land; 

 

3)  the Government will control how much a farmer must pay for use of that land; 

 

4)  the Government will control how long a farmer can use that land; 

 

5)  the Government under Section 67 subsection (f) can make regulations respecting the management  

   and control of that land, in other words — 

 

6)  the Government can tell the farmer how he must farm, what he can grow and what use he can     

   make of that land. 

 

The second piece in the package would have to be The Succession Duty Act. Here the NDP Government 

says that they don’t want the young farmers to inherit too much money. ‘Big Brother’ knows what’s best 

for you so we’ll just take part of that money to help speed up the new land tenure system in this 

province. This will cause the break-up of many family farms 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1495 

and help make it easier to speed up that new land tenure system. 

 

Then came another piece for that package, Mr. Speaker. The abortive Foreign Ownership of Land Act 

which would have controlled just what land and what persons could own land in socialist Saskatchewan. 

 

The fourth piece of that package was the refusal of this Government to sell presently held Crown land to 

needy farmers. 

 

One more piece which they are trying to put into this package is the Federal Small Farms Program 

which they are stalling. They do not want to participate unless the Federal Government plan will agree 

to buy land and turn it over to the NDP state. 

 

The sixth piece for the package was the 1972 amendments to The Natural Products Marketing Act, 

which I have mentioned earlier. Another example of where ‘Big Brother’ knows what’s best for the 

farmer. If ‘Big Brother’ feels that a commission to market a particular product which a farmer produces 

is best for that farmer, then the farmer is going to have it whether he likes it or not. 

 

The seventh piece would have to be the accumulation of Intercontinental Packers, which I have already 

mentioned this afternoon. 

 

The final piece for that package is Bill 50 which we have before us now. One of the most vicious pieces 

to be added to this package. Let’s review again what is included in this last piece. 

 

. . . practically all products that can be produced by a farmer are included in this Act; 

 

. . . before a product can be marketed, the farmer must register and purchase a license; 

 

. . . the farmer can be told where and when he can market his product; 

 

. . . the farmer can be told how his product will be transported and how it will be distributed; 

 

. . . the farmer may be prohibited in whole or in part as to the transportation, packing, storing, and 

marketing of any regulated product of any grade, quality or class; 

 

. . . the basic principle of British law has been reversed under this Act. It says that the farmer is guilty 

until he himself proves himself innocent; 

 

. . . if the farmer doesn’t comply to the above, he is subject to a fine of $500 or imprisonment of three 

months, or both. 

 

A producer under this Bill, Mr. Speaker, could be controlled, regulated and manipulated like never 

before. It is unfortunate the Premier and his Cabinet have asked this Legislature to give them this much 

power. It is quite evident that the Bill and this power is required to complete this package that the 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1496 

Minister has talked about. 

 

The completed package, Mr. Speaker, is designed to give this Government the complete control of the 

agricultural industry in this province. Control of the land, control of the produce that the land produces, 

control of the processing of that produce and by so doing it could eventually apply control to the 

individual who operates that land. This package, Mr. Speaker, gives this Government a tremendous 

amount of power. The intention of using such power when a Bill such as this one is introduced, may not 

be in the minds of some of the more rational Members, sitting opposite, but experience has shown that 

when power such as this is available that it is very often abused. 

 

I would urge this Government, the Members of this House, Mr. Bowerman, to reconsider their position 

and follow the lead that was expressed by my colleague, the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) 

and withdraw this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — If the Members of this House believe, if the Members of this House and Mr. Bowerman 

believe in the freedom and ability of the farmers to plan their own future; if they believe in the ability of 

the individual farmer and producer to make sound and rational decisions on his own, or as an 

organization; if they believe in the basic rights of producers to have a vote prior to the implementations 

of commissions, then they will again I say, join with the Member of Moosomin in asking the Minister 

and his Government to withdraw this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — In closing, Mr. Speaker, especially for the benefit of Members opposite, I must again 

remind the Government that you cannot legislate loyalty to a program or to an ideal. That you cannot 

legislate efficiency, nor can you legislate viability, that you cannot legislate acceptance. This can only be 

accomplished by trust and adhering to the basic rights and freedoms of individuals for whom you 

govern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — There is no way, Mr. Speaker, that I can support this Bill. There is no way that I can 

vote for a Bill that gives the Government, the Cabinet, or one Member of that Cabinet as much power as 

they are asking for in this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — There is no way that I can vote for a Bill and idly stand by as the basic foundation of 

individual rights and freedoms of this province are eroded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1497 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, I will definitely not support this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, will the Member permit a question before he takes his seat? 

 

I wonder if the Member is aware that every province in Canada has legislation with virtually the same 

powers as this legislation that we are discussing here today? 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, I am perfectly aware that other provinces have this legislation, like the 

Province of Alberta for example, where the producers elect the commissioners on that board, the 

producers govern the regulation, the producers have the entire say as to how that board is implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, it is an honor for me to rise and enter into this debate. The honor 

is even more considerable as I have the opportunity to follow the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe). 

 

I say that the least of his performance should not be too difficult to top, as once again we have seen the 

tired, old Liberal logic argued in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, you know the attitude of the Opposition in 

general and the Member for Morse in particular. During this debate it shows conclusively that the 

Liberal Party has still not learned its lesson. 

 

One would think that at least since the last election, Mr. Speaker, they would have been taught a wee bit 

of a lesson. They should be reminded of their credibility and its bad need of overhaul. They criticize just 

for the sake of criticism. They are the same people that have been here for years and are at it again 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must admit though their reaction to our legislative proposals is a pretty accurate 

barometer to follow engaging public support and popularity. In a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, if the Liberals 

are against it, rest assured that it is a good program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — We only have to look at such things as Medicare, the Wheat Board and the Land Bank, to 

mention only a few, to show the Liberal Party what they really are. 

 

It is rather ironical, Mr. Speaker, that it should be the Member for Morse who should be the one to have 

the audacity to accuse Members on this side of the House, to accuse Members on this side of the House 

of evading the issues in this debate. He accused the Agriculture Minister (Mr. Messer), he accused the 

Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson), he accused the Member for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding), and saying they 

were straying away from the issue. Yet what did he do? I tried — I really did — and I wrote down as 

many as I could of the issues that he stuck to. Do you know what they were? He stood up here and 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1498 

talked about the South Saskatchewan Irrigation Project, the Land Bank, Succession Duties, buffalo, 

foreign ownership, Intercontinental Packers, ostriches and the British legal system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, tell me what that had to do with The Natural Products Marketing Bill? I 

found it difficult to find any connection whatever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue is clear, the Liberal Opposition in this House is not interested in debating the 

facts. They would rather resort to their old usual game of attempting to tack political points on the 

scoreboard. I would caution them, Mr. Speaker, that they should stop playing this kind of politics, the 

game is over and the score as you will recall, 45 to 15. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps it is understandable why Members to your left should oppose any 

legislation which deals with orderly marketing. We can all, too vividly recall, their position in respect to 

the establishment of the Canadian Wheat Board. Nobody on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is 

suggesting the Opposition does not have its right to criticize. Certainly not! That is their right. In fact it 

is their responsibility to criticize. However, where the Opposition falls short is when it comes time to 

recognize and accept the responsibility, to be constructive in their opinions and offer alternatives and to 

be positive. 

 

We certainly didn’t see this in the speech this afternoon from the Member for Morse. The Member for 

Morse, Mr. Speaker, termed this Bill as one of the most vicious pieces of legislation ever brought before 

this Legislature. That, indeed, is quite a claim coming from the mouth of a Liberal, especially from the 

mouth of the Member from a party who wholeheartedly endorsed and enacted Bill 2, that inhumane 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. As he said, the “Big Four” set this one up. I would love to know which 

‘Big Four’ set that one up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can think of the big city corporate lawyers such as now Justice Heald — you know whom 

I speak of — the ex-Member for Lumsden, a veterinary from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac)., the Member for 

Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) who is a big businessman and the biggest businessman of them all — and 

when I say big, I mean that — the Member from Regina Lakeview, Mr. McPherson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan do not take kindly to this kind of politicking any more. The 

Liberals are the last people of this province who should complain about individual freedoms being 

eroded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province are not fooled by this smokescreen drama which the Members 

opposite are trying to stage. The farmers have recognized for years that orderly marketing is absolutely 

necessary if farmers are to be able to capture their fair share of the national and international market 

place. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1499 

We have been talking about marketing commissions for years, however, what has been the result? Well 

while we have waited for something to develop, slowly our competitors have been capturing more and 

more of the potential sales which are available. The Opposition attempts to convince the people of 

Saskatchewan that this Government has arbitrarily decided what type of marketing structure is desirable 

without giving the primary producer a chance to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look at the facts. The Liberals to your left say farmers were not consulted. Do they 

deny the fact that the Minister of Agriculture consulted with all the farm organizations such as the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the National Farmers’ Union, 

were all consulted and they all approved of a Hog Marketing Commission overwhelmingly. Those are 

the kind of organizations, Mr. Speaker, which speak for all farmers. Certainly the Liberal Party doesn’t 

seem to know this. For example, the National Farmers’ Union president, Roy Atkinson, has said over 

and over again, ‘we need a Commission immediately. It is long overdue and necessary.’ 

 

Mr. Guy: — What does he know? 

 

Mr. Cody: — The Member for Athabasca says, what does he know. I am sure that he knows a lot more 

about farming than the Member for Athabasca ever will. 

 

Then we have the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. What do they say? Mr. Speaker, let me 

quote from an article, a new release, January 29, 1973. Mr. E. A. Boden, Vice-president said: 

 

It is about time that Saskatchewan hog producers, both commercial and otherwise, woke up and did 

something effective in the marketing field. 

 

The pool official who is also the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, made the 

statement following the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan Livestock Association, January 24th in 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

We are getting somewhat tired of the very obvious political manoeuvring, aimed at obstructing the 

creation of a more rational marketing system. I want the actual producers of this province to know that 

we recognize the real motives of certain groups who want to scuttle the plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Boden said that his association recognizes the real motives of certain groups who want 

to scuttle the plan. We know as well who some of these groups are. A quick glance across the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, identifies the Party and the motives are equally as noticeable. Yet for some strange reason 

we hear daily from our friends across the way that producers do not want a commission, that the 

producers are upset at what we have the foresight to bring in these amendment, that we are eroding their 

very freedoms and the freedoms of their choice. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1500 

Mr. Speaker, that is hogwash and you know it. It is true, Mr. Speaker, that there is a small but vocal 

group of people who are busy running around the country trying to stir up farmers with scare tactics. 

However, their ploy will not work. It hasn’t worked in the past and it won’t work today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who are these people? Are they affiliated with a group who is representative of agricultural 

interests? Are they friends of the family farmer concerned about orderly marketing? No, Mr. Speaker, 

they are not. These meetings are organized by the Palliser Wheat Growers. That is who is organizing 

them! And no doubt, wholeheartedly supported by the Liberal Party. Just let me read a clipping just to 

prove my point that they are in fact organizing it. 

 

“Farmers protest Marketing Act”. 

 

Leader-Post of last night from Lampman, Saskatchewan a little town southeast. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Are you against the Palliser Wheat Growers? 

 

Mr. Cody: — I could answer that in one very short word. 

 

200 farmers from southeast Saskatchewan Tuesday night registered displeasure at the prospects of 

living with the Saskatchewan Natural Products Marketing Act. Art Manill well-known Liberal in the 

Weyburn area assisted by Glen McEwan, a well-known Liberal in the Tyvan area, directors of the 

Palliser Wheat Growers Association were in charge of the meeting attended by 225 association 

members and other farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that goes to show who is organizing these meetings. The Palliser Wheat Growers are 

against orderly marketing and are behind this smear campaign. 

 

It is very funny, Mr. Speaker, that when a person looks at the Order Paper you see that the Member for 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) wants this Government to give a grant to the Palliser people. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! That is a different debate. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Fine, Mr. Speaker. But we certainly know that the Liberals opposite, by statements that 

they have been making are definitely in accord with what the Palliser Wheat Growers Association is 

doing by organizing meetings of this nature, to get people aroused so that they won’t be in favor of this 

kind of commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government has set up 28 meetings across this province to give the producers a chance 

to discuss these proposals. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! There is too much crossfire. Will the Hon. Members refrain from so 

much crossfire. 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1501 

Mr. Cody: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the Government of this province has set up about 28 

meetings across this province to give the producers an opportunity to discuss these proposals. And to 

date, the reaction has been most favorable. Yet it seems that the Palliser people feel that they are the 

ones who should be carrying out this responsibility. 

 

I will let the people of this province decide for themselves. I am sure that they can do quite well without 

the pressure groups, such as the Liberal Party, the Conservative Party and the Palliser Wheat Growers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the proposed amendments marketing commissions will have the same power as 

marketing boards, with one noticeable exception. The marketing commission will not have the power to 

control production. This Government takes the position that the power to control production should be 

reserved for marketing boards, established by a producer plebiscite. 

 

Once again, the Opposition says and tries to distort the facts by claiming we will control production. 

Nonsense, that is not what we are saying at all. They condemn us for having the courage to go forward 

with a program to help insure that stability and prices takes place. They holler, why not a vote? 

 

Time does not permit me, Mr. Speaker, to go into details of all the reasons but I ask Members opposite, 

if they were so virtuous and concerned about the right of people to vote on the establishment of 

commissions, why weren’t they concerned when we set up the Medicare Commission. There was no 

vote on this Commission. There was no vote on the Human Rights Commission. There was no vote on 

the Alcohol Commission. Not a word was said when these commissions were established, but now when 

there is a Hog Marketing Commission everybody is up in arms — I mean at least 15 people in the 

province are up in arms. 

 

The answer is simple, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals have convenient principles. If they think they can make 

mileage by way of distortion and rumor mongering they will go at it full force. 

 

We have heard from our friends across the way that this Bill is a bad Bill. Yet it is curious to note that 

the sections criticized, especially by the Opposition Agriculture critic, the Hon. Member for Moosomin 

(Mr. Gardner), are sections in the Act that were in force when they were the Government on this side of 

the House. They very same ones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sincerely, I ask Members opposite, if you are so violently opposed to areas contained in 

this Bill, why didn’t you change them when you were in power? Why didn’t you change them? 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — We were no threat. 

 

Mr. Cody: — You were no threat, you didn’t have the guts to change them because you knew the 

farmers wanted them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1502 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, history records that it has been in Saskatchewan where most of the 

progressive pieces of legislation have been brought forward. The recognition that we pay towards the 

desirability and necessity of orderly marketing is borne out in the amendments currently before this 

Legislature. 

 

To study this issue even further, I think it is necessary to find out who, of the Liberals, are really trying 

to protect. Why is the Liberal Party really trying to protect here? The farmer? I doubt it! Several 

speakers from the Opposition have said that if the Commission is so necessary and will solve the 

instability problem that relates to prices — just like the Hon. Member this afternoon said — why is it 

that Saskatchewan was experiencing $18 hog prices and our friends in Manitoba, where a Commission 

was in operation, were going through similar conditions. That is exactly what he said. 

 

Once again they don’t tell the whole story. Without a Commission in Saskatchewan there was nothing to 

stop the multi-national packers from coming directly to Saskatchewan and load up hogs to be shipped 

directly to their plants. In open defiance these packing plants were challenging the commission concept. 

There was nothing that could be done. A commission for Saskatchewan will stop that practice, restore 

stability to pricing and ensure that the producer receives a fair return for his product. Manitoba was 

unable to solve all the instability problems because the commission was not in operation long enough. 

Security long-range contracts were needed to correct the problems. We watched with close interest, Mr. 

Speaker, the attempts by the big packing houses to challenge the commission concept in the courts. We 

viewed with interest the outcome of that legal battle. We saw the result as the final proof needed for the 

people of Saskatchewan to have just such a commission. 

 

The concern of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is not with the farmer, it is with the multi-national 

corporations and certainly not with the family farmer. In a nut shell Saskatchewan hogs were being used 

to force down prices in Alberta, Manitoba and in Ontario, where hog marketing agencies have been in 

operation for some time. Lower prices in those provinces invariably led to lower prices in 

Saskatchewan. At the present time Saskatchewan is the only surplus producing province without a hog 

marketing agency. You would think the Liberal Party would recognize the importance of bringing in this 

type of program and policy which would encourage orderly marketing. Surely, Mr. Speaker, one would 

think that the Liberals could see the advantage of a marketing structure which would encourage fairer 

prices and more success in the competitive marketing place. Their present attitude is that they are not in 

favor of this approach and it goes to show that they have, what I referred to earlier, as convenience 

principles. They have the kinds of principles that they want, when they want. 

 

What did they propose during the election campaign? Let me refer to their little pamphlet — I’ve got it 

right here. The Liberal Program, nicely decked out in green with a nice little flower on it. This is the 

guile of the Party that is going to vote against this Bill. I refer to point No. 11. It says, the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Government will support the right of livestock producers to have unrestricted access to all 

markets in Canada for red meat animals. Mr. Speaker, what does that 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1503 

tell you? On one hand they support the efforts to give producers a bigger share of the action, yet on the 

other hand they oppose the only logical approach which must be taken to ensure that maximum benefits 

accrue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I might be permitted to reiterate the reasons for the amendments before us today. We are 

striving on this side of the House to achieve: (1) Higher and more stable prices; (ii) New dependable 

export markets; (iii) The lowest possible spread between the farmer’s return and the prices paid at the 

packing plant; (iv) The lowest possible cost of moving our product into domestic and foreign markets. 

How in the name of common sense can any rational person who purports to be concerned over the 

welfare of our farmers oppose this Bill in its amendments? 

 

I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker, because Liberals like to oppose things. They are masters at it. All one 

needs to do is pick up anything any time, any issue and you can pick any little article here. February 25, 

1960, as far back as 1960, in the Prince Albert Daily Herald, a Member who is still sitting in the House 

and now leading the Party: 

 

D.G. Steuart last night at a house meeting of local Liberals speaking on the prepaid medical care plan 

said, “There are many reasons why we oppose the CCF in this issue . . . “. 

 

Hon. Mr. Snyder: — President up there. 

 

Mr. Cody: — That’s right, he was the president up there. He goes on to say: 

 

The CCF will be ramming state medicine down the throats of the majority of the people, whether they 

like it or not. 

 

Identically the same thing as he has been saying about the Hog Marketing Commission. Mr. Speaker, as 

I say, you can find an article wherever you look in whichever paper. I have got one here, February 26, 

1946. 1946 can you imagine this! A Member who used to sit over there, from Moosomin, 

 

“Accident Insurance Bill Labelled Greatest Hoax”. 

 

Exactly the words that the Leader of the Opposition uses, exactly the words that the Member from 

Morse uses. Let me quote from this: 

 

Leading the Opposition attack on the Bill, Mr. Proctor described it as an example of socialistic 

paternalism and socialistic class discrimination which opens the field for the most vicious interference 

and political influence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they said it in 1946, and the Member for Morse is saying it today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cody: — The Member from Morse should 



 
March 8, 1973 

 

 

1504 

also know better I am sure. I am surprised that he would oppose this orderly marketing, especially since 

it will be of immense benefit to him. I am sure he must say thanks to the Liberal Party he got a big hog 

barn, now he has got lots of hogs to market. I am sure that when he delivers his hogs to Intercontinental 

Packers he will welcome the stable prices which this legislation will provide. But maybe he won’t. 

Because it is very difficult to find any kind of reason with a Liberal, that is for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous piece of legislation. There is a tremendous amount one can say about 

this piece of legislation. I have a lot more that I want to say and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o’clock p.m. 


