



















































Hansard: March 30, 1973


2058 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

47th Day 
 

Friday, March 30, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Boldt: — (Rosthern) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of students from the Rosthern 

Junior College. They are here under the direction of their teachers, Mr. Thiessen and Mr. Dueck. The 

Rosthern Junior College also admits other students than Mennonites and I am pleased to see that there 

are students here today that come from Hong Kong. We also welcome them in a special way. I am sure 

all Members will wish this group a pleasant stay in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO GIRL GUIDES 
 

Mr. W. E. Smishek: — (Regina North East) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to 

Members of this Legislature a group of Girl Guides from Company 16 at the Haultain School. They are 

seated in the Speaker’s Gallery and are accompanied by their Company Captain, Mrs. Niethercout and 

Lieutenant, Mrs. Mills. They have toured the Legislative Building prior to coming to the Chamber. I 

understand they spent about an hour with the Guides that took them through the buildings. I will be 

meeting with them later on in the day. I should like to extend to the Girl Guides and to the ladies that are 

accompanying them a warm welcome to the Legislature and express the hope that their stay with us will 

be a pleasant experience and a memorable occasion. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Report of Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 
 

Mr. Grant: — (Regina Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, in the absence of 

the Minister of Industry and Commerce, in the absence of the Premier and the absence of the Attorney 

General, I should like to direct a question to the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) and I may be 

directing it to the wrong person and if so, surely, there is somebody over there who can answer it. Up to 

the present time we haven’t received the annual report of the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation and it possibly is going to be tabled today but if it is not, I wonder if the Minister could tell 

us when it is going to be tabled. It is holding up the work of the Crown Corporations Committee and I 

believe today is the last official legal day that is available for the tabling of that report. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2059 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that I can’t answer that question. I am going to investigate the 

matter and let the Hon. Member have the answer as quickly as I possibly can. 

 

Elevators in Building Not Operating Properly 
 

Mr. A. R. Guy: — (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Government Services (Mr. Brockelbank). I should like to know what steps he 

is going to take to ensure that the elevators in this building are operating in a safe and efficient manner. I 

understand the other day there was a woman trapped in one for one and a half hours. I was trapped in 

one for ten minutes today. I know you’ll be glad to hear that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I don’t know whether it was a plot or not but it did happen. We went from floor number 

one to floor number two and the door wouldn’t open. We went up to number three and it still wouldn’t 

open and it stopped several times in the interim of going from floor to floor. It is not a laughing matter, 

it is very serious. It doesn’t bother me particularly but I know that some people have a fear of enclosed 

places. I think the Minister should look into it immediately. 

 

Hon. J. E. Brockelbank: — (Minister of Government Services) Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the 

Members that the system misfired on the first trap and worked on the second one. 

 

I wasn’t aware that the elevators weren’t working properly. I haven’t been informed of that by the staff, 

however, I will look into it. If the Member will indicate which elevator it was . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — The one right in from of your office door. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you. I never use the elevator, I walk. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

New Agreement on Crop Insurance 
 

Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, it is a 

pleasure for me to announce a new arrangement between the Province of Saskatchewan and the Federal 

Government in regard to crop insurance for Saskatchewan farmers. With this new arrangement we will 

be able to provide crop insurance to farmers in Saskatchewan for a third reduction in premium from 

what has been the cost in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — It will mean, in fact, a 50 per cent subsidy of 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2060 

premium to farmers who are purchasing or undertaking a crop insurance contract in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. It will mean that the Province of Saskatchewan will underwrite totally all of the 

administration costs for the crop insurance program. I think this is evidence of a further step in 

improving and providing better crop insurance for Saskatchewan farmers. We are hopeful that this will 

encourage more farmers to take advantage of what we now consider to be the best crop insurance 

program in Canada. 

 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald: — (Cannington) Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to hear that there has been an 

increase in the subsidy for crop insurance as far as premiums are concerned. As a member of the 

committee that looked into crop insurance last year, this was one of the fundamental things which, I 

believe, all members were in agreement on. In order that crop insurance be taken by more farmers the 

premium would have to be lowered. We are pleased that the Federal Government has seen fit to put 

forward some more money in co-operation with the Province so that the rate is lowered. We believe now 

that it will be much more attractive to many more farmers. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Price of Meats 
 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — (Regina Albert Park) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like 

to direct a question to the Hon. Minister of Consumer Affairs (Mr. Tchorzewski). I drew his attention 

the other day to an increase in the price of meats. I observed that within about a month wieners went up 

10 per cent, in a little over a month ground beef went up 11 per cent and in just less than a month 

bologna went up 15 per cent. All of these are just examples of drastic increases in the price of meat. I 

notice that President Nixon has just recently put a curb on meat prices in the USA. The Hon. Minister 

informed me the other day that the Provincial Government has a committee to deal with these things. 

Other provinces have done it and I wondered, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the Hon. Member ask his question because we can’t have a speech leading up to a 

question? 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker interrupted me just at the point of the question. The question, Mr. 

Speaker, is this, is the reason the Province of Saskatchewan is dragging its heels on this matter due to 

the fact that if they have to point the finger at anybody it’s probably at the company that they bought 

into, namely, Intercontinental Packers and they are reluctant to do that? 

 

Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski: — (Minister of Consumer Affairs) Mr. Speaker, in reply to that speech 

followed by the short question, I should probably suggest to the Member that he should direct his 

question on these kinds of matters to his colleague, the Prime Minister of Canada where it would be 

more effective. With the cost of living that we see increasing so rapidly today, action has to be taken 

basically on a national basis. The Member 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2061 

referred to the action that has been taken in the United States and I know that the Federal Government of 

Canada should be looking at that as well. I am very pleased as well as my colleagues are that the 

Government of Canada has established a commission which has been sitting, a parliamentary 

commission, and we hope that commission will have some firm recommendations which will then be 

followed by the Federal Government. The Members of Parliament for the New Democratic Party in 

Ottawa have done a tremendous job in presenting on behalf of the people of Canada and the Members of 

Parliament for the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan have done a tremendous job on presenting 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan their views to this commission. I only hope that when the 

commission makes its final report it will pay attention to those recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Is the Minister telling us that the Province of 

Saskatchewan assumes no responsibility and has no concern at all for meat prices at all and intends to do 

nothing at all? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, that is not the case at all. I think the Province of Saskatchewan is 

being very well represented in the Parliament of Canada by the Members of the New Democratic Party. 

I think the Member should be reminded of the fact that is was the Liberal Party when it was the 

Government of Saskatchewan in 1966 that joined with Alberta and Manitoba in establishing a 

commission, the Batten Commission, to look into Consumer Affairs. That commission at that time 

recommended, and I quote from the report: 

 

That each of the Governments of Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta establish a consumer section to 

safeguard, inquire into and advance the consumer interest in all spheres. 

 

That Government, Mr. Speaker, took no action on that at all. Our Government, last year, did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 157 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. G. Lane (Lumsden) for 

Return No. 157 showing: 

 

In accepting bids for goods purchased through the Purchasing Agency, whether the Government 

allowed any preference to Saskatchewan manufacturers of goods so purchased; (a) If so, the 

preference; (b) If so, the total cost of the preference in 1972; (c) If so, the number of contracts awarded 

in 1972 by the Purchasing Agency in which provincial preference was the deciding factor in the 

award. Also, to whom were such contracts awarded, the amount of such contract and the types of 

goods requested. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2062 

And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: 

 

That all the words after the word “Agency” in the second line by deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

(a) Whether the Government followed a general policy of allowing preference to Saskatchewan 
manufacturers of goods so purchased; (b) Whether there are any exceptions to this general policy; (c) 

If so, the general types of products that exceptions are made: (d) The reason the exceptions are made; 

(d) Whether these exceptions created any additional costs to the Government for the purchase of the 

products. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Lane: — (Lumsden) A final comment, Mr. Speaker, on the matter. We have been attempting to 

find out exactly what the Government of Saskatchewan has done for local industry, local business, local 

suppliers. Unfortunately, the amendment that was just voted on by this House does not give the facts to 

the people of Saskatchewan of how much money the Government of Saskatchewan is putting into its 

own purchases in order to support local manufacturers. We think it is unfortunate, we think it is another 

example of the Government opposite with an awful lot of talk and no action. I can go far beyond this 

particular amendment to indicate that the Government is all talk and no action. When we talk about 

representations on rail line abandonment we find out that the Government opposite hasn’t talked to any 

Cabinet Ministers that they are prepared to admit. They stirred up an issue, talked about it and did 

nothing. 

 

We have heard a great deal of talk about what the Government of Saskatchewan is going to do about 

industries and establishing industries or strengthening industries to service the so-called Prairie Basin, a 

term which sometime will have to be defined by the Government opposite. But what happens when we 

ask a question, what has the Government done to support local industry? What preference has it given? 

What amounts is it spending? What are the particular goods purchased? What aspects can we look at and 

what answers can we get? We find out that we get a general answer. It is a very simple question. We 

have asked how much are you putting out to local industry, local business. Unfortunately, you have seen 

fit to deny us the information. We must vote against the motion as amended. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 4 — Co-operation between Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission and Federal 

Small Farms Development Program 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. M. Feduniak (Turtleford): 

 

That this Assembly press for a co-operative arrangement between the Saskatchewan Land Bank 

Commission and the Federal Small Farms Development Program in order to make the full benefits of 

both programs available to 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2063 

Saskatchewan farmers and urges the Federal Government to respond immediately to Saskatchewan’s 

request to establish such a co-operative arrangement. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 35 

Messieurs 

Dyck Brockelbank Richards 

Meakes MacMurchy Faris 

Wood Pepper Cody 

Smishek Michayluk Feduniak 

Romanow Whelan Mostoway 

Messer Carlson Comer 

Snyder Engel Rolfes 

Kramer Owens Lange 

Thibault Robbins Oliver 

Larson Tchorzewski Feschuk 

Kowalchuk Taylor Flasch 

Baker Matsalla  

 

NAYS — 11 

Messieurs 

Coupland Boldt McPherson 

Loken MacDonald (Milestone) Lane 

Guy Wiebe Grant 

McIsaac Gardner  

 

Resolution No. 5 — National Feed Grains Program 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. I. W. Carlson (Yorkton): 

That this Assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan initiate negotiations with the 

Federal Government directed at establishing a national feed grains program which will: 

 

1. Provide a guaranteed price for feed grains through a Grains Income Stabilization program, such 
price to take into account production costs. 

2. Establish a Feed Grains Reserve Bank which will guarantee delivery opportunities to feed grain 
producers and which will guarantee a supply of feed grains to livestock producers at all times. 

3. Establish equitable price relationships for feed grains throughout Canada. 
 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Weatherald: 

That all the words after the word “recommends” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

“the Canadian Wheat Board (a) establish initial guaranteed prices for feed grains which will ensure 

adequate supplies are produced for both domestic and export markets; (b) establish selling prices that 

will ensure a fair net return for the producer.” 

 

Mr. L. Larson: — (Pelly) Mr. Speaker, the other day when I adjourned the debate, the Member from 

Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) had just moved an amendment to what I thought was a very complete and 

adequate resolution. In his comments pertaining to the amendment he made 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2064 

some remarks that I thought were rather irrelevant. He talked about adequate supplies, most efficient 

regions of Canada, equitable price range, and the concerns of the extremely complex problem with 

regard to feed grain, and that it wouldn’t be solved and that there should be more discussions and so on. 

 

After having looked at the amendment to the resolution I still feel that it is irrelevant and that it detracts 

from the main intent of the motion. 

 

I, therefore, want to make some very general and rather important remarks this afternoon with regard to 

the feed grain situation and why I feel the resolution is an important one. I want first of all to draw 

attention to the geographic location as well as the production potential of Saskatchewan as a major feed 

producing area. Up to the present time farmers have had to bear the major share of the boom and bust 

feed grain business. Manitoba and Alberta sell commercially a much lower percentage of total feed grain 

production because of relatively higher livestock numbers than Saskatchewan. With restricted quotas 

over several years the greatest part of surplus stocks on farms have been in Saskatchewan. Even with 

improved conditions we shall still be holding the largest surplus long after Manitoba and Alberta have 

regained balanced positions. Grain delivery quotas are based on cultivated acreage and are the same for 

high and low producing land. A producer who feeds half of his crop to his own livestock gets the same 

quota as a straight grain farmer with the same acreage. For many years or up until 1970 producers were 

able to live with this situation as flax and rape seed quotas often reached open quota levels every few 

years and all grains were at a high level of quotas. 

 

This chaotic and uncertain situation has a very disastrous effect on Saskatchewan farmers. Surpluses 

tended to build up in the hog producing areas. Present regulations denied these farmers a legal outlet for 

a good part of their production. The only alternative was to peddle his grain wherever possible and at 

whatever prices the farmer could get. This has resulted in the chaotic situation we have seen in the past, 

lower prices, as low as one cent a pound, long distance hauls, limited or no markets, pile up of grain on 

farms, cost of building bins very high, buying up of grain by speculators to hold for better prices, 

resulting in the general demoralization of the whole feed industry as we know it in Saskatchewan. All of 

this wasteful internal movement of grain did not increase the total movement to export or reduce the 

amount of surpluses. Apart from the grain which was resold to the Wheat Board, the quantity of low 

priced grain bought by Saskatchewan feeders was small compared to the amount handled by the 

Canadian Wheat Board. It is obvious that any policy which fails to provide outlets for all grains 

produced within a year or two after production will create an intolerable situation for a relatively small 

number of farmers most of them in Saskatchewan. These farmers would also unduly bear the cost of a 

policy which achieved slightly higher prices for all farmers but which fell even a small amount short of 

clearing all the supplies off the farms. This chaotic situation of the feed grain industry has been 

recognized by farm organizations. 

 

The Western Agricultural Conference along with the Canadian Federation of Agriculture had this to say 

in 1971. I quote: 

 

An effective grains policy for the Prairie Provinces 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2065 

requires a producer-government working relationship, a sharing of responsibility. Grain producers 

cannot be expected to be content to live solely from revenues of a market place in a world of grain 

trading nations where grain farmers in most other countries receive some form of direct government 

assistance. 

 

The National Farmers’ Union in its 1972 policy statement had this to say: 

 

The failure to restore to orderly marketing of feed grains in the Canadian Wheat Board areas has 

widely depressed farm to feed or feed mill grain prices. It is sweet to the buyer but a disaster to the 

seller whose economic circumstances force the devalued conversion of his grain to cash or debt 

payments. High volume grain production that forces the farmer into livestock production in 

competition with livestock producers who produce little or no grain for the market is again sweet to 

the industrial processor but poses a potential price disaster to livestock producers. Grain producers in 

the central provinces suffer the competitive disadvantage of tariff structures which adversely expose 

them to US imports of corn and soy bean but prevent similar access for Canadian feed grains in the US 

markets. This is an advantageous policy to industrial concerns but an unfair policy for the farmers. 

 

This is only a partial summary of what the Farmers’ Union had to say in its 1972 convention. 

 

This brings us to the present situation which can only be described as rare and unusual. The 1972 world 

grain situation can best be described as unstable and uncertain which contributes to the uneasiness about 

the short-run with rising world grain prices, the highest in 50 years. Adverse weather conditions in the 

Northern Hemisphere, particularly Eastern Europe and Asia, brought about short crops in some of the 

countries located in this region of the world. This situation, coupled with rising uses for grain in the 

developing countries, has contributed at least in the short-run to a short grain supply crisis with its 

attendant instability. 

 

In Canada the focus is on the contradictions inherent in our national policy. What are some of these 

contradictions, Mr. Speaker? Rapidly rising grain prices yet flour millers still securing their supplies of 

milling wheat at $1.95½ ICW per bushel. The growing concern about the stability of livestock 

production because of rising costs of feed grains and the ensuing margins that prevail. In beef feeding, 

strong feeder cattle prices with predictable narrow margins even to negative margins on fed cattle. 

Concerns for possible short supplies of grain to meet export opportunities; concerns for adequate 

inventories of grain available for domestic feeding; concern for rapidly rising costs of production related 

to increased cash flow in the grain community as agri-business widens its operating margins to take 

advantage of a profit opportunity. Farmers facing bankruptcy because of adverse income years and the 

lowest final payments in a decade. Contradictions in overall economic policy as the country is torn 

between maximizing its earnings of foreign currency through sales of grain and suspending export sales 

to meet domestic requirements. Its urge to maintain stable livestock, dairy and poultry production and a 

stable economy free 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2066 

from price distortions. The conflict between the grain growers’ opportunity and the livestock, dairy and 

poultry producers’. But this year, Mr. Speaker, the reverse of pre-1972 years when grain growers were, 

in fact, subsidizing feeders by providing feed at below production cost. In 1972 the feeder, in all 

probability, will suffer operating losses thereby subsidizing the consumer, particularly in the beef 

industry. 

 

There is much more that could be said in identification of this chaotic situation. What has to be borne in 

mind is the fact that even with today’s demands on grain farmers, they have no assurance, with return to 

normal conditions abroad, that the same problems will not recur. When recurrence does take place, 

farmers will not be content with such negative and inhumane programs as LIFT or the Task Force 

Report or even the stabilization proposal. I noted with some interest, Mr. Speaker, the comments of the 

member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald). His remarks indicated his great confusion. On the one hand 

he spoke for the principle of the resolution while on the other hand he wasn’t sure he favored control of 

all sales by the Canadian Wheat Board. I want to say to him that you can’t have it both ways. If there is 

to be stability and orderly marketing that is shared by all Canadians the Canadian Wheat Board must be 

the sole marketing agency. If the chaotic situation of the past few years is what the Member from 

Cannington wants then do nothing and you will have it. 

 

The principle of this resolution is a good one. The principles and the possibilities it poses is what is 

needed in this very important aspect of farming. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that any program or policy that does not embrace the following 

factors will not be sufficient for the good of the industry: 

 

1.  All producers of feed grain should receive the same price for their product allowing for 

transportation and normal costs. 

 

2.  Provision for permanent maintenance of stock levels subject to review to meet (a) domestic needs, 

(b) growing needs of developing countries, and (c) growing needs of commercial countries. 

 

3.  These stocks to be used as a hedge against future crop failures or catastrophes. 

 

4.  The program should avoid as far as possible regulations which rely on the honor system or else 

require difficult or extensive policing. 

 

5.  Subsidies such as feed grain assistance, if any, may be used only to reduce disadvantages in terms of 

returns above feed costs in various regions but never to create an absolute advantage where none could 

exist without the subsidy. 

 

6.  All producers of feed grain should have reasonably equal opportunities to market their grain within a 

reasonable period of time. 

 

7.  All domestic users of feed grain should have access to prairie feed grains at the same price adjusted 

for transportation, handling, etc. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2067 

The Canadian Wheat Board is and should be the logical agency to implement such a program. 

 

It should be noted that this kind of a program will be completely dependent on agreement by the Federal 

Government to accept the principle and to bear the cost of using feed grain and initial Wheat Board 

prices as an instrument policy. These are minimum requirements, Mr. Speaker, they are all possible and 

necessary. I call on all Members to support them in principle. Obviously, I will be supporting the main 

resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker, I think it is fair to say that we have had 

problems with feed grains and feed transportation for decades in the prairies and particularly in 

Saskatchewan. We have had piecemeal policies and endless talks but I think it is now time that we 

endeavor to establish a truly national feed grains policy. 

 

The temporary war time measure of feed freight assistance which was first introduced in 1941 is still 

with us. Any suggestion of ending this assistance arouses almost as much emotion in Eastern Canada as 

does a change in the Crow’s Nest rates in Western Canada. There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that feed 

freight assistance has over the years caused a tremendous shift in livestock production from Western 

Canada to Eastern Canada. There have been extended periods over the years when the difference in the 

price, for instance, of a market hog in Saskatoon compared with Toronto or Montreal was much greater 

than the difference in the cost of grain needed to feed that hog to market. This means that the eastern 

hog producer has a greater margin over feed costs than producers here in Saskatchewan because of 

mainly feed freight assistance. This is one thing we feel must be corrected in a national feed grains 

policy. The advantage given to some eastern livestock producers by feed freight assistance has changed 

to a considerable degree since about 1968 when the Wheat Board abandoned its long standing practice 

of offering barley to all takers at the same price basis Thunder Bay. 

 

In recent years the Canadian Wheat Board has been pricing barley for use in Eastern Canada at prices as 

high as possible without causing large importation of United States’ corn. Eastern Canadian users 

frequently paid considerably more than the overseas customers were being charged for said barley. 

Western feed mills at times got their supplies below even the lowest export cost prices. This situation, 

however, has caused marked protest from the eastern provinces. I can’t say that I entirely blame them. 

However, there are many other inequities in the grain producing sector. Saskatchewan as the largest 

grain producer and the province with the highest grain and livestock ratio has suffered greater losses 

than any other province from past policies in regard to grain pricing, marketing, transportation and 

regulation through the quota system. Whenever, grain surpluses appear Saskatchewan farmers are the 

first to suffer. Long after Alberta and Manitoba have regained a balancing of those situations 

Saskatchewan farmers are forced to hold grain at their own expense or sell it at fire sale prices. We are 

at the moment in a much happier situation due to the spectacular rise in world grain prices. But we 

cannot afford to wait until we get another 1970 situation before doing something about the 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2068 

long term problem and coming forward with a long term solution. 

 

When our grain farmers find themselves unable to market all their grain for three or four or five 

consecutive years, they turn to livestock to create an outlet for that grain. And it takes a lot of hogs to eat 

100 million or so bushels of grain. 

 

Our market system and our packing industry can adjust to a steady increase in livestock. But they cannot 

cope with an explosion in production such as we had in 1969 and again in 1970. The result was an $18 a 

hundred weight price for dressed hogs in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to emphasize that these cycles of very low feed grain prices hurt the livestock producers just as 

much as they hurt the grain sector. Livestock producers in both Eastern and Western Canada want stable 

prices for feed grain, not necessarily prices below the cost of production, alternating with years of 

scarcity and high prices when producers turn to other crops for other reasons. 

 

But stable adequate prices are meaningless, Mr. Speaker, unless the farmer can deliver his grain. I 

maintain, that Saskatchewan will continue to bear an unfair share of the cost of carrying grain surpluses 

until we get a guarantee that all western farmers will be able to deliver their grain within a reasonable 

period after production has taken place. 

 

I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is in Saskatchewan’s interest to support a feed grains policy which 

maintains the spread between feed grains east and west which makes sense in terms of transportation 

and handling costs and in terms of the cost of moving dressed livestock from the West into the major 

eastern markets. 

 

Quebec fears such a spread. They fear that the spread may be too great. But we in the West must not 

forget that the realities of Federal policies in Canada today could result in a system of subsidies and 

pricing of feed grains which could seriously cripple our western livestock industry. We are most 

concerned about that in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

My department, the Department of Agriculture, has done a good deal of work on the problems of the 

whole grain sector and its relationship to the livestock industry here and in Eastern Canada. I am 

convinced that no solution will be effective which attempts to deal with feed grains in isolation from 

other cereal and oil seed crops. If the returns from the various crops are not kept reasonably in line, 

farmers will shift production widely from year to year. We have evidence of that happening on all too 

many occasions in the past. Therefore, it is impractical to talk about high price supports or returns 

guaranteed to cover cost of production in feed grains while leaving other crops to follow world markets. 

 

The farmer deserves a fair price for all of his crops, not just one or two of them. And that is why my 

Government continues to press for a comprehensive grains income stabilization policy. A grains income 

stabilization policy which will ensure that kind of drop in grain income that hit Saskatchewan in 1969 

and 1970 will never occur again. 

 

Within that framework there are strong arguments in favor 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2069 

of allowing domestic feed grain prices to respond rather quickly to changes in world markets rather than 

to try to guess a year or more in advance what feed grain prices could or should be. If we get caught in a 

situation of having a set price for feed grain which turned out to be much higher than prices in the 

United States or overseas, our livestock industries would be put in a squeeze. Enforcement of prices in 

that situation would be most difficult if, in fact, possible. And there might be serious disruption of 

livestock production in some areas and among certain types of production units. 

 

It might be better to let western feed grain prices remain free to find their own level, protected, of 

course, by a respectable initial price and use that floating system or that floating price as a basis for the 

price to be charged in Eastern Canada. In that way, Mr. Speaker, prices both East and West would 

reflect the farmers’ expectations of return from export sales. And the competitive position of our 

livestock producers would not be in danger. 

 

I support the principle of a reserve of feed grain to ensure adequate supplies for the Canadian livestock 

industry. Such reserve would help to stabilize stock production. And if it resulted in a greater volume of 

production as well, the whole national economy would, in fact, benefit. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the cost 

of such a reserve should be borne by the Federal Government. My Government will not support any 

policy which could result in Saskatchewan grain farmers being forced once again to hold large stocks of 

grain for the benefit of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we, over the past six or seven months drafted a national feed grains policy. I had the 

opportunity some ten days ago to present that policy to the Hon. Otto Lang, Minister in charge of the 

Canadian Wheat Board and to the Hon. Eugene Whelan, Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa. 

 

We presented that policy which is a comprehensive one and in some aspects and some regards a 

complicated one, but still one which we think is the simplest to incorporate not only in relation to the 

Province of Saskatchewan but in relation to all provinces in Canada. Before presenting it we discussed 

our proposal with a number of other farm organizations, not only organizations limited to the perimeters 

or the boundaries of Saskatchewan but to national farm organizations, The Saskatchewan Federation of 

Agriculture, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, Saskatchewan Wheat pool. I think it ultimately 

went from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to the Alberta Wheat Pool and the Manitoba Wheat Pool. We 

discussed it with the National Farmers’ Union, gave a general condensation of the proposal to various 

livestock organizations within the Province of Saskatchewan. In some instances, I think the policy in the 

condensed form was sent to other provinces in Canada for their consideration. 

 

Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that all of these organizations, all of these parties 

to which we gave this national feed grains proposal, agreed with it. I think, to be fair, I have to say that 

there were some aspects of the feed grains proposal that we had which they did not agree with but when 

they related it to the total feed grains problem, the total livestock production problem in Canada, they 

were willing to overlook some criticism in some areas in which they would not give us total agreement 

to in order to endorse, I think, the only national policy which they thought would be 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2070 

acceptable to all. 

 

I am happy to say that in my discussions with Ministers of the Federal Government and administrators 

and officials of the Federal Government that the reaction to our proposal was warm. I don’t want to 

attempt to mislead any Members of this Legislature or anyone in Saskatchewan that the proposal will 

necessarily be accepted. We know that the Federal Government and in particular the Minister in charge 

of the Canadian Wheat Board and the Minister of Agriculture have said that they would be making 

announcements either this spring or early summer in regard to a feed grains proposal. It was for this 

reason that we wanted to discuss our proposal with them at an early date. And I don’t want to mislead 

Members or people in Saskatchewan into thinking that our proposal will, in fact, be accepted or what 

portions of it may be accepted. I am optimistic that because of the comprehensive nature of the proposal 

we have and the fact that we have had some dialogue and some discussion with farm organizations 

which are most concerned about a solution to this policy and that they have said in a general sense there 

was a lot of merit in the Federal Government going along with the provinces incorporating or agreeing 

to such an agreement that a lot of these recommendations if not, in fact, the general objective of that 

recommendation of that policy will be accepted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with these remarks in regard to a most important subject today that I ask all Members 

of this Assembly to support this resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac: — (Wilkie) Mr. Speaker, a few very brief comments on a very comprehensive and 

complex question. 

 

I was interested in the remarks of the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson). One of his stipulations as to a fair 

and equitable proposal insofar as the marketing of feed grains was concerned was that all producers of 

feed grains should receive the same price. On the surface that sounds difficult to disagree with, Mr. 

Speaker. I just ask him how practical is it to implement that proposal in the strictest sense and I am sure 

that is the way he meant it as I listened to him. 

 

The Member knows full well, I am sure, of the problems in the feed grain industry when we look not 

only at Saskatchewan but when we look across the nation. I think we have to remember that we in 

Saskatchewan are perhaps the major producer of feed grains in Canada. We have a livestock industry 

that has been developing and with its ups an downs there is no question we have a livestock industry that 

has a tremendous future. While we have an obligation to other Canadians and other Canadian provinces 

and on-going livestock industries there, I think we need, first of all, to keep in mind the protection and 

development of our own industry. 

 

I don’t think that we need necessarily the Government of Saskatchewan being the sole negotiating agent 

with Ottawa on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. And that, as I read the resolution, is what the motion 

proposes. We have many farm groups. I was glad to hear the Minister say that the proposal the 

Government has developed is one that he has put out to various farm 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2071 

groups. As I listened to him discuss the degree of acceptability that they received on that I did gather 

that it wasn’t totally acceptable to all segments of the farm industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

I say we have farm groups that represent the viewpoints of Saskatchewan farmers. They are well 

organized and they represent all segments and all factors of the farming industry in the province, the 

grain grower as well as the livestock operator. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that these people are doing a pretty good job. It is true to say that the recent 

conference in Ottawa dealing with this question didn’t really come up with any resolution of the 

problem for some of the reasons again pointed out by the Minister of Agriculture. It is difficult to get 

Canadian acceptability, one province with another, the Maritimes, Quebec, Ontario and Western 

Canada, on a question and on a problem that is so complex. But I believe that they are making headway. 

I believe progress has been made and I think, Mr. Speaker, that any moves that are made by the 

Government should certainly be only in support of an overall co-ordinating effort of the farm groups, be 

they livestock men or the grain grower or any other representing any segment of the industry. 

 

One of the big questions, and I have never heard anybody in this House across the way or outside of this 

House tell me how they are going to resolve the one big issue on this question, and that is, what about 

the thousands of mixed farmers in Saskatchewan? Farmers who raise their own feed grain and in turn 

themselves feed the most of it either to hogs or to cattle. How are we going to control and regulate these 

people under a bureaucracy such as is outlined, as I understand it, by the resolution before us? 

 

There are many thousands of mixed farmers in Saskatchewan who, as I say, raise most of their own 

barley and oats. Perhaps this year they will sell 500 bushels of oats to a neighbor. But in essence, they 

are basically producing and feeding their own feed grain. 

 

The Members opposite, I say, overlook the problems that would be created by setting up a kind of 

bureaucracy such as has been advocated here in this resolution. As I say, the Minister of Agriculture told 

the House in his remarks just a few moments ago that the Government has developed a comprehensive 

policy. I apologize for the fact, Mr. Speaker, that I have not studied it and I am not acquainted with it. I 

do think it is a problem that needs more answers. I do suggest that we are getting the answers gradually. 

I believe we are closer to some kind of national policy on this question today than we have been in 

years. Certainly, there is a need. 

 

But I wish to speak in support of the amendment. I, for the life of me, can’t see how we are going to 

resolve anything by setting up this kind of bureaucracy that is envisioned, as I understand it, in the 

original motion. 

 

Surely, the Canadian Wheat Board which has been in the grain business for many, many years, by the 

establishment of initial guaranteed prices, establishing selling prices, this would be the direction to move 

as far as some development of orderliness in the whole question of the marketing of feed grains. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2072 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and not the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The amendment negatived. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 6 – Urges the Government of Canada to Amend The National Transportation Act. 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. W. A. Robbins (Saskatoon 

Nutana Centre): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to amend the National Transportation Act so that 

national transport policy be directed to promote provincial and regional economic development rather 

than act as a brake on industrial expansion. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: — (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on this 

particular resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in particular, I should like to touch on some of the problems of transportation policy, 

problems which are currently being developed and analyzed with solutions hopefully being proposed. I 

am looking forward to the eventual meeting between Ottawa and the four western provinces on this very 

important issue. 

 

In fact, the western Premiers of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba are meeting 

right now in Manitoba to discuss aspects of the transportation policies of Canada as they particularly 

relate to Western Canada and Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan, the railways have had and continue to maintain a monopoly in the 

hauling of most of our basic commodities. 

 

The National Transportation Act which is the subject of this resolution provides shippers with certain 

possible safeguards, although I hesitate to use the word “safeguard”. I refer to the application of section 

23 of the Act, the so-called public interest section. This will depend upon interpretations and rulings yet 

to come from the Canadian Transportation Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Province of Saskatchewan has the most unfavorable export position of the three Prairie 

Provinces both from the import and export point of view. Our closest port is Churchill, at present limited 

to an 85 day shipping season. Our main domestic markets for potash, pulp and lumber in the mid-west 

United States is acknowledged to be a long all rail haul. Because of our central landlocked geographical 

location, our weak, or relatively weak, truck competition and because the railways have been given the 

freedom under the National Transportation Act, 1967 to vary freight rates without reference to any 

regulatory authority, Saskatchewan makes the highest contributions to rail overhead costs on all rates 

except export of grain — grain is an exception because of the Crow’s Nest statutory protection rates. 

 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2073 

Now the railroads perform certain services in the public interest for which we, as taxpayers, pay 

subsidies to them. Since the passage of the National Transportation Act, 1967 some $410 million have 

been paid to the railways, at least to the end of 1971. And all the while that we have made these 

subsidies out of taxpayers’ dollars in the amount of $410 million, freight rates have been increased since 

1967, from an average of 29 per cent then to an average of 67 per cent in the year 1973. 

 

In the intervening period the railways have been confronted as well with enlarged export movements of 

coal, potash, grain, ores and concentrates. So, in other words, there is not only an increase in freight 

rates but there is more activity and movement for the railways as well as more money for them. 

 

In fact, the movement has been so intense that the railways have been unable to cope with this demand 

for increased freight services because of serious equipment shortages. It exists not only in the area of 

potash but from time to time most noticeably in the area of hauling of grain. 

 

Thus, very often because of this inadequacy potash sales go by the board because we cannot move it in 

sufficient quantities to Vancouver and port positions and the result is loss of markets and loss of 

customers. 

 

This is also highlighted, this lack of equipment, by the Federal Government’s recent decision to 

purchase 2,000 hopper cars for grain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a word on that purchase of 2,000 hopper cars for grain. The fact of the economics of 

hopper cars, I say to the Members of this House, has been well known for quite some time. It has been 

well known to the railway companies, it has been well known to the people in the grain business, it has 

been well known for quite some time that notwithstanding this, the railway management failed and has 

failed to purchase railway grain hopper cars. It indicates, Mr. Speaker, that the railway management is 

abdicating its duty, its position as a leader of the Canadian National Transportation policy, because the 

grain hopper cars, of course, have been purchased by the Canadian Wheat Board, the producers, the 

taxpayers of Canada. 

 

The total corporate policy of the CPR, Mr. Speaker, quite obviously, time and time again takes 

precedence over the overall transport needs of Canada and Canadians. The Canadian Pacific obviously 

thought that it would get a higher rate of return, as its railway generated capital, by pouring its profits 

into such enterprises as CP hotels, CP Air, CP investments with its new hotels, office and apartment 

complexes, real estate holdings and the like and explorations for natural resources. In other words, the 

profits obtained were generated back into non-transportation functions and the result was that railway 

hopper cars, trackage, motive power, all of this has received secondary consideration by the railway 

corporate policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Pacific empire, all of its empire investments in real estate, was built upon 

Western Canadian land settlement. It was based upon Western Canadian resources and the productivity 

of Western Canadian farmers and Western Canadian people. The new transportation policy enunciated 

in the National Transportation Act, 1967, the subject of this debate, effectively 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2074 

relieves the CPR from any burden of responsibility for western development other than that which the 

railway may feel is in its own corporate interest. 

 

Let me give the Members of this House another example. In the period 1957 to 1966 the US rail lines 

were turning to grain hopper cars because of the economics of size and utilization. Mr. Speaker, it is 

now 15 years since that was being done in the United States. In this period the CPR spent $915 million 

on new capital equipment and property for airlines, hotels, communications, steam ship investments. In 

addition, another $364 million was spent in securities held by Canadian Pacific Investments Limited set 

up as a company in 1963. 

 

$915 million on some aspects of its operations and an additional $364 million in the investment side of 

its operations. It must be noted, Mr. Speaker, that this internally financed expenditure included not one 

red cent for the purchase of one grain hopper car. Not one red cent for the improvement of the shipping 

of the commodity to port positions. Yet the economies of hopper cars, grain hopper cars to the railways, 

to the industry and to all of Canada were obvious to all since 1956. And still to this day the railway 

companies have refused to spend anything on grain hopper cars. It is the producer and the taxpayer who 

are doing it for them by the purchase of hopper cars by the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the light of the corporate position of the CPR, the determination of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to demand that the amount of railway burdens or overhead costs be significantly reduced 

takes on even greater importance and greater significance for all the people of our province. 

 

Because of the distance factors, we will pay higher rates even in those areas in which the railways do 

have adequate intermodal competition. One way to compete with railways and try and get the freight 

rates down is, of course, to look at our highway trucking operations as an alternative mode. 

 

We want, as a general policy, our trucking industry to compete vigorously with rail especially in those 

areas where the truckers have a clear economic advantage. In this respect the Canadian National 

Railways have shown that nearly all rail freight reductions in Saskatchewan in the past three years have 

been the result of direct intermodal competition, the direct result of increased and better trucking 

competition with better highways, better truck equipment, more experienced management. I hope and 

expect that the truckers of this province will provide much more of that needed competition to the rails. 

 

We are going to continually review regulations to assure that there is the maximum of road and trucking 

competition. At the same time, we will, of course, ensure or seek to ensure that regular and consistent 

services are provided to our smaller communities. 

 

In short, while we will promote increased competition and make it easier for our truckers where 

possible, we will not go hog wild in removing regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Government has said on occasions in the past, particularly at the Saskatchewan 

Truckers’ Association annual meeting several weeks ago, we have instructed the 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2075 

Highway Traffic Board in concert with the industry to undertake a study of the efficiency of trucking 

operations. We will do some experimenting hopefully to conduct some reorganization to improve our 

transport and trucking services to rural Saskatchewan as a direct source of competition to the railways. 

We must strive for efficiency and reduced costs if we are to service effectively our agriculture economy 

and the businesses and the small businessmen and our towns and villages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this relates to the topic under discussion, the National Transportation Act, in this 

way. Let me just detail in brief terms some of the aspects of the National Transportation Act, 1967, 

some of the consequences of deregulation brought about by the National Transportation Act with regard 

to our railways. Now the nub and the substance of the National Transportation Act, 1967 is expressed in 

the following phrase: 

 

Regulations of all modes of transport will not be of such a major kind as to restrict the ability of any 

mode of transport to compete (and I underline the word “compete”) freely with any other mode of 

transport. 

 

How did this National Transportation Act and this policy position come to be stated? Well, this comes 

about as the result of the MacPherson Royal Commission into the railways and freight rate structures. 

The MacPherson Commission viewed the transport scene on the basis of the statistical evidence before it 

of the late 1940s and early and middle 1950s. In that period of the ’40s and ’50s when MacPherson 

looked at the railway system, he quite obviously saw an over-regulated railway system desperately 

trying to fight off the incursion of competition from truck, water, air and pipeline as technology 

increased. And these incursions of competition of truck, water, air and pipeline had a significant effect 

on the freight, passenger traffic, the competitive and economic position of railways throughout Canada. 

That was the situation when MacPherson looked at it in the last ’50s and the early ’60s. 

 

Thus the share of truck and surface transportation, to give you statistics, grew from 5.4 per cent in 1938 

to a little over 8 per cent in 1948, double to nearly 18 per cent in 1958. Those figures will show the 

increased trucking from five per cent in 1938 to 18 per cent in 1958, in 20 years. 1958 was the period of 

the MacPherson study and quite obviously trucking was cutting heavily into the over-regulated railway 

system. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, those facts have not changed. In the succeeding decade 1958 to about 1967-68, 

the trucking industry halted in its growth. In fact, the trucking industry as a form of alternative 

competition to the rails barely was able to hold its own. It moved up to 21 per cent of the competition in 

1960, dropped back down to 20 per cent and is now hovering somewhere around 18 per cent of the total 

competition, the position it was in in 1958 at the time of the MacPherson Report. 

 

The rail proportion was similarly stabilized although there was a 50 per cent increase in total freight rate 

ton miles generated in Canada. Quite obviously then, Mr. Speaker, the competitive situation between rail 

and truck in the 1960s was different from that of the 1950s and the statistics on which the report was 

based no longer applied. 

 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2076 

I said that the National Transportation Act released the railways from regulation. Prior to the Act in 

1967 the railways were regulated. Now the NTA said that the only regulation is competition. 

Competition will provide the lowest freight rates and the best service. And they made that report and 

that decision and that Act was drafted on the basis of those statistics that I gave you on trucking. It 

obviously worked in the very competitive areas of Canada. 

 

Now released from these regulations of rates, the railways have been given a free hand. The railways 

now, Mr. Speaker, have adopted an almost automatic formula for rate increases on all commodities 

except those under statutory protection, one rate increase in the spring, one rate increase in the fall, 

without having regard to any regulatory tribunal. Before 1967 they had to justify their increases, now 

under the new Act there is no need to account to that regulatory tribunal. And the result, Mr. Speaker, 

being freed of this competition, has been that since 1967 the general freight rate level has increased, as I 

have stated, from 29 per cent to over 67 per cent in a short six-year period, depending on whether or not 

the rates are between Eastern and Western Canada or within Western Canada. 

 

Make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are suffering the maximum 67 per cent 

increase in freight rates and the reason that we are suffering this maximum can be more readily 

understood if we just take a very brief look at Ontario. In Ontario 65 per cent of all freight loaded is 

transported by trucks. Well over 80 per cent of all manufactured goods in Ontario are transported by 

truck. Can that situation be said to exist in the Province of Saskatchewan or Western Canada? Quite 

obviously the answer is no. No such comparable competitive situation exists in Western Canada and 

particularly in Saskatchewan. 

 

In Ontario and Quebec intermodal competition has, perhaps, acted as a brake on skyrocketing transport 

costs. However, in Saskatchewan, longer distances, small plants, low production volume of secondary 

industry, sparse population, dependence on primary agriculture and resource industry has militated 

against breaking down the rail monopoly and the result has been that you and I, everybody in this 

province, pays the full penalty of 67 per cent maximum increase in freight rates because of the lack of 

intermodal competition. 

 

That is what the National Transportation Act of 1967 does for Western Canada. 

 

Well, complaining about freight rates is like complaining about the weather, I guess. Someone will say, 

what can we do about excessive freight rates? Well, as I’ve mentioned, one method is to appeal a freight 

rate that has been set by the railways to the Canadian Transport Commission. And you can appeal it if 

that freight rate is prejudicial to the public interest. That’s the section 23 that I referred to at the very 

beginning of my remarks. If a shipper makes out a prima facie case to the Canadian Transport 

Commission that the freight rate is prejudicial to public interest then the Commission will hold hearings, 

conduct an investigation and perhaps ask the railways to revise downwards their freight rates. The rape 

seed crushers of Western Canada, the Prince Albert Pulp Company cases on freight are cases in point 

where there are appeals to the CTC on the grounds that the rates are prejudicial. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2077 

In fact, I might say, Mr. Speaker, that these cases, Western Rape Seed and the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company are the first major cases placed before the commission since the new National Transportation 

Act of 1967 was passed. The rape seed case lasted over five weeks in Saskatoon plus an additional time 

in Ottawa. Legal counsel in the rape seed case represented three prairie governments, the governments 

of Ontario and Quebec, eastern rape seed crushers who opposed our application, the railways who 

opposed the application to reduce the rates. 

 

This is an attempt to get a secondary industry on its feet and growing in Western Canada. Putting it 

bluntly, what can you do about freight rates? If you appeal under the public interest section of section 23 

of the National Transportation Act you can be sure of hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees and 

a terrific amount of time before the hearing is heard and determined. Without the support of our three 

provincial governments, the rape seed crushers could not have proceeded with this very legitimate case. 

 

Take the Prince Albert Pulp Company case, here the company seeks reductions in freight rates into the 

United States. Now in this case, Prince Albert Pulp Company has to proceed to the Interstate Commerce 

Commission of the United States. Concurrently it has to go to the Canadian Transport Commission. And 

here too, the total costs are in the hundreds of thousands of dollars. Mr. Speaker, you can see quite 

obviously that only very big business or big government can successfully take appeals against unjust 

freight rates to the CTC in order to correct any wrong that might exist. That’s not good enough, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The National Transportation Act is supposed to be an instrument of national policy, of unity for all 

Canadians including Canadians in Saskatchewan. It is supposed to be an instrument of development for 

all industries including industries such as the Prince Albert Pulp Company and Western Rape Seed 

Crushers. This Government intends to join with our people and our industries in those cases in the CTC 

in the future that have merit to fight each and every one to lower prejudicial freight rates in order to give 

our people a fair break for a change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Up until now the dice have been loaded in favor of the railways insofar as the 

average shipper is concerned and unequal justice is dispensed from Montreal or Winnipeg. 

 

I state that the Canadian Transport Commission has shown to date perhaps a slight bias which might be 

described as pro rail. I don’t want to say more than that because we do have cases before it. But I have 

not been entirely happy with the hearings we’ve had with the CTC. 

 

Members will know Mr. Pickersgill, a very distinguished former Cabinet Minister in the Liberal 

Government in Ottawa was the former chairman of the Canadian Transport Commission. I had hoped 

that when he retired that a person more familiar with regional western transport problems could have 

been appointed chairman of the CTC. In fact, this Government made representations to the federal 

authorities urging the Prime Minister and others along these lines and we were joined with the provinces 

of Alberta and Manitoba. Well, you know what happened. 

 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2078 

The chairman of the CTC is now Mr. Edgar Benson and I don’t want to prejudge the new chairman and 

I don’t say this in a political vein, but I say we, in the West, are sick and tired of having our vital 

problems of transportation decided finally by ex-Ontario politicians, be they Liberal, PC or NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — As a Provincial Government we are going to request strongly that amendments be 

made to the National Transportation Act to simplify these appeals of unjust rates. We want a bridle to be 

put on the seemingly insatiable appetites of railways for higher rates in this area where we are captive by 

the rails. We want our railways to maintain an adequate level of service to western communities. We 

don’t want station agents closed, we don’t want a wholesale abandonment of rail lines. We want 

adequate service on LCL and express shipments. We want the National Transportation Act to work to 

the benefit of all western Canadians and thereby work to the benefit of all Canadians no matter where 

they are located. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, most important in our consideration of transport policy is the nub of 

this resolution which calls for a review of the objectives and the wording of the National Transportation 

Act of 1967. That’s the real nub of negotiations and discussions in Winnipeg right now. It was, I submit, 

when the former government was in power as well because they knew what the problem was with 

freight rates and I don’t think there is anything here which divides us on any grounds of political 

philosophy. 

 

While no one can argue that we require an efficient transportation system and I do not reject the 

proposition that competition keeps business on its toes. The concept that competition pervades the 

Canadian Transport structure, I impress upon all Members, is simply not correct. The underlying 

philosophy of the NTA that competition among the modes will give us the best rates and the best service 

is simply not correct because there is no competition in Western Canada. We are captives of the rails. 

We don’t have alternative trucking. We don’t have access to water and we have difficulties with respect 

to getting any interest by other alternatives means. 

 

The objective of obtaining efficiency in transportation by means of intermodal competition may have 

success in Eastern Canada but it hasn’t had in the West. Certain technological advances and pipelines or 

truckload limits may give us some more competition. We’ll work and look toward that possibility but 

they must operate independently of the rails. 

 

What is required, however, in Western Canada and in Saskatchewan specifically is a national 

transportation policy which looks toward regional development and not solely corporate development. 

Instead of milking the West and keeping us as a source of raw materials, what is needed is a determined 

regional and national effort to broaden the industrial and social base of the Prairie Provinces, to broaden 

the industrial base of Saskatchewan. When present transport policy is a deterrent to that industrial 

growth that we week and strive for in 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2079 

Saskatchewan then I say that transport policy is no good and must be changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And thus, instead of a national policy pointed towards the corporate interests of our 

railway companies or our airline companies, let’s start thinking of railways like they were 100 years ago 

or so, an instrument to unite all Canadians, not to divide Canadians. 

 

I invite all Members of this Legislature to support what I think is probably one of the most important 

resolutions on this Order Paper, the resolution by my colleague from Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) 

urging for the revision of the National Transportation Act and to encourage national policy to act as a 

promotion of industrial expansion in Saskatchewan and the Prairie Provinces. 

 

I am pleased to support this resolution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Robbins: — (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I wish simply to make a brief summation of 

some of the material I presented previously. I am hopeful that this resolution will be adopted 

unanimously by the Members of this Assembly. I felt when I looked at the Order Paper some days ago 

that there were a number of resolutions there on which we might gain reasonable unanimity. Some of 

them I have been a bit disappointed in but I am hopeful that this one will receive total support of all the 

Members of this particular Assembly. 

 

I stated when I introduced this resolution sometime ago that the roots of the problem were based on a 

national policy set up in the 19th Century which was detrimental to Western Canada. The thrust of that 

policy was directed at tapping the investment frontiers of the Canadian prairies and the base legs of that 

policy were tariffs and the construction of railways. 

 

Initial railway construction occurred, of course, a long time ahead of reasonable probability that it would 

pay its way. I briefly covered the points related to the CPR and its construction and I pointed out that 

this is one of the main reasons why we get many people talking about the necessity of nationalization of 

the CPR. The fact remains that that railway’s initial cost of some $100 million saw $25 million in a cash 

subsidy from the taxpayers of Canada, $34 million in terms of construction of railways in Manitoba and 

British Columbia which were donated free to the CPR company at no cost, 25 million acres of western 

Canadian land including mineral rights, a 20 year monopoly in terms of rail transport across the prairies 

and this was touched on by Mr. Romanow, the Attorney General to some degree in his discussion of the 

resolution. I tried to stress and I gave some statistical background for the reasoning of the resolution and 

I should like to just summarize that with a few of those examples again to emphasize and impress upon 

the House the need for change in the freight rate structure. 

 

The previous speaker made some reference to the Rape Seed Crushers’ case. I want to summarize again 

the situation related to the shipment of rape seed from Nipawin to the Lakehead and 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2080 

on to the East and when the processed product of rape seed meal or rape seed oil is shipped. It costs 23½ 

cents per hundred weight to send rape seed from Nipawin to the Lakehead and 44 cents per hundred 

weight to send it from there to Toronto. However, if it is processed into rape seed meal in Nipawin at the 

Agra plant and shipped to the head of the lakes, the cost is 23½ cents per hundred weight, the same as 

the rape seed but from the Lakehead to Toronto it increases from 44 cents to 79 cents per hundred 

weight. If you process the rape seed into rape seed oil in Nipawin, ship it to the head of the lakes, the 

cost is 23½ cents per hundred weight but it increases to $1.41 per hundred weight from there to Toronto. 

It is obvious that the freight rate structure militates against any probability of processing in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. The whole process of the transportation structure in that respect simply means produce 

the raw product here, ship it out of the province to another part of the country for processing. 

 

As previous speakers have intimated, Mr. Speaker, we as prairie inhabitants are locked in to the railway 

transport situation on all major commodities because of the length of haul and the lack of competition. 

 

Transportation, Mr. Speaker, should be recognized as a primary instrument in the development of a 

reasoned economic base and this simply cannot happen in Western Canada on a regional basis unless we 

get amendments to the National Transportation Act and the freight rate structure. 

 

I pointed out in my previous comments with respect to the resolution that the transportation policy must 

deal not only with rail and freight structures but with all of the aspects of transportation — air services 

and various other aspects of transportation as well. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I commented at that time that the Federal Government has already given some 

recognition to this fact by giving some subsidies to regional air carriers such as Quebec Air and Eastern 

Provincial Airways in the Maritimes. I also pointed out that I could not understand and I’m sure 

Members of the Assembly must find it difficult to understand why similar subsidies have not been made 

available to regional air carriers in Western Canada. 

 

I want to cite two other examples to stress the points I made with respect to the idiosyncrasies that 

appear in the freight rate structure. I want to cite the case again of steel products being shipped from 

Cooksville, Ontario, through Regina to Vancouver, a distance of 2,672 miles at a cost of $1.48 per 

hundred weight. The same steel shipped from Cooksville to Regina, a 1,108 miles shorter freight haul, 

costs $2.21 per hundred weight or 73 cents per hundred weight greater than that 1,108 mile longer haul. 

Now I don’t know how anyone could rationally defend that kind of a freight rate structure. 

 

The exploitation of the West, the hinterland of the industrial East, will not end unless it becomes 

economically feasible to develop a secondary industry base in the prairie region. It is my contention and 

it has been confirmed and supported and emphasized by other speakers that this simply cannot happen as 

long as that freight rate structure works so strongly against us. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2081 

Fully developed provincial economies in the prairie region would provide a more effective spring board 

for the development of the North. This obviously isn’t going to happen either unless we get a reasoned 

secondary industry base in the prairie region. 

 

One other example to illustrate the idiosyncrasy of the freight rate structure and I am again repeating 

here to emphasize it, is the fact that you could ship Japanese oranges from Vancouver to Winnipeg for 

30 cents a box less than you could shop the same oranges from Vancouver to Regina. Again, a shorter 

freight haul, some 400 miles and yet a much heavier cost. 

 

I think in my initial remarks, Mr. Speaker, I made some comments with respect to the freight rate 

structure in the United States which I think, if adopted here, would give us at least some measure of 

equity and fairness. If you ship a product from a point like Minneapolis through to say, Seattle, and if we 

assume that the cost of that freight was $1.50 per hundred weight, then it is illegal under their law and 

their Transportation Acts to charge any more than that $1.50 per hundred weight for shipping the same 

product from Minneapolis through to any point to which that product must go on its way to Seattle. In 

other words, if you ship to Havre, Montana, you could not charge more than $1.50 freight rate 

structures. 

 

If we had a similar freight rate related to a shipment of steel from Hamilton or Cooksville, Ontario 

through to Vancouver, the rate to Regina would have to be $1.48 per hundred weight, the same as the 

rate is to Vancouver. Now obviously, I think Members of this House would agree, that in itself would 

not be necessarily an equitable freight rate structure but nevertheless would be immeasurablybetter than 

the $2.21 freight rate structure which applies at the present time if shipped from Hamilton to Regina 

compared with a $1.48 freight through to Vancouver. 

 

In concluding the debate on the resolution, I should like to stress again that in an overall national 

transportation policy freight rates, air services, passenger rail services, branch line abandonment, grain 

terminal storage at Vancouver related to expanding trade probabilities in Pacific rim countries, rail 

construction to remove existing bottlenecks in the grain handling system in interior British Columbia, 

harbor boards, national ports, toll structures on the St. Lawrence Seaway and the urgent development 

needs of the Port of Churchill are all matters in which the prairies and particularly Saskatchewan have a 

vital interest. 

 

I am sure that Members of this House realize that at the present time the Premier and some of the 

Cabinet Ministers from this Government are meeting representatives of other prairie governments in the 

Western Economic Council in Winnipeg in relation to these things and it is very important, I believe, 

that we have some unanimity in relation to our approach to the conference that will be held this summer 

between the western provinces and the Federal Government. I, therefore, urge all Members of this 

Assembly to strongly support this resolution. 

 

The other day the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) commented in his contribution to the debate 

and made it quite clear that he strongly supports this resolution and, therefore, I urge all Members of this 

Assembly to do so when the vote comes up. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2082 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 46 

Messieurs 

Dyck Meakes Wood 

Smishek Romanow Messer 

Snyder Thibault Larson 

Kowalchuk Baker Brockelbank 

MacMurchy Pepper Whelan 

Carlson Engel Owens 

Robbins Tchorzewski Taylor 

Matsalla Richards Faris 

Cody Gross Feduniak 

Mostoway Comer Rolfes 

Lange Oliver Feschuk 

Flasch Loken Guy 

Grant Boldt MacDonald (Milestone) 

McIsaac Gardner Weatherald 

MacLeod McPherson Lane 

Wiebe   

- 46 
NAYS — 00 

Messieurs 

Nil 

 

Resolution No. 15 – Irrigation Project Near Outlook 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): 

 

That this Assembly express its regrets at the cancellation of the irrigation project on the west side of 

the South Saskatchewan River near Outlook and further that this Assembly urges the Saskatchewan 

Government to reconsider its decision to cancel this project. 

 

Mr. H. Owens: — (Elrose) Mr. Speaker, as is all too common on resolutions moved by some of the 

Members opposite, this one is full of falsehoods and misrepresentations as were the mover’s remarks 

when he introduced the resolution. 

 

The Member for Moosomin very boldly and over and over again spoke of the irrigation project as being 

cancelled when at no time has any Member for the Government ever proposed or suggested that the 

program would or should be cancelled. The word used by the Government Member is deferred. 

 

Might I suggest to the Member that he trot down to the library, dig out a very reputable dictionary and 

carefully read the definition of the two words and then report back to this Assembly just what he 

learned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the Minister of Agriculture for announcing at an early date the delaying of the 

west bank irrigation program at this time. While making these few comments I hope that I can explain to 

you just why I agree with the decision. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2083 

Mr. Speaker, the Member for Moosomin indicated during his speech that the portions of the canal to 

carry the water were left partially completed. I would suggest to the Member to substantiate the 

statement by advising this Assembly the exact location of where these projects are not completed by 

section, township and range. 

 

I followed the ditch from the west bank at the pumping station where it started to where it presently ends 

at the town of Conquest and nowhere did I see part of the ditch that was not completed. All the contracts 

that were let have been finished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is rather odd and amusing that the Member for Moosomin, the constituency bordering 

the Province of Manitoba, should be speaking in such tear-jerking style for farmers in the constituency 

of Rosetown, several hundred miles to the west, especially, Mr. Speaker, when the Rosetown 

constituency is so ably represented by a Member sitting in their own party. 

 

I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that if the farmers of the Rosetown constituency were so concerned 

about the completion of the irrigation project on the west bank they would have had their own Member 

going to bat for them. Is it possible that the Hon. Member for Rosetown (Mr. Loken) had his ear to the 

ground and he has heard no rumbling? Is it possible, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers in that particular part 

of Saskatchewan are prepared to continue dry land farming that they know rather than to branch out into 

irrigated farming that they do not know? 

 

Past experience has shown that dry land farmers are not easily persuaded to change to irrigated farming 

unless and until they can be assured of a better farming future. Mr. Speaker, the delay of this irrigation 

project on the west bank is specifically for this purpose, namely, to carry on more experimentation on 

the east bank for various crops and methods of land use that are already in an irrigation project. The east 

bank has to date been a costly program in terms of dollars spent. However, the knowledge gained in 

terms of what to do and what not to do, what can be done and what cannot be done, cannot be measured 

in dollars. 

 

These facts and statistics are of unquestionable value. The continuation of this experimentation and the 

growing of a variety of crops and methods of cultivation will eventually result in crops suitable to the 

area and saleable in the market place. 

 

One dual observation is certain. Irrigated farming is too costly for cereal grain production and dry land 

farmers prefer to grow cereal crops. Diversification into irrigated farming will need to be proven before 

it is acceptable, proven to the extent that the farmer will be duly compensated for the extra labor and 

operating costs involved. Therefore, the Government feels its primary obligation must be to the farmers 

who are presently trying to make a living from irrigation farming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were reminded the other day by the Member for Moosomin that the dam and irrigation 

project was built by a Conservative Government in Ottawa and the CCF Government in Saskatchewan, 

endeavouring to leave the impression that the Liberals were too clever to get involved. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, whom is he trying to kid? How long did they use this project 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2084 

for a political football? Surely, he is not belittling that veteran politician of the Province of 

Saskatchewan and the Liberal Party, that gentleman who was so anxious and so proud to get the name of 

the dam for his own identification, the late Hon. James G. Gardiner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the party represented in this Legislature by the Members to your left are always ready to 

accept the glory whether or not deserving. I would suggest that in building this great project their record 

stands condemned in the eyes of fair-minded citizens of Saskatchewan. It was the imagination and the 

effort of our former Premier, T. C. Douglas and his CCF Government that negotiated the fulfilment of 

this great dream of creating a huge man-made lake in the arid section of south west Saskatchewan, a 

base for a new economy in Saskatchewan, a recreation and holiday area easily accessible to thousands of 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to read for your interest and information from an article that recently 

appeared in a recent issue of the Estevan Mercury. This article is quite long and I shall only read parts of 

it, and I quote: 

 

The dam on the South Saskatchewan River was never promoted only for the purpose of irrigation 

alone. As a matter of fact, if one reads carefully the report and the findings of the commission 

appointed in 1951 they will find that these learned gentlemen stated that construction of the dam could 

not be justified on the basis of useful irrigation. These men recognized the cost of irrigation as well as 

the fact that, by and large, Saskatchewan farmers were not enthusiastic supporters of irrigation 

farming. 

 

Today, we realize that irrigation is really only a minor use of the water. Recreation, as well, is an 

extremely important subject. More leisure time and an increasing interest in the tourist dollars, both 

provincially and nationally, makes this project increasingly valuable from this point of view. 

Expenditure of dollars today for recreational development on the lake will realize a much greater 

financial return to our governments’ treasuries than any irrigation development. 

 

The major point, I feel, is that many farmers are opposed to irrigation farming. The need for irrigation 

at the moment has not been proven to my satisfaction. When we took over the Government in 1964 

there was a division among our Government at that time as to whether or not we should force 

irrigation. We made a number of enemies for our party due to our insistence on proceeding with the 

irrigation program and forcing local farmers in many cases to sell their land against their wishes. I 

feel, knowing my father as I did, I feel that he would be opposed today to the use of force in any way 

to carry out the commitments made to the Federal Government to proceed with the project. I believe 

he would see, as our present Provincial Government should see, that his commitment should be 

rescinded with the consent of the federal authorities. 

 

As the years pass, if the need arises, irrigation can be further extended. I see the possibility that some 

day much of the area in which we live may in some way be irrigated, but I say, let us not force this 

issue at a 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2085 

time when land values are high and the great need that existed in the ’30s does not seem to be with us 

now. 

 

The construction of the dam can now be justified from many points of view without one acre being 

irrigated. Modern science today does not necessarily hold up irrigation of land as a good procedure. 

Let the farmers themselves determine the use of the dam for irrigation purposes and not the big fist of 

a paternal government. 

 

These words were written by a man who apparently made an independent survey that apparently agrees 

with the decision made by this Government and opposes the position taken by the official Opposition. 

One could almost believe that the writer of this article was a supporter of the New Democratic Party. 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, the article was written by Mr. Wilf Gardiner, son of the gentleman I referred to 

earlier, the late Hon. J. G. Gardiner. 

 

I believe it would be safe to say that the late Hon. J. G. Gardiner was a confirmed Liberal and that his 

son, to my knowledge, is not a supporter of the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the deciding factors in making the decision to delay work on the west side irrigation 

system was the very high cost. Experience gained from the east side indicates that to complete works to 

serve 17,000 acres of irrigable land would require $6 million to $8 million. Assuming farm size at 400 

acres, the cost per farm would be around $230,000 with further farm development costs of $270,000. Of 

these costs the province would assume $234,000 leaving approximately $27,000 as the farmer’s share 

who would also have the additional cost of labor for the irrigation process. 

 

I feel the farmers in that area would not be prepared to make this kind of investment in a program that as 

yet is not a proven economic operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is difficult, in fact, impossible to understand the thinking behind the talking of the 

Members opposite. We have heard some unbelievable ranting and raving about the Government’s 

investment in the firm of Intercontinental Packers and to a lesser degree on the investment made recently 

in IPSCO, both sound business ventures in Saskatchewan, and now we hear condemnation form the 

same Opposition for delaying a much more costly project that, at this point in time, does not warrant 

expenditure of high amounts of money. 

 

Would it be possible, Mr. Speaker, that the Members opposite are again endeavoring to put a small 

number of farmers into a perpetual poverty position? Well do we recall the reception received from the 

Federal Government Stabilization Bill, supported by the Members opposite, that would have stabilized 

the agriculture industry in Saskatchewan in a state of poverty. I ask again, Mr. Speaker, is it possible that 

the Members opposite want to force a small group of Saskatchewan farmers into a perpetual poverty 

position? This Government does not intend to put any farmer into a straight-jacket. 

 

This is not the thinking or the purpose behind the actions of this Government. It is our desire to make 

farming in Saskatchewan a pleasant and profitable venture. We have pledged ourselves to this task. We 

will continue to do everything in 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2086 

our power to fulfil that pledge and warrant the support of the farming community. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe the delay in the west side irrigation program is in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan and more especially of those farms directly involved. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, you will realize that I do not support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. F. Loken: — (Rosetown) Mr. Speaker, just a few words on this Resolution No. 15. 

 

The Hon. Member from Elrose need not be concerned about the farmers in my part of this irrigation 

area. He didn’t say anything about his own. I will have to agree with him that all farmers are not in favor 

of irrigation farming but by the same token many of them are. We don’t know what the feeling is 

because they didn’t get a chance to voice their opinion on this irrigation, as to whether they wanted it or 

not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the decision to cancel the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project is a direct 

contradiction to this Government’s so-called rural rebuilding schemes. During the Budget Speech, Mr. 

Cowley said and I quote: 

 

The decimination of our rural communities and the decline in provincial population are problems that 

can no longer be ignored. While improvements have occurred in the past 18 months positive action is 

required by Government to stem and reverse this trend. Mr. Speaker, this Budget introduces a new era 

in Government programming in Saskatchewan. It provides positive steps to stimulate economic 

development in the province and to revitalize our rural areas. 

 

Positive action – was it positive action to cancel the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project? 

Revitalize our rural areas – Mr. Speaker, does an eight per cent loss in the population of Outlook that 

will occur as a direct result of this decision, revitalize our rural areas? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is significant that the Rural Municipality of Rudy is the only municipality in the 

Province of Saskatchewan that has grown since the last census. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is it the policy of this Government to penalize progress? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has proclaimed throughout the province greater people participation in 

Government legislation. The people of Saskatchewan were to be heavily involved in decisions affecting 

their way of life. Could the Government tell me where the people participation was in the Hog 

Marketing Commission? What happened to the farmers’ participation in Bill 50? Whatever happened to 

prior producer participation that was promised by the Minister of Agriculture before a decision affecting 

the irrigation would be reached? 

 

This Government is ruling with iron-handed dictatorial controls. More and more, Premier Blakeney is 

assuming the role 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2087 

of the benevolent godfather of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Government has spent more than $15 million buying into prosperous Saskatchewan companies. 

While that money has bought an interest in business it has created no new jobs and has done nothing to 

stimulate the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

At the same time the Government killed one of the brightest projects in Saskatchewan. The irrigation 

project was steadily expanding the growing population and economy of Rudy Municipality. The 

continuation of the project would have meant a steadily increasing population and a strengthening 

economy throughout the area benefitting all of Saskatchewan. Positive action – the killing of the South 

Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project can hardly be called positive action. 

 

In a brief to the Government submitted by the Outlook Chamber of Commerce, the Town of Outlook, 

the Village of Conquest, the Rural Municipality of Fertile Valley, the Outlook Water Users Association 

and the Alfalfa Cubers Mutual Limited it was said and I quote: 

 

It is the opinion of all parties concerned that the returns to the farmer and to the province have not 

been given a fair chance. 

 

That pretty well sums it up. This Government may be offering a New Deal For People but there is one 

thing you can be assured of, it is not a fair deal for people. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J. R. Messer: — (Minister of Agriculture) Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this motion, I want to say 

that I will be presenting an amendment to it after I have made some remarks in regard to the decision of 

the Government in delaying further construction of the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is plain that it is not the intent of the Government in its decision to penalize 

progress in any area of the Province of Saskatchewan, in this instance, in the area where the South 

Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project was being carried out. 

 

The Government, I think, had to assume its responsibility to all farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan 

and see that some endeavors were undertaken to provide a stable and viable agricultural industry for all 

farmers in this province. And when we look at the expenditures that have already taken place in the 

South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project, the kind of hardship and problems that farmers who are 

endeavoring to irrigate have had to endure, the kind of problems and hardships that they are confronted 

with, we realize that there are some real legitimate reasons for us to delay further encouragement in that 

area and take the funds that would have normally been continued to be funneled into that project and 

spread over the entire province and make them available to other farmers so that we can bolster the 

entire economic agricultural industry 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2088 

in this province. 

 

We have a considerable number of acres that have potential irrigation prospects in the South 

Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project on the east side already. We find that only a fraction of those 

acres are irrigated at this time because farmers have been reluctant to undertake irrigation even though it 

is undertaken with large subsidies from the Provincial Government. They have experienced some real 

difficulties in obtaining any kind of net returns from irrigation. I think it can be safely said that most 

farmers have, in fact, suffered losses year after year in the irrigated crops. To help alleviate the situation 

the Provincial Government has made special grants of $10 per acre to those irrigating farmers for three 

years in a row to help offset their losses in irrigation. 

 

We have committed ourselves to give priority to recognizing the problems of farmers on the east side 

and hopefully to turn those enterprises into economic and stable farming units. 

 

One is the cubing plant where the Government has encouraged farmers to establish a cubing operation. I 

am told that construction is now underway in regard to that plant. They have already sold or have 

commitments to sell the total production of alfalfa cubes from that plant which will be coming on the 

market sometime this summer. We are taking pasture land and making it available to farmers as rapidly 

as possible in order to expand and develop a livestock enterprise in the irrigated region. We are also 

providing special considerations under the FarmStart program which will give irrigating farmers or 

those who wish to establish an irrigated farm, special consideration by providing larger sums of money 

and raising the ceiling of gross productive assets that will be needed and will have to be available to 

farmers in order to establish an irrigated unit. 

 

In all probability we shall have to make other concessions and other grants available to farmers in the 

east side in order to develop a viable irrigated operation in the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation 

Project. 

 

The prospects for changing the operation and maintenance costs in the near future are not good and we 

are certain that we shall have to continue to subsidize those costs for some years in the future. Besides 

the expenditure of nearly $16 million which the Provincial Government has already made, which is 

about $400 per irrigatable acre on the east side, there will be considerable further expenditures in the 

maintenance and operation of the project. With the background of experience that we have, it just did 

not make sense to proceed with the west side where costs were even higher. 

 

To develop the first 17,000 acres, public expenditure of nearly $600 per acre is required. Public 

expenditure for a 400 acre farm is, therefore, nearly one quarter of a million dollars besides the cost of 

acquiring land from farmers who prefer not to irrigate and further subsidies to establish paying farm 

enterprises and to take care of the operation and maintenance grants which are fairly high in irrigated 

areas. 

 

Prospects for attracting a major industry are not good. In all probability another 15,000 to 20,000 acres 

would have to be developed at these high costs before we could even 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2089 

consider pushing for such kinds of industries. 

 

Until irrigation, Mr. Speaker, gets on its feet on the east side in particular, it is not realistic to develop 

the west side and the funds at our disposal need to be used for increasing income opportunities, as I have 

already said, in other areas of agriculture in the province. 

 

It does not, therefore, Mr. Speaker, make sense to build an oasis and have the rest of the province 

deserted. 

 

The Province has for all intents and purposes met its commitments under the agreement for developing 

irrigation in the SSRIP. Complete irrigation works including a complete surface drainage system have 

been built to service 37,600 acres. And the 17,000 acres have construction built to service another 5,000 

acres in the Broderick and Outlook area. Main works have been built to serve another 5,600 acres in the 

Broderick east and the Bridgewater areas. Through the acres in the Broderick east and Bridgewater areas 

and through the Saskatoon south east water supply works, this will bring water to another 7,000 acres 

which have been constructed. The total then is over 55,000 acres which have potential irrigation 

opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because there have been a number of statements and/or accusations made as to who was 

really responsible, or for that matter, to blame, for the establishment of the irrigated undertaking in the 

South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project, I want to give you just a brief history of the development 

of the South Saskatchewan project. 

 

I think one should go back as far as 1935 when there was the passage of the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Act by the Federal Parliament of Canada. The purpose of this was to counteract the effects of drought in 

the southern portion of the prairie provinces. I think it provided the kind of atmosphere that some people 

responded to when they started thinking of an irrigated acreage for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1937 PFRA established small irrigation projects at Val Marie, Eastend and Maple Creek which were, 

in fact, a beginning of community irrigation of the southern portions of this province. In 1943 PFRA 

was authorized to make studies on the feasibility of damming the South Saskatchewan River for the 

purposes of developing a larger irrigation project. In 1947 an interim report by the PFRA on the South 

Saskatchewan River development was tabled. It recommended that the Coteau Creek site was feasible as 

a dam site. It was possible to irrigate 500,000 acres with a power potential of 210 million kilowatt hours 

annually. The total cost of the dam at that time was estimated to be $66,360,000 without any irrigation 

development. 

 

In 1949 the Conservation and Development Branch was set up in Saskatchewan within the 

Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture to give assistance to irrigation development. In 1959 a final 

report from PFRA came in regard to irrigation. 

 

In August of 1951 a Royal Commission of the South Saskatchewan River Project was appointed by the 

Government of Canada to decide two important factors. One, whether the economic and social returns to 

the Canadian people on the investment in the proposed South Saskatchewan River Project would be 

commensurate with the cost thereof. Two, whether the project represented 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2090 

the most profitable and most desirable use which could be made of the physical resources involved. 

 

In 1953 the report of that Royal Commission recommended that the project not be considered because of 

the high cost in relation to the benefits that would be gained. 

 

In 1954 to 1957 there were a number of submissions and studies and proposals put forward to the 

Provincial Government which were in favor of the construction and the establishment of an irrigated 

project. 

 

In July of 1958 an agreement was signed between Saskatchewan and Canada to proceed with 

construction of the project. 75 per cent of the cost was to be borne by the Federal Government, 25 per 

cent of the cost by the Province in regard to the dam and to appurtenances. Saskatchewan was to 

construct irrigated works so that 50,000 acres of land could be served one year after the dam was 

completed. 

 

In 1958 PFRA entered into several contracts regarding construction. Saskatchewan started topography 

and soil surveys. From 1959 to 1964 investigational work on irrigation construction, land classification, 

economic studies and income projections were made and engineering studies of a distributing system 

done. Extension work with farmers in the area was carried out. 

 

The Government stated on many occasions that farmers would have an opportunity to vote on the 

acceptance of irrigation. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, in July of 1964, I want you to note that date of July 1964, because there has been a 

significant change. That was that some months earlier the Government in the province had changed and 

it was after that Government change that the irrigation works, in a physical sense, began to take place. 

 

The Government stated in July of 1964 that the construction of irrigation works would go ahead to meet 

the commitment with the Federal Government. No vote would be held with the farmers. The 

Government would buy land from those who were opposed to a change-over. Consulting engineers, 

Crippen and Associates, were engaged to draw up specifications. There were a number of contracts 

awarded from that time on in regard to the establishment of the physical structure as it is today. 

 

Starting on June 8, 1965 a contract was awarded to Pigott Construction for the pump structure for 

$704,000. I could list all of them to you, Mr. Speaker, but I think there is no real need to. But from that 

date of June 8, 1965 to July 24, 1970 $9,370,000 was put out by the Provincial Government for 

construction in the SSRIP area. 

 

Then there was a commitment made in 1970 to develop the west side. The $9,370,000 that I made 

reference to was for works totally carried out on the east side of the project. But a commitment was 

made and a decision was made by the former Government to then endeavor to develop and expand the 

irrigated works to the west side. And on April 14, 1971 a contract was awarded to P and N Construction 

of Outlook for the coffer dam for some $14,000, Graham Construction for the substructure and pump 

plant for $792,000. From April 14, 1971 to August 16, 1971, there were contracts awarded to the extent 

of $2,304,000 on the west side. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2091 

Again, another significant change took place. The Government changed in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to impress upon you that all the money had been provided by the former Government for the 

development of the west side and that the tenders had, in fact, been let in the spring before the change of 

Government took place. 

 

When I was appointed Minister of Agriculture there were already some contracts signed and some 

construction being carried out on the west side. In fact, there was some construction being carried out on 

the west side for which contracts had never been signed. It was obvious that it would be foolish and 

ridiculous to make a statement in regard to termination of the project even though there were some grave 

doubts being expressed as to what its merits would be if we continued to develop it, so the work for that 

year which had already been budgeted was allowed to be carried out. 

 

But during that period of time there was some considerable works being done by the Department of 

Agriculture by some other interested people, there was a re-institution of a group of people in irrigated 

works which had not been functioning for some period of time, to re-investigate the potential and the 

wisdom of carrying on the development of irrigation on the west side. They made some reports to me, 

Mr. Speaker. There was also a consulting firm hired to look into the potential and the rewards that might 

ultimately accrue to farmers and to the Provincial Government in expanding the irrigation project. A 

report was ultimately tabled in this Legislature last session. This was the Sibbald Report providing 

information to the Government on the merits of pursuing and expanding the irrigated works in the area. 

We also had some extended discussions with the University, our own departments were looking at the 

wisdom of further expanding irrigation in the area. When we compiled and summarized all of the 

material that a year’s work made available to us it was obvious that it was not in the best interest of the 

Government or in the best interests of the people in the area to continue to pursue further establishment 

and expansion of irrigation in the area. 

 

The farmers on the west side, at least in the majority sense, are not fussy nor are they willing to 

undertake irrigation. In most instances the Province would have to buy the land from the farmers 

because they wish to continue to be dry land farmers and we would then have to turn that over to 

farmers who were willing to undertake an irrigating project. This is the same situation that the 

Government was confronted with on the east side and we simply looked back in history to see the 

problems that emanated from that kind of situation. So we decided not to terminate the South 

Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project as some Members have said, we simply decided to delay any 

further construction until we can give higher priorities to establishing the acreage which is available for 

irrigation, which is available on the east side. Once that has been done and once it can be shown that 

there is potential and viable units are, in fact, in place on the east side and there is potential for 

expansion of development on the west side, the Government will then continue to expand the irrigation 

project. But not until we have been able to satisfy both ourselves and the farmers who are now able to 

irrigate land that it is, in fact, a wise decision for them and one which will ultimately give them a viable 

and economical, irrigated unit. 

 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2092 

It is for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I move an amendment, seconded by my seatmate, the Minister 

of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that Resolution No. 15 be amended: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

“commends the Government of Saskatchewan for its decision to postpone the development of the west 

side of the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project and further that this Assembly urges the 

Government to continue to place emphasis on developing farming units which are already under 

irrigation into prosperous and viable operations and on establishing new farmers in the area already 

developed.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: — (Morse) Mr. Speaker, what we have heard this afternoon from the Member from 

Elrose (Mr. Owens) and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), I feel is one of the lamest excuses 

ever given to this Legislature for cancelling one of the greatest dreams that this province ever had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — One of the excuses which they used was that it costs too much. It costs too much to 

continue on a program that would give this province more young people, would give this province more 

net return in the agricultural industry. They say that it costs too much when only a month ago they spent 

$10.2 million for 45 per cent of $6 million. Do you call that economical, Mr. Speaker? They spent that 

$10.2 million for something that did not provide one new job in this province, did not add one new 

industry in this province, nor did it put one more young farmer on the land in this province. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture also mentioned that the dry land farmers that were there already were not 

that interested in obtaining the land. What has the Minister of Agriculture and his Government done to 

attract these farmers on to this land? What have they done to educate these farmers, to provide 

incentives, to provide grants and provide opportunities for them to go on? What about our young 

people? Of course, the young people have never had the opportunity to farm with irrigation and they 

haven’t had that much opportunity to dry land farm because they aren’t that old, Mr. Speaker. Why 

doesn’t this Government act upon a program to educate our young people to put them on these lands. An 

example of what can happen, Mr. Speaker, is exactly was has happened at Outlook. The 2½ section farm 

which was previously operated by one farmer quite easily is now being operated by 19 families. Mr. 

Speaker, 19 families now make a successful living on two and a half sections of land that was previously 

done by one man. That is how the Minister of Agriculture could put more young people back on this 

land. 

 

He talked about the tremendous cost of irrigating or developing this land for irrigation, something like 

$1,600 to $1,700 per acre. I imagine this, Mr. Speaker, is for flood irrigation but has the Government 

bothered to look into the 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2093 

possibilities of sprinkler irrigation. Sprinkler irrigation cost, Mr. Speaker, runs around $400 an acre. 

This land around Diefenbaker Lake and Diefenbaker Dam is definitely suitable for sprinkler irrigation. 

Why doesn’t the Minister of Agriculture take the time to go down to Colorado, for example, and look at 

what sprinkler irrigation is doing for that state? 

 

Mr. Messer: — I went to Vancouver once. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Certainly, you went to Vancouver. They are certainly having a tremendous time 

irrigating the mountains up there as well. But if he would have taken the time and I hope, Mr. Speaker, 

that some of the Members opposite who did accompany us on the Foreign Ownership of Land 

Committee tour of Colorado this summer will get up and explain to the Minister of Agriculture just 

exactly what irrigation can do for a country and for a province or for a state. 

 

An Hon. Member: — As soon as you sit down they will jump up. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — You go to Colorado, Mr. Minister, you will find their cost between $50 and $60 an acre 

to purchase the land. It is bare prairie, nothing can be grown on it but grass. For a cost of between $300 

and $400 per acre that land is now netting that farmer close to between $50 and $60 per acre clear profit. 

The banks and the governments in the State of Colorado provide money for these farmers to develop 

that land. The terms for this money are around seven to eight years. When you can make $50 to $60 

clear profit per acre you can easily pay the $400 per acre cost in that length of time. 

 

As well, the State of Colorado provides the technical assistance and advice to allow these young people 

to go into irrigation. This is the type of project this Government should take in Saskatchewan instead of 

deciding to cancel the project which could do tremendous things to this great province. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, is the question or the problem which the Minister of Agriculture brought 

forward that there are no sales for the products that this irrigation land will produce. Naturally, there are 

no sales for this produce because when you have got a Socialist Government in this province you are not 

going to bring industry into this province that is going to process those products. Why doesn’t the 

Minister of Agriculture encourage potato processing plants? Why do we have to go and purchase our 

potatoes and our peas and our beans from the Province of Alberta? Why can we do that here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that I heartily support the motion made by Mr. Gardner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. L. Faris: — (Arm River) Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to direct a few remarks since the Member 

for Morse who has no irrigation farming in his constituency has pretended to be an expert on the subject. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, for the 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2094 

information of the Member opposite we have a tremendous amount of irrigation in the Morse 

constituency and it is flood irrigation as well as sprinkler irrigation and I should like the Member to 

come down and have a look at it. I might mention that I spent more time moving irrigation pipes than 

the Member opposite has. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the Hon. Member please take his seat when I call for order. 

 

Mr. Faris: — If the Hon. Member is such an expert on irrigation then he will know that a great majority 

of the irrigation farmers in the Diefenbaker Lake area are in the Arm River constituency. As a matter of 

fact, they are in the Cutbank poll. I invite you to look at the results of the Cutbank poll. The votes of the 

irrigation farmers in the last election went four to one for the New Democrats and they will go four to 

one or more for the New Democrats in the next election. 

 

But after the very interesting comments by the expert on irrigation concerning Colorado I am just at a 

loss as to why he didn’t tell us about irrigation in Peru or Viet Nam or some other parts of the world 

which he knows equally little about. The fact is that there are 22,000 acres of land which the Members 

opposite, when they were the Government, could have irrigated. All of these extension programs and 

this invitation to young people to come and farm could have been given to young people when they were 

the Government. I am sure that invitation was extended but the fact is that these young farmers were not 

foolish enough to go into the situation where year after year they had losses. Now the Minister of 

Agriculture has pointed out to us that for three years there has been a $10 per acre payment made to 

these farmers. That program was started under the former Government in the year just prior to the 

election of 1971. The reason for that was that at that time as at present the financial feasibility of 

irrigation had not yet proved out. It makes great, good sense and it makes great, good sense to the 

irrigation farmers who live in my constituency that we should first of all develop the east side, develop 

those 22,000 acres before we move on to the west side. 

 

Now I realize that to come forth with an irrigation policy takes some courage. I also realize and you 

would realize it if you were to speak to the irrigation farmers, the men who are actually doing the 

farming in that area, that under the former Government there was no irrigation policy. That is the major 

thing they are concerned about. You just talk to those farmers, I invite you to come up with me 

sometime, Jack, and we will go and talk to those men and ask them what the irrigation policy was under 

the former Government. The answer is there was none. That is what they are mainly concerned about. I 

am very pleased to see that the FarmStart program is going to be applied to these farmers in a special 

way. They have made the point very well that in order to get into the intensive use of their land they are 

going to require larger amounts of land capital than are necessary in dry land farming. They applaud this 

move and they are very pleased with it. That along with the cubing plant, along with the intensive use of 

this area for cattle, should bring it into a condition where these men will not have to go to the 

Government for further loans and grants. They don’t want that. Like most of us they want to be able to 

work hard and 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2095 

make a decent living and I believe that in the years to come we will see that first of all the east side will 

be made viable and at that time we will all be pleased to see the west side developed. I think it is a 

shame that the Members opposite should continue to say, as they have said in this House and in the 

press, that this project is being cancelled because that is news to those farmers on the east side who are 

at this time looking forward optimistically for the first time in many years to being able to make a decent 

living on irrigation farming. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Mr. E. F. Gardner: — (Moosomin) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly listened to some pretty depressing remarks from some of the Members 

opposite regarding the irrigation project on the South Saskatchewan River. It certainly demonstrated a 

complete lack of imagination, completely negative thinking. They say, in effect, that we give up and we 

don’t think it is going to work. Sorry, we spent a lot of money, it is wasted and we are just going to 

forget about it. This is certainly a surprising result from the people who are going to do all the things 

they claim for agriculture. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that we have 40 per cent of the arable land in Saskatchewan and we are 

almost the only province in Canada with no canning industry. Alberta, our neighboring province has 

over 600,000 acres under irrigation and we have, by the Minister’s own admission, 17,000 acres under 

irrigation. Almost nothing in comparison to Alberta and still the experts in the irrigation field tell you 

that the potential in Saskatchewan is just as great or greater for irrigation than that in Alberta. There is 

certainly room for expansion and there is certainly need for the continuation of this program. 

 

I should like to make one point very clear, Mr. Speaker, in closing this debate and I want to make it clear 

to all of the people of Saskatchewan. It is already clear to people in the Outlook area, to people in the 

irrigation community and that is that the NDP Government is effectively shutting down irrigation in this 

province. If they think they can convince anybody in this province that 17,000 acres, a small number of 

acres such as that, is going to support any kind of an irrigation program, of course, it is ridiculous. It 

requires much more than that. You are not going to get any industries which will use the products that 

are grown on irrigated land. You are not going to be able to have the technical people there, the research 

people. It is not a viable program in any way with 17,000 acres. It is not a cut back in irrigation, it is not 

a postponement, it is a cancellation and they might as well admit that is what it is. We are just not going 

to have an irrigation program in the Province of Saskatchewan. These people who are now in the 

irrigation business if they find themselves in difficulty and it is quite possible that they will, they can 

only blame the Minister and the NDP Government for cancelling the program, for denying the 

expansion that is necessary to keep this program alive. 

 

The Minister again mentioned the cubing plant that is being built near Outlook and I am surprised that 

he did mention it because he announced it in the House one day, it was announced in the Throne Speech, 

we have one of the Ministers announcing it in Mayfair and we find out that, in effect, they are spending 

$500. 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2096 

Mr. Messer: — On a point of order, I made no announcement in this House regarding any hay cubing 

plant. I may have responded to a question but I made no official announcement with regard to a cubing 

plant. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — (Milestone) Point of order, Mr. Speaker. If he would just go back and read his own 

Throne Speech he would find out where the announcement was. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Perhaps, he should consult with the Minister in the row behind him who made a 

similar announcement in the constituency of Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank). The fact is that the 

Government instead of building a $700,000 hay cubing plant are actually putting up $500 in cash 

towards the project. 

 

I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, about some of the remarks made by the Member from Elrose (Mr. 

Owens), the machine dealer from Elrose. I am a little concerned, he is not in the House at the moment, 

but he indicated that we shouldn’t have any concern for farmers in the rest of the province. He said the 

Member for Moosomin lives down there in the east side of the province, what’s he doing being 

concerned about people up in the irrigation area. Of course, this is a ridiculous type of statement. All of 

the people on our side of the House regardless of where they are from, whether they are from the city or 

any place in this province, are very concerned about the cancellation of the irrigation project at Elrose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — We had a similar statement from the Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris). They both 

seem to think that we shouldn’t be concerned about what is going on or what is happening to our 

farmers in the rest of the province. I should like to remind him somebody has to be concerned. We had 

some remarks from the Member from Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) the other day and he didn’t indicate any 

concern for this project and these farmers. Certainly, the other two Members who spoke didn’t indicate 

any concern and I should like to tell them that we are concerned. I should like to tell them also that as an 

indication for our concern, about two weeks ago I went up to Alberta and spent a day in consultation 

with the irrigation people to try and find out all of the information I could about the irrigation projects in 

Alberta. I am sure that this is more than they have ever done. They didn’t consult with anybody, they 

didn’t get any information, they just make a snap decision and this is the result. My colleague from 

Morse mentioned some of the costs in the United States. We have had some ridiculous figures by the 

Minister and the Member for Elrose. I think in calculating the cost of bringing water to a certain number 

of acres of land they must have taken into account the cost of the complete dam because some of these 

figures are certainly not correct. 

 

In his letter to the householder, Mr. Speaker, the Minister indicated that there were 17,000 acres being 

irrigated and we take his word for it. I think this is probably correct. He goes on to indicate the cost and 

he says also in his letter that one of the reasons for cancelling this project is that funds are needed in 

developing new programs such as FarmStart 



 

March 30, 1973 

 

 

2097 

and the Land Bank. Of course, this is what is happening. The money that should have been used for 

irrigation is being used by the Socialist Government to grab up land in this province for the Socialist 

state. Instead of using the money to promote family farmers on the irrigated land in Outlook they are 

taking this money, cancelling the project and using it to buy up more land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was very little consultation, if any, before this project was cancelled. There was 

certainly no warning for the people involved and this is obvious by some of the statements that we have 

heard from them. The whole province is concerned about the end of this dream. I read a letter the other 

day from an executive member from the constituency of Mayfair and this is an indication of the concern 

of all people of all political faiths in the province. It doesn’t matter whether they are city people or 

country people, all over the province they are concerned about this particular program and the fact that it 

has been cancelled. We share their concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not going to support a motion, this amended motion which commends the 

Government for killing this great project and we won’t be voting for this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:09 o’clock p.m. 

 


