



















































Hansard: January 25, 1973


 

 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

1st Day 
 

Thursday, January 25, 1973. 

3:01 o’clock p.m. 
 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the twelfth 

day of December, 1972, for the meeting of the Third Session of the Seventeenth Legislative Assembly 

of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker, informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary 

to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 

p.m. today, Thursday, the Twenty-fifth day of January, 1973. 

 

3:04 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, 

was pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: — 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 

The Economy 
 

The economy of the province particularly in the agricultural sector, has continued its recovery during the 

past year. Higher prices for grain, coupled with stable livestock markets and strong demand dramatically 

improved the returns to farmers. This improvement is reflected in most other sectors of the economy. 

 

You will be asked to approve measures at this Session which will further improve the province’s family 

farm economy and create new opportunities in our smaller cities and towns. 
 

The Farm Economy 
 

To open up more opportunities for more farmers to operate successful farming ventures, my 

Government will introduce an Agricultural Incentives Act. 

 

Through the use of low cost, supervised credit related to livestock and through a system of earned 

grants, this new program – to be called FarmStart – will make it possible for many young farmers to put 

together the necessary resources to become successful and independent. 

 

You will also be asked to approve measures to strengthen the Hog Marketing Commission and to 

expand livestock production. 

 

And to provide recourse for farmers who have complaints concerning the availability of machinery 

repair parts or warranty performance, you will be asked to approve amendments to The Agricultural 

Implements Act. 
 

The Government is also acting to provide funds for a co-operative alfalfa cubing plant to be operated by 

farmers in 



 

January 25, 1973 

 

 

2 

the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project. 

 

Housing 

 

Legislation will be introduced to create a Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. This corporation will 

mobilize the funds and skills required to provide improved housing for low and middle-income families 

and to assist in developing more attractive neighbourhood facilities. Housing co-operatives will be 

encouraged. Directly and indirectly the new corporation is expected to provide some hundreds of new 

jobs. 

 

The corporation will also administer a new program to assist senior citizens to repair and improve their 

homes. 

 

Industry and Tourism 

 

To further promote economic development you will be asked to approve a considerably enlarged role for 

the Department of Industry and Commerce. These measures include: 

 

- more intensive research into opportunities for development; 
- the building of more active export trade relations, particularly in the Pacific area; 
- the provision of substantially more resources to improve and promote tourism, including a program 

of grants for provision of major tourist attractions; 

- expansion of the department’s role in assisting small business enterprises. 
 

Resource Development 

 

In addition to measures designed to improve the farm economy, increase the stock of housing and 

promote industry and tourism, my Government plans decisive steps in the field of resource development. 

 

After taking office, this Government carefully examined the prevailing forest practices and management 

in the province and found them unsatisfactory, both environmentally and economically. Steps have 

already been taken to require greater care in tree harvesting and reforestation. It is now our intention to 

see that the tree harvest contributes more to the province’s economy. 

 

You will be asked to approve measures to ensure that each cubic foot of timber is so utilized that it 

yields the greatest number of jobs and the greatest return to the people of Saskatchewan Forest Products, 

a publicly owned corporation. 

 

My Government shares the growing concern of Canadians about the control and use of our energy 

resources – particularly petroleum and natural gas. You will be asked to approve legislation establishing 

a Crown corporation to participate in exploration for oil and gas. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Substantial funds will be provided to prospect for hard rock minerals in Northern Saskatchewan during 

the coming year. 



 

January 25, 1973 

 

 

3 

A major expansion in housing construction and in the provision of community sewer and water facilities 

in the North will be proposed. 

 

My Ministers are also actively negotiating with the Federal Government to conclude a joint, large-scale 

economic development program for Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

All of these programs will be of primary benefit to Saskatchewan people of Indian ancestry. 

 

Transportation 

 

My Government is especially concerned with the high and increasing costs of transportation which have 

slowed the industrial development of Western Canada, and particularly Saskatchewan. We therefore 

welcome the forthcoming federal-provincial meeting which will consider freight rates and other 

transportation problems. 

 

It is the intention if this Government to urge wholesale revisions in national transportation policies 

which have for so long worked to the disadvantage of Saskatchewan people. 

 

To assure maximum participation of all our people in the formulation of the province’s position on 

transport matters, my Government will invite all interested parties in the province to a Provincial 

Transportation Conference early in 1973. 

 

Property Tax Relief 

 

At this Session my Government will take substantial new strides in its pledge to further reduce the 

impact of property taxes for school purposes. 

 

You will be asked to approve increased in individual and corporation income taxes which were 

announced earlier. 

 

The increase in revenues from these taxes, which closely reflect ability to pay, will be used to increase 

grants to schools and to make substantial increases in Property Improvement Grant payments to 

homeowners, farmers and businessmen. 

 

Health and Social Services 

 

The cost of hearing aids has long been a heavy burden for those requiring them. Legislation dealing with 

this problem will be placed before you. 

 

In anticipation of a new program of dental care for children, you will be asked to approve an act 

concerning dental technologists. 

 

To improve preventative services to families in difficulty, a new Family Services Act will be placed 

before you. Protection of children will be further enhanced through a new Children of Unmarried 

Parents Act. 

 

You will also be asked to approve funds for a new system of grants on behalf of residents of special care 

homes – grants which will pay that portion of costs attributable to nursing care. 



 

January 25, 1973 

 

 

4 

Consumer 

 

In the year ahead the new Department of Consumer Affairs will expand its services by opening an office 

in Saskatoon to receive and investigate complaints. 

 

A new Residential Tenancies Act will establish more equitable relationships between landlord and 

tenant. 

 

The conditions under which compensation many be awarded to those suffering loss as a result of 

criminal injury will be widened. 

 

Elections and Municipal Affairs 

 

Pace-setting legislation controlling election expenses of candidates and political parties will be 

introduced at this Session. In addition, you will be asked to grant an extension of time for the reports of 

the Constituency Boundaries Commission established last year. 

 

You will be asked to consider major changes in community planning legislation and in The Municipal 

Elections Act. 

 

Employee Benefits 

 

Among amendments proposed to The Labour Standards Act are measures respecting maternity leave 

and stronger provisions guaranteeing equal pay for equal work. 

 

Superannuated employees of the Government of Saskatchewan and some of its agencies will be eligible 

for pension supplements under certain conditions, as will teachers. 

 

A revised and improved Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act will also be introduced. 

 

Environment 

 

Legislation will be placed before you to amend and strengthen The Litter Control act. 

 

You will be asked to approve substantial funds to allow the Department of the Environment to 

co-ordinate environmental impact studies on possible recreation and hydro-electric development projects 

in Northern Saskatchewan. These studies will be completed and the public consulted before my 

Government makes any decision respecting construction of these projects. 

 

Computer Services 

 

You will be asked to authorize establishment of a Crown corporation with power to provide computer 

and data processing services to Government and Government-funded agencies. 

 

Traffic Safety 

 

The Government is gravely concerned with the mounting toll of accidents on Saskatchewan’s roads and 

highways. In addition to steps already taken by my Government, you will be asked to approve the 

establishment of a Special Committee of this Assembly to recommend further action to reduce accidents 

and improve highway safety. 



 

January 25, 1973 

 

 

5 

Legislative Committees 

 

My Government is looking forward to considering the recommendations of the several Special 

Committees appointed at the preceding Session of the Legislative Assembly which have been holding 

hearings across the province during the inter-sessional period. Careful consideration will be given to 

their recommendations. 

 

R.C.M.P. Centennial 

 

The year which has just begun will be a memorable one for the people of Saskatchewan. All of us look 

forward with keen anticipation to the visit to our province of Her Majesty the Queen and His Royal 

Highness the Duke of Edinburgh during the first week of July. They will help us celebrate the 100
th

 

anniversary of the founding of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 

 

The Royal Visit will be the culmination of a series of events which make 1973 a signal year for 

Saskatchewan. Not the least of these is the Silver Broom International Curling Championships which 

will be held in Regina in March. 

 

My Government will be honoured to welcome the many thousands of visitors who will wish to join us in 

these celebrations. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with the full confidence that you will favorably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Appointment of Assistant Clerk 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Merry Deidre Harbottle, has been appointed 

Assistant Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Also that Dorothy Funk, Brenda Zakreski, Randy Gill and Bryan Cox will be Pages 

during the present Session. 

 

Certificate of Election and Return of Mr. A.R. Guy 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has received 

from the Acting Chief Electoral Officer notification of the following vacancy in the Representation, 

which reads as follows: 

 

May 23
rd

, 1972 

Re Athabasca constituency Proceedings under The Controverted Elections Act, 1971. 

 

Today I received a report pursuant to Section 22 (1) and 31 (2) of the above named Act from Mr. 

Justice Bence, The Hon. Chief Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan, 



 

January 25, 1973 

 

 

6 

reporting that on February 14
th

, 1972 he found Allan R. Guy to have been unduly elected to the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly for the Constituency of Athabasca, during the Provincial general 

election held on June 23, 1971. 

Signed: Donald G. MacMillan, Assistant Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has now received a further 

letter from the Acting Chief Electoral Officer, on November 20, 1972, which reads as follows: 

 

Dear Mr. Barnhart: 

Re the Athabasca Constituency, The Elections Act 1971. 

Please be advised that today I received a return to the writ which was issued on August 29, 1972 to the 

Returning Officer appointed to act in Athabasca Constituency. According to the return, the candidate 

having the largest number of votes and having been duly elected was Allan Ray Guy. 

Signed: Donald G. MacMillan, Assistant Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, I have the honor to present Allan Ray 

Guy who has taken the oath, signed the books. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Let the Hon. Member now take his seat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:27 o’clock p.m. 


