



















































Hansard: April 30, 1973


3057 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

68th Day 

 

Monday, April 30, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

Second Readings 
 

Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) moved second reading of Bill No. 125 — 

An Act to amend The Northern Administration Act. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an Act to amend The Northern Administration Act and it deals with 

the long awaited and, what I would suggest to you, Sir, is a milestone in the development of Northern 

Saskatchewan by the implementing of the principle of providing those provisions which will 

accommodate local government in Northern Saskatchewan. I suggest to you, Sir, that this Bill is another 

evidence of one of the commitments which this Government made in its election campaign in 1971. It is 

the fulfilment of that commitment by providing for the development of the necessary provisions for 

people in Northern Saskatchewan to undertake local government with respect to the administration of 

their communities of the North. 

 

This new deal for the people of Northern Saskatchewan will provide them with the long awaited right to 

nominate and to elect local government. This Bill extends to approximately 15,000 of our Saskatchewan 

citizens for the first time in our province’s history the democratic principle which the rest of 

Saskatchewan citizens have generally taken for granted as an alienable right. This situation in the North, 

Mr. Speaker, is not well understood by the rest of Saskatchewan, even by many of the Members of this 

Chamber, that the rights of self determination to administer local government have been denied the 

citizens of Northern Saskatchewan for this long time in our province’s history. Statements have been 

made and are virtually true that the Governments of Saskatchewan have administered its northern 

regions and its population in the North as the British administered, the various colonial states under their 

jurisdiction. Governments and their bureaucracies have said and acted in a manner which have said to 

northern people over these many years that they knew best how things in Northern Saskatchewan should 

be administered. 

 

The proposal which we made in our campaign in 1971 provided for a new deal here to be struck with 

respect to the development of local government in Northern Saskatchewan. So that earlier day and that 

earlier attitude of governments continuing to administer the affairs of Northern Saskatchewan 

particularly those municipal and civic affairs which are normally and logically the responsibility of 

people to assume, will now become a responsibility under the provisions of this Act. The attitude of the 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan or any of the other agencies of Government to continue 

administering the North will disappear. This, we believe, Mr. Speaker, is what the people in the North 

have been looking for for a long time. 

 

I must, Mr. Speaker, criticize the former Liberal Government for wasting seven to ten years in the lives 

and the 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3058 

developments of northern people. I do so because the stage for these new developments were 

programmed very, very early, as early in fact as the mid-1950s by the former CCF Government. The 

original Northern Administration Act gave broad ministerial powers to begin local community 

governments and we did establish in those years what we called Local Community Authorities. These 

Local Community Authorities were the beginning of local municipal government but that local 

municipal government was not enhanced or nurtured to the point where they developed and blossomed 

into full civic municipal authorities. Therefore, the original Northern Administration Act which gave 

these broad ministerial powers should have been continued and municipal and civic government given to 

the people of the North. These broad powers did not develop and local autonomy did not occur as it was 

once designed to do. 

 

The major frustration of those objectives resulted from proposed developments being placed under the 

responsibility of a regular department of government. There was pressure by other major programs 

unrelated to northern development and municipal government. The responsibility for the development of 

municipalities in Northern Saskatchewan was formerly under the Department of Natural Resources 

whose program did not concern itself directly with the responsibilities of local government but with 

many of the other responsibilities associated with administering Natural Resources which are unrelated 

to the particular thrust being considered. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the experience, the studies and the 

recommendations of both the Douglas and the Lloyd Governments that were being put into action in the 

early 1960s should have been carried on, should have been carried on from 1964 to 1971. Because of the 

partisan political prejudice and because the Public Service personnel were literally instructed to destroy 

the studies and the proposals of the former Government and to implement a Task Force on 

Saskatchewan’s North, another report was ultimately tabled; a report recommending the same approach 

as was recommended in the years before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the principle of this Bill is to establish a northern municipal council, an overall council 

which will have powers granted to it, powers similar to a rural municipality council in the South. That 

overall municipal council, Mr. Speaker, is to be elected, for the first time in this province’s history. Four 

persons that live in the North, will be elected for geographic areas that have yet to be defined. In 

addition to those four elected persons, two will be appointed from the respective Indian associations 

represented in the province, specifically the Metis Society of Saskatchewan and the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians. These two appointees, Mr. Speaker, will assure that on any northern municipal 

council there will be provision for representatives of the Indian communities to be represented on the 

council. It is possible that the four elected persons could all be people of non-Indian ancestry. Because 

of the large preponderance of people of Indian ancestry we believe it is essential and necessary at least 

in the formative years to appoint and make sure that there are people of Indian ancestry on that council. 

Therefore, provisions in the Bill make that possible and this is a point which the northern people have 

made. 

 

Provisions of the Bill establish regional electoral areas. The legislation also provides for qualification of 

voters in the established electoral areas. There is opportunity for the council to set a remuneration in 

consideration of the positions and the work which they will perform. This has been some time 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3059 

in coming, Mr. Speaker. We have been criticized since taking office in 1971 for what may have been 

viewed by Members in the Opposition as the Government not wanting to fulfil its commitments in this 

regard. I suggest to you that we have followed, as we have committed ourselves to do, the route of 

consultation with the Metis Society and with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and with northern 

people. I further suggest to you that this Bill comes to the House as a result of an agreement with these 

many people and the consultation which we have had with them. The recommendations of these various 

groups have been formulated into this Bill. While this Bill may not meet all of the objectives and may 

fall short of coming up with some of the expectations which northern people may have at this particular 

time, we believe that it will nevertheless provide for the opportunity of northern people to begin 

assuming the responsibilities of municipal government in Northern Saskatchewan. As the time goes 

forward, Mr. Speaker, we propose to allocate to that council much of the authority and much of the 

responsibility both fiscal and otherwise in matters relating to themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said at the outset that this is an historic milestone in the life and the developments of 

Northern Saskatchewan. It is a condition which people, like ourselves, living in urban and rural 

municipalities of the South have had for many years. It gives the privilege of every year nominating and 

electing a council member, electing a reeve to look after affairs in a rural municipality, similarly the 

cities and the towns electing their mayor or their overseer and their council members. This opportunity 

is now being extended to people in Northern Saskatchewan so that they, too, can set themselves up in 

civic government, responsibilities of local government which has not heretofore been their privilege and 

right to have. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a good deal of pleasure to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments on the Bill. We 

have waited a long time for a Bill that would provide some form of self-government to the people of 

Northern Saskatchewan. As you are aware I introduced a Bill earlier in the Session which would have 

gone much farther and provided a much fairer form of representation than we have in this particular Bill. 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the key to this Act is in the last clause and I want to just read it to the Members 

of the House: 

 

Nothing in Sections 124 (a) to 124 (i) excludes or restricts or shall be deemed to authorize the 

exclusion or restriction of the performance or exercise by the Minister of any function, duty or power 

imposed or conferred on him by this Act. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker, they have brought in a municipal type of government, so they say, 

and then in the last clause of the Act they say, “But in no way have we restricted the wide ranging power 

of the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan.” That’s the very reason why this Act will mean nothing to 

the people of the North. Because the Minister will still have his heavy hand over every citizen who lives 

up there. 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3060 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I had to laugh, when he started by saying that this was a milestone for the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan, with the fulfilment of the election campaign of 1971. I noticed he didn’t say 

anything about the election campaign in 1972 up in Athabasca constituency. They want to forget that 

one because they were condemned in that election campaign for their failure to act as they had promised 

in 1971. He says this is a development of local government. They are taking this whole northern area, 

dividing it into four constituencies and providing one person to cover that whole area and then he says, 

“We’re giving the same type of representation that any town or city or village in the Province of 

Saskatchewan has today.” Well, that’s absolute and complete nonsense. He is still appointing two 

members to the board and he said, “We’re going to appoint two Indian Members.” There is not one, and 

I defy the Minister to tell me where in the Act it says that you are going to appoint two people of Indian 

ancestry. It doesn’t say it. You can appoint two white people to that board. You say, today, that it is your 

intention to appoint someone from the SFI and the Metis Society. You said that about the Northern 

Advisory Council and you haven’t appointed a Metis member to that board yet. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — We did. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Not recommended by the Metis Society. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — They never recommended anybody. 

 

Mr. Guy: — All right there you are. There is my exact point. If the SFI and the Metis Society do not 

make recommendations to the Minister then he’ll turn around and appoint anybody that he sees fit. 

Probably appoint some of their own civil servants to this Northern Municipal Council. This doesn’t 

ensure that there will be one native person on this council. In fact the Minister himself said the four 

members who are being elected in the four divisions will probably be white men. He said that is why we 

are making two appointments by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. There is not one Section in this 

Act that guarantees that people of Indian and Metis ancestry in northern Saskatchewan will have any 

representation on this board. 

 

If you will recall, the Bill that I brought in earlier in the Session, would have guaranteed that every Chief 

in northern Saskatchewan and every chairman of Local Community Authorities, who are in most cases 

of Metis origin, would have been on a Northern Advisory Council and would have had some say in the 

plans and the developments of the North. This Act does not do that. There is nothing to say that these 

four elected officials could not all be civil servants as you haven’t excluded the Civil Service from 

serving on this board. So you could have four civil servants from the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan, in fact you could have all six civil servants from the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan on this board and then along with none of the Minister’s powers being taken away from 

it, what have you accomplished but a stronger, more binding Department of Northern Saskatchewan 

with little local input at all. There are no guarantees in this Act the local people will have any say or 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3061 

any representation on this board. They could all be employees of the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan if the Minister wanted to use his power in the manner that he has been using it over the 

last few months, forcing people into moving North or moving out of the area and using these wide 

powers that he has given himself. 

 

The other day he provided a $6 million large political account that he can go in and buy votes and 

everything else with. No, this Act, Mr. Speaker, falls far short of what the people of northern 

Saskatchewan have been given the assurance that they would receive. There was an opportunity through 

the Bill that I presented earlier to ensure that every northern community would have had some 

representation and some input into the . . . 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Advisory only. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Well, this is only advisory. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Guy: — This is a control that you say that the RMs have. But it is not necessarily so. There are a lot 

of the responsibilities that RMs have that have absolutely no relationship to northern Saskatchewan at 

all. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot more that has to be said, and we have to have the views of northern 

people before we decide whether we are going to support this Bill or whether we are not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Therefore, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Adjourned Debates 
 

Second Readings 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Thorson that Bill 

No. 92 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish the Hon. Member would have been in his seat if he wishes to speak. 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3062 

Mr. D.G. Steuart:(Leader of the Opposition) — I wish I would have been, too, but with meeting night 

and day you know, and going out to tell the people of Saskatchewan the truths about the dictatorial 

powers these people are grabbing over every sector of our society, we have had to have these meetings 

when we can. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We are doing our share. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I know you are doing your share. Where have you been, getting your instructions from 

the eastern labor leaders or where? We have missed you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to speak long on this Bill but I want to put on record my serious objection to 

it. And I want to put on record the fact that I oppose it without hesitation. 

 

As I said earlier when we were discussing in the Speech from the Throne the reference that was made by 

the NDP Government to the fact that they intended to go into the oil and gas exploration business, that 

not only would it be one more step to discourage private investment in this province, but that on top of 

that it was a stupid move. It was a poor move because of what it would do to the reputation of 

Saskatchewan. But it also was just plain bad business. Had the old CCF Government decided in the 

early ’50s or the late ’40s to go into the oil business when the first discoveries were made at the 

reasonably shallow levels, I still would have opposed it on principle. But at least from the point of view 

of the opportunity of realizing a profit on the investment or really doing something for Saskatchewan in 

developing a resource that was very obviously there then, it might have made some economic sense. But 

today all the Government is doing, if this isn’t window-dressing, will be to gamble the taxpayers’ money 

on what will be an extremely poor risk. 

 

There isn’t any doubt that the oil industry has honeycombed the area where oil has been found and 

where indications are that oil could be found at the shallow levels. Now we must hope that someone will 

look at the deeper levels. And the cost of sinking an exploratory well to these depths can run anywhere 

up to $150,000 a well, with absolutely no guarantee, of course, that we will strike anything but a dry 

hole. 

 

The oil industry came into this province and they risked a tremendous amount of money. They have 

begun, these last few years, to show a return on their investment. And taking it out of context, as the 

Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) has done and as other Members opposite have done, 

they have attempted to show that the oil industry has made a huge profit in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It has been pointed out before by speakers from this side and people in the oil industry that taking into 

consideration normal interest on the money invested, that while there has been a profit it hasn’t been 

huge, it hasn’t been extraordinary. It hasn’t been anything that could be criticized by fair-minded people. 

 

However, we are moving into a new phase of the oil and gas business. And that phase will call for the 

investment of tremendous amounts of capital and extremely high risks. So, 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3063 

when we look like we might be coming to the end of the profitable oil play, this NDP Government with 

its usual dexterity, stupidly stumbles on the scene and says, w are now going to take over. 

 

The oil industry, I think, will sit back and say you’re welcome. I think they will walk away. I will be 

amazed if any oil company of any note joins with this Government in any kind of a venture. 

 

When we saw the Bill, it went as usual, a great deal further than just allowing the Government to go into 

the exploration business of looking for oil and gas. The Bill will give them the power to go into every 

phase of the oil business, exploration, drilling, the development of oil wells and gas wells, the 

production of oil and even into the retail sales. 

 

Again, if they want to do this, fine. They are a socialist Government and if this is the way they want to 

move for the development of business and industry in Saskatchewan and the investment of people’s 

funds, there is nothing we can do until the next election to stop them. 

 

But again, if you look at what they are really doing, it is another case of sort of half-baked socialism. 

They may move in. I don’t doubt they may move into the oil industry in every phase. Not just looking 

for oil and gas, which is a stupid risk on their part, but also into the refining business, certainly a good 

possibility of moving into the retail business. 

 

Again, this is an area that is already extremely well served. There is a great deal of competition in this 

business. The public are well served. In fact, there may be those who say that they are too well served. 

But regardless of that this is a choice that has been made by people who have invested their money, their 

own money, the money that they have raised and chose to risk. Why should any government stop them? 

Why should any government hinder them? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole aspect of moving in on the oil and gas industry in every phase has another 

factor to it that is disturbing. When you couple it with the Bill, the Minister just talks about keeping 

almost total control of every thing that goes on in northern Saskatchewan. They are freezing out the 

tourist industry. Literally stopping development by the private sector in our economy, the development 

of the tourist industry. Moving in on the timber industry in a way that is still unbelievable and shocking 

not only to the people of this province, but right across the country when they begin to realize that here 

is a Government that tears up its contracts and says proudly, “Our word is not worth the paper it is 

written on,” and threatening a good timber industry. When you couple their moves in the Consumer 

Affairs Department that gives them the power of life or death over every retail outlet, every small 

independent business in the Province of Saskatchewan, goes back to what we said in the beginning. 

They have started 20 months ago and declared war on business in this province. And they have carried 

that war on and, in fact, in this last two weeks that warfare has reached a peak. It has reached a peak 

through the moves in the Labour Department, it has reached a peak in the moves of the Department of 

Industry, of the Department of Natural Resources. In fact, there is hardly a department of that 

Government that hasn’t reached out to take more power for the Ministers, for the Government and 

lessened the independence, the autonomy and threatened the very future of everyone who is in business 

in 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3064 

this province both large and small. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are opposing this Bill, because we think it is bad from the point of view of what it 

will do to the future of this province in regard to our attempts to encourage private investment to come 

in here. It is definitely one more step in creating the worst business climate of any province in Canada. 

We also oppose it because it is just plain stupid. You have to put it along side of the deal they made for 

Intercontinental. The stupid move they made in buying IPSCO shares that did no one any good except 

the investor who sold them for $15 plus and probably bought them for $6 or $7. It ranks right along with 

that and the Deutsche Mark loan that they stupidly refused to hedge or to pay off when they could. They 

must have been listening to Herman or some of those brilliant backbenchers. 

 

So for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, we intend to oppose this Bill. We would hope the Government would 

come to their senses, but we realize this is too much to hope for, because they really haven’t got any 

senses, either in the front bench or the back bench. We would hope that they would withdraw it, but they 

won’t. But we will oppose it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. K. Thorson: (Minister of Industry and Commerce) — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few 

words following the statements made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart). It is amazing to me, 

Mr. Speaker, and I am sure it is going to be amazing to everybody in Canada and particularly in 

Saskatchewan, that the Liberal Party in this province would take the position as just expressed by the 

Leader of the Opposition. Here we are about a third of the way through the eighth decade of the 20th 

Century, and here is the Saskatchewan Liberal Party not even in the 19th Century. 

 

There isn’t a civilized country in the world where there aren’t joint ventures between public agencies 

and private agencies. I read out a list of them when I moved second reading of this Bill. 

 

In Canada, the Federal Government, led by the Liberal Party of Canada, has gone into joint ventures in 

the high Arctic for the very purpose of exploring for oil and natural gas. It is just amazing that the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party should still be away back there, two centuries ago, saying there is no place 

for the Government in economic activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if, indeed, Saskatchewan was getting such a great development out of the oil industry left 

in private hands, that would be one thing, but the fact is that we have not been in recent years. And that 

decline started during the years when my friends in the Liberal Party were in the Government. 

 

The production is declining, the exploration activity has been declining, when left in the hands of private 

industry. Part of the reason, Mr. Speaker, is because the private oil companies, particularly the large 

ones, do not have Saskatchewan interest foremost in their plans. 

 

One can’t really blame them for that. No reason why they should have. They are out to make a dollar 

wherever it can be 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3065 

made. If it looks as though the stakes are better in some other place, they will go some other place. 

 

But I think the people of Saskatchewan expect the Government of Saskatchewan to have 

Saskatchewan’s interests first and to do something about Saskatchewan’s interests including exploration 

and development of the oil resources that are available here. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says that no oil company will go into joint ventures with the Government. 

All I can say to him is that that has not been our experience in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, in 

the exploration and development of natural gas resources. There have been companies in joint ventures 

with us. We confidently expect there will be others which will go into joint ventures with the new oil 

corporation that this Bill will provide. 

 

Let me in closing say, Mr. Speaker, that in this last third of the 20th Century, the need for energy 

resources of all kinds in North America, especially in the next 10 or 15 years will become particularly 

acute. We will see almost every half year, if not oftener, an increase in the price of crude oil, an increase 

in the price of natural gas. I confidently expect before this week is out there will be another increase in 

the price of crude oil for Saskatchewan and Alberta crude. 

 

There is going to be a shortage of energy resources. There is going to be an increase in price for these 

resources. It is time, Mr. Speaker, that every provincial government take the initiative as was taken by 

the Liberal Government of Quebec to have some direct involvement in the development and in the use 

of energy sources and particularly to make sure that the people of each province get the maximum 

benefit from these resources. 

 

That is what this new Saskatchewan Oil corporation is designed to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman that 

Bill No. 111 — An Act to amend The Forest Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I ask when I look around that the Members would rise rather than interrupt the 

Speaker all the time. 

 

Mr. M. Feduniak: (Turtleford) — I was on my feet, Mr. Speaker, for quite some time. I am sorry that 

the Members on the Opposition side have to be watched very closely because they don’t get on their 

feet, they are not even staying in their seats when they are supposed to speak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — I don’t blame you because you have to keep very close watch on those culprits there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for me to participate in this debate. Ever since the Liberal 

Government was elected 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3066 

in 1964, I have watched with dismay as our forest resources have been taken advantage of because of 

the Liberal Government’s insistence on allowing free enterprise to do whatever it felt like. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — I am sure that Members on both sides of this House will agree that one of the major 

reasons for the defeat of the Liberal Party in 1971 was because of their disregard for our resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — And a major reason for the overwhelming victory of the New Democratic Party, was 

the fact that our platform contained a major commitment to change the situation which had existed under 

seven years of Liberal mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — A lot has been said about the Athabasca Pulp Mill and I am sure that we will hear 

much more as this debate progresses, however, unlike the Liberals, I intend to tell this House the other 

side of the story. 

 

It is funny that when the Liberals speak about the proposed mill all we ever hear is their side of the 

issue. But I guess that it is to be expected because I am confident that they are unable to look at the two 

sides of anything, in fact, they don’t even know the difference between one type of a tree and another. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — Mr. Speaker, in order to reveal the true picture which existed, it is necessary to go 

back in time and study the natural resources situation which existed as early as the 1930s. We had to 

take a look at such things as timber, wildlife, water supplies, fish and big game, including environment. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And little game. 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — Yes, including the little game from Prince Albert West. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — During these early times we had the Liberals in power for 22 years consistently. And 

we also had the Conservatives in power but what did they do to our natural resource environment? What 

happened to our natural resources during this period of time? Mr. Speaker, these old-line Governments 

almost completely exhausted our resources and the reason this happened was because they had no 

planned policies. In fact, they had no policies at all when it came to resource development. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Giveaways. 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3067 

Mr. Feduniak: — Year after year we saw our timber resources depleted at an alarming rate and all 

because it was tendered to a couple of private elite making it impossible for the rest of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan to get any permits. These monopolizers let out contracts to a few very large contractors 

who in turn subcontracted to small individual operators who did all the work and came out broke and in 

some cases encumbranced after they completed their work. The only ones who profited from this 

undesirable situation were two large contractors who tendered all the timber permits in the province’s 

north. These contractors were not even good corporate citizens but rather quite the contrary. In fact, they 

were guilty of exploiting the very people who worked for them. The campsites were in a deplorable 

condition with no health regulations enforced. Workers who were hired had no protection for 

compensation if injured on the job. There were no guaranteed wages or hours of work and in general the 

people employed by these corporate giants were, in most cases, driven like slaves. And the same 

disregard existed in the forests where there were no regulations enforced. The harvesting of railway ties 

was a good example. The ties were obtained from jack pine and when a tree was cut down and it was 

found to have a red centre or a rotten core, it was just left and then when a sound tree was located two to 

four ties were cut off. The rest of the tree was left where it was cut. It is obvious that this lack of 

management resulted in other chaos and confusion in the harvesting area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another hazard, as well, resulted from this practice and that was the fire hazard. One can 

easily assess the danger when those felled trees were just left in the forest and allowed to dry. Lightning 

or fires started deliberately by individuals so they could get work caused real problems. When these fires 

started they would rage out of control for sometimes as long as two or three days before fire fighters 

could reach them because there were no roads or cut lines to the areas. These fires not only endangered 

the timber, but also took in its path the young wildlife, birds and wild berries. Mr. Speaker, during this 

period of time the fur trappers also starved because not only was there a scarcity of animals due to a bad 

situation respecting the timber harvest, but also the trappers received disgracefully low prices from the 

Hudson’s Bay Company and the other private fur dealers who were wheeling and dealing in the area. In 

fact, the situation was so bad that muskrat pelts were selling at an average of 25 cents. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — There were no fire jumpers. 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — I should like to keep my voice to a reasonable level, Mr. Speaker, but if those 

vultures will keep on interrupting, I’ll have to raise my tone. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — Beavers were really scarce. Moose were just not to be found and hunters were in a 

very difficult situation, not only because of the lack of game, but because there were no safety 

regulations to protect them. You had to take your chance, and if you were mistaken for a deer and shot, 

well, life wasn’t worth much in those days anyway. 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3068 

A similar bad situation faced our fish population. Let me just list one example. Take a look at Birch 

Lake ten miles northeast of Glaslyn. It is a shallow lake and when we had an extremely cold winter, as 

we did several times, a thick layer of ice would develop which, in turn, would develop an inadequate 

oxygen supply for the fish and as a result they were all killed. But yet the Liberals did absolutely nothing 

to replenish those lakes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lane: — We tried to catch all those fish and save them, Mike. 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — The Liberals’ failure in tourism and recreation is just as bad. In fact, tourism was 

almost non-existent because of no facilities and recreation was just about impossible because there were 

no roads to get to these areas. However, things could only get so bad before improvement and the first 

major improvement came in 1944 when the CCF were elected in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — One of the first things this new Government did was to undertake a program to 

provide cut lines running north and south and east and west which established individual forest blocks 

providing better fire guards and roads. These cut lines and roads made it possible to take stock of our 

forest resources, see where the problems were and burn the trash during the winter months to remove the 

fire hazard. Next the Government established the Saskatchewan Timber Board which assured that 

harvesting was carried out in an orderly fashion, forest stocks were protected, as well, with an 

elimination of infested timber. Controls were put into effect and permits were made available to 

individuals to harvest the timber and this was handled in an orderly manner by the Timber Board. The 

permits which were issued were to be used to take out mature timber to a limited size. This method 

made it possible to harvest some areas every few years depending on climatic conditions and the rate of 

growth. 

 

Another major advantage in this system was the price. By operating under these regulations the 

consumer was able to purchase his timber requirements from the Timber Board at greatly reduce prices. 

Farmers in this part of the province were able to benefit immensely from these price reductions. Farmers 

in the fringe areas had the privilege of getting a total of up to 30,000 feet for their own personal use. The 

net proceeds of the Timber Board operations benefited all citizens of Saskatchewan and provided many 

jobs for our people. In total, Mr. Speaker, the Timber Board was a very valuable operation because it 

was so beneficial to all the people. Perhaps, that is why the Liberals did everything in their power to 

eliminate it. Millions of feet of poplar timber were harvested during this period and the people were the 

ones who benefited. 

 

Another reason for the success of the Timber Board was its tight fire control method. By placing heavy 

emphasis on fire protection and control it was possible to eliminate a fire that started within 15 minutes. 

And as a result, timber losses were reduced drastically. With these rigid fire control methods and 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3069 

good housekeeping practices the productivity of our forest region grew faster and faster to the point that 

by the mid ’60s we had a very sound and adequate timber stand throughout our northern Saskatchewan. 

And the benefits didn’t stop there. As a result of our healthy forests, fur animal populations started to 

pick up and the Government brought in the Fur Marketing Board which stabilized prices. As a result 

millions of dollars of fur harvesting was done by our farmers and trappers and native people and the 

return was much better. In the past where muskrat pelts sold for 25 cents, the price was boosted to $3. 

As the result of sound planning and these reasonable controls, the natural resources of this province 

yielded another industry, one which some people might think not important, but just the same it was 

important. There was an abundance of strawberries, raspberries, saskatoon berries, gooseberries and 

blueberries and it is really unbelievable how big this industry was at this time. Hundreds of our citizens 

made a major part of their annual income by harvesting thousands of pounds of berries each year. And 

this was, again, made possible by having roads into the area of this province. 

 

By preserving our forests, big game flourished as well. Hunters were happy, the tourist trade picked up, 

food was provided for our people and provincial revenue was boosted because of the fees charged. 

 

By stabilizing water levels and stocking fish populations in our northern lakes, not only was good 

fishing provided for our citizens, but also helped a great deal to encourage tourism. As a result of the 

CCF Government and their policies relating to this part of the total resource program, Saskatchewan is 

regarded as a fishing paradise for tourism all around the world. 

 

Tourism is very important and this Government recognizes this fact. This industry is worth literally 

millions of dollars a year and we must do whatever possible to promote its being. With automation 

coming in at a rapid rate people find themselves with more time. We must provide them with an outlet to 

use up that spare time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have briefly outlined some of the developments which occurred in the past and some of 

the issues which lead to the legislation we have before us today. Our record in relationship to resource 

development is a sound one. Because of good socialist, democratic planning directed to benefit all the 

people of Saskatchewan, we are in a position to claim a much better record than the Liberals opposite. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I am sure the Liberals don’t want nor need any reminding of the sorry record they 

piled up when they were in the Government. I only hope that they have learned their lesson and will 

show they are sincere about this matter and support the legislation we are proposing at this time. 

Unfortunately they are not listening. 

 

In 1947 our Party made it quite clear we were not at all pleased with the direction our resource 

development was going. At that time the CCF Government established an independent Royal 

Commission Study into the whole resource potential and development issue. In the following year it 

became very evident that the direction which the CCF Government took was the right one. However, 

when the Liberals were given the reins of Government they sold out to their corporate friends and 

disregarded the orderly approach which we had been developing. It is the 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3070 

Liberal Party opposite which must shoulder the blame for the conditions which exist today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — Mr. Speaker, for a moment let me take a look at this situation from a different point 

of view. I have spent considerable time researching the operations of the Saskatchewan Timber Board 

and the operations and policies of the Department of Natural Resources. Based on data included in the 

various annual reports some related statistics were revealed and these figures will be most disturbing to 

the Liberals sitting across the way. The average return on stumpage fees between 1955 and 1964 was 

$5.03 per cord. Between 1964 and 1969 the return increased to $6.41. However, compare the Timber 

Board returns with the stumpage fee return from Simpson Timber between 1965 and 1971 when they 

averaged $2.11. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a difference of $4.30 per cord between the two operations. Yet Liberals keep 

trying to tell us the Timber Board was of little value. And the loud-mouth Member from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) yells in this House that the Timber Board was a useless operation and should be done away 

with completely. And don’t let him get up and deny he said it because it is on the record. Since 1965, 

when Simpson Timber was established, they harvested 654,000 cords and based on the $4.30 per cord 

loss, compared with the Timber Board rates, we can project that $2.81 million were lost to the people of 

Saskatchewan by stumpage fees. And this only represents one operation. Besides Simpson Timber there 

is the Prince Albert Pulp and the Meadow Lake Stud Mill in operation. Another advantage of the Timber 

Board which Liberals don’t like to talk about was the contribution it made towards reducing by five per 

cent the cost of lumber to farmers, community projects and co-operatives. These discounts average $1 

per cord and coupled with wage differential between the two corporations and the difference in return 

per cord is not $6.41 but rather $10.41 or over four times greater. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you compare the unemployment potential between the Timber Board and Simpson 

Timber we find that between 1955 and 1971 the Timber Board produced 10.8 man hours of labor per 

cord while Simpson Timber’s record was a dismal 2.9 hours. Take the 654,000 cords harvested during 

this same period, use the 7.9 hours lost per cord and project in the usual mathematical manner and we 

see that 4,766 million hours of work were lost. Using 8 hours a day would bring this to 595,836 days 

lost on a yearly basis. Using 240 work days per year we see that 2,483 men could have been working 

over this six-year period or more simply stated, 414 full-time jobs for six years were sacrificed because 

of Liberal give-away policies to Simpson Timber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is but one example. One could also use comparisons for Prince Albert Pulp, Meadow 

Lake Mill, Domtar or MacMillan-Bloedel. In the case of the Prince Albert Pulp, they utilized 510,000 

cords during 1971 and the stumpage rate averaged just less than 70 cents per cord for spruce and this 

includes the ground level and the fire protection levy. The Meadow Lake Mill took out 133,000 cords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I see the Member for Meadow Lake 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3071 

(Mr. Coupland) popping up and repeatedly saying it was such a mistake to cancel the Athabasca Pulp 

Mill, it really makes me wonder. For any Member, especially one who couldn’t manage a turkey farm, 

or couldn’t even successfully run an egg hatchery operation there is no sense of him trying to convince 

anybody because nobody trusts his reasoning. Continually he jumped up and harped and criticized the 

Crown corporations which were set up. He even yelled about the SGIO. But when the Liberals had the 

monopoly he grabbed this so-called no good corporation in order to bail him out. I say, shame to you, I 

say to you that you do not have the courage to carry out your convictions because all you know is cheap 

politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during our pre-election campaign we promised the people of Saskatchewan we would stop 

construction of the Athabasca Mill and I say further that a major reason we are sitting here with 45 and 

you Liberals over there with only barely enough to make a quorum, is because of Athabasca. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Four, only four. 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — It is a pity that Members like the one from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) weaseled 

his way into the position of administration in our province, had to resort to wild promises, false promises 

and loose statements to get to that position where he could sell out our products. It is unfortunate he was 

given that power because before politics he even bombed out as a toast salesman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment in this Act will stop the big give-away. What this legislation will do is to 

restore some order into the marketing and harvesting practices. It will stop the vicious disregard which 

has been shown for this resource after the past years and it will result in the people of this province, who 

own the resources and are reaping the benefits instead of giant, foreign-owned corporations which have 

Davey Steuart and the rest of his culprits in their back pocket. 

 

In our recent research it is noted that only about 10 per cent of our finished product is used for 

construction here in the province. The other 90 per cent is imported. It is totally unreasonable that we 

have to rely on such things as joists, rafters, plywood and veneer from other provinces. We have already 

made a major step in stopping this by announcing a $6 million plywood mill for Hudson Bay. I wonder 

how the Liberals feel about that project. I would caution the Liberals and their little leader to watch what 

they say because the people of Saskatchewan are listening very carefully and they know that the Liberal 

record in such things as the Water Supply Board and the brilliant German Deutsche Mark deal which the 

Opposition Leader negotiated are good examples of what they expect from the Liberals. The Liberals 

like yelling about such thing as the box factory, the woollen mill and the shoe factory which is about 35 

or 40 years old now. 

 

Mr. Lane: — You haven’t learned anything since. 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — But they get pretty quiet when we remind them that all three of these operations lost 

less than half the amount they did in two ill-fated blunders, namely the Water Supply Board and 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3072 

the German Deutsch Mark loan fiasco. If the Leader of the Opposition continues to play politics with the 

issues, if he continues to distort the facts and say anything just to make political hay, I would humbly 

suggest that he resign his seat because he is doing disservice to the people he represents by continually 

being very loose with his facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, expanding on the German Deutsche Mark loan deal, it was interesting to watch him try to 

weasel out of it when we discussed it during Estimates. He said, we should have paid it out. It is easy for 

him to say these things now that he has been relieved of his government responsibility and has been 

relegated to the benches of the Opposition. When we assumed office, we inherited a financial position 

which was not all good. Not only were finances in a poor state but our inventories were depleted as well 

with the Liberals spending the reserves our Crown corporations had built up. They sold most of the 

Crown land and most of the highway construction equipment and most of the Timber Board assets. They 

sold them at ridiculously low prices along with the assets at the North Battleford Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all I say is that once again we will pay off all these bad debts made by the Liberals and 

start building again just like we did in 1944 when we inherited the worst possible financial record and 

turned it around to a profit picture, with sound policies and programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — In 1944 only 5 per cent of our farmers and businessmen held titles to their operations 

but by 1964 and on, only 5 per cent of these same farmers and businessmen didn’t have a title. Some 

difference, indeed, Mr. Speaker. The Opposition Leader attempts to hide and justify the German loan by 

pointing out to Ontario where they went to Germany to get funds for their hydro project. Well that is no 

justification because Conservatives are the same as Liberals when it comes to logic. They both lack it. I 

challenge the toaster salesman to explain why Ontario just passed a sales tax legislation up to seven per 

cent which will boost Government revenue by $330 million. If we had increased ours to the same extent 

we would have received $32 million in Saskatchewan. Liberal logic leaves a lot to be desired, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I am mentioning these points because I think they should be considered and the people of Saskatchewan 

should keep them in their minds when listening to the Opposition Leader. He talks about his good 

financial record and all his balanced budgets. Well anybody could balance any budget if he had the 

assistance of 1,470 new taxes to be added to the revenue which was needed to offset the deficits that 

their bad policies had piled up. Another point for the Liberals opposite, they say the Socialist projects 

we started were no good and they had to clean up the mess when they came into office. Why is it then, 

Mr. Speaker, that from 1944 to 1964 the Dominion Bureau of Statistics reports show that Saskatchewan 

had the highest credit rating in Canada. During the Liberal years of 1964 to 1971 it dropped to the 

lowest. Members opposite can laugh all they want, and I just heard one there, and they can question my 

statistics but I can back them all up. I obviously get under the Opposition Leader’s skin because his only 

response to my charges 



 

April 30, 1973 

 

 

3073 

were that I had a low I.Q. 

 

For his information I would like to advise him that when I took my I.Q. test in the Air Force, which was 

conducted by highly qualified personnel, I received a very high I.Q. and as a result of my examination 

was told I had the potential for a responsible position in the force. I know I have been a bit hard on the 

Liberals during this speech but they deserve it. In fact I want to make one further observation which is 

so fitting to the loud outburst which the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) makes in this House. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, he reminds me of a hyena. You might wonder why I draw that conclusion. 

Well, let’s briefly take a look at what a hyena is. 

 

In Africa there is a coyote-like animal called a hyena. They don’t serve any useful purpose in society at 

all. For instance when the lions are in the process of hunting down a Zebra for kill, the hyena makes lots 

of noise by howling and barking and protesting the whole thing. As the lions are feasting away the 

hyena keeps on howling, but from a safe distance. Then when the lions leave the carcass the hyenas 

move in to feast on the leftovers. That is the way the Member from Milestone and some of the others 

act. They holler loud and long when we propose good legislation, but yet when he finally sees that it is 

good legislation, then he gets in line with us and wants some of the credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is good legislation . . . 

 

Mr. Lane: — Hyena legislation. 

 

Mr. Feduniak: — This legislation is another good example. The Liberals can complain all they want 

but it will serve no purpose because the people of Saskatchewan gave us the mandate to bring in this 

type of program. It is good legislation, it will work and I support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


