



















































Hansard: December 12, 1973


457 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

10th Day 

 

Wednesday December 12, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. H.H. ROLFES: (Saskatoon Nutana South) — Mr. Speaker, indeed it is a pleasure for me to 

introduce to you, 79 Grade Twelve students from Aden Bowman Collegiate in Saskatoon. They are 

sitting in the West gallery and they are accompanied by. three teachers, Mr. Washenfelder, Mr. Barber 

and Miss Zombathy. My colleague Wes Robbins and myself met with the students for about one-half 

hour just before the House opened and we were very pleased with the questions that the students had. 

One of the topics most on their minds, of course, was the topic of energy so we know that they will 

enjoy this afternoon as the Minister will give second reading to the Bill on energy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Aden Bowman Collegiate is one of the many excellent collegiates that we have in 

Saskatoon. Aden Bowman has just had a new addition put on. It has a very good academic record and it 

is certainly known for its success in football, although sometimes we at Holy Cross don’t want to 

acknowledge that. Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I should certainly like to commend Aden Bowman’s success in 

the area of drama under the successful direction of Mr. Hinitt. I hope the students enjoy themselves this 

afternoon and under the adverse weather conditions that they have a safe trip back to Saskatoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS: (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) — Mr. Speaker, I might wish to just add a word or 

two with respect to the comments of my colleague, Mr. Rolfes, from Nutana South. Perhaps it is proper 

that I do since they built that new addition on, the school now borders the Saskatoon Nutana Centre 

constituency which runs along Taylor Street. 

 

I appreciated the opportunity of meeting with the students and very much appreciated the questions they 

were asking just before the House sat. I sincerely hope they will enjoy the proceedings this afternoon in 

the Assembly and I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

SAVING OF CRUDE OIL 
 

MR. E.F. GARDNER: (Moosomin) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

direct a question to either the Premier or the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). In view of the 

Premier’s statement that he is saving our crude oil for our own people and so our 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

458 

 

own farmers can put the crops in and so on, about what percentage of the diesel fuel and gasoline now 

being used in Saskatchewan come from Saskatchewan crude oil? 

 

HON. K. THORSON: (Minister of Industry and Commerce) — Mr. Speaker, the fuels which are 

refined in Saskatchewan from crude oil are done on the basis of crude oil which comes into 

Saskatchewan from Alberta and not from Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Minister answered my question as to the 

percentage. Did he say that it all comes in from Alberta? Also would the Minister then agree that if 

Alberta keeps its oil for its own people that we would be out of diesel fuel and gasoline almost 

immediately? 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, I would expect that before Alberta runs out of oil and before the 

National Energy Board permits them to continue exporting to the United States some consideration 

might be given to the interests of people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

STUDY ON FOOD STORES 
 

MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Consumer Affairs (Mr. Tchorzewski). 

 

I note that there was a study, I understand at the request of` the Government of Saskatchewan, it was a 

matter of pricing of food stores. I understand from the study that only chain stores were studied and that 

only three chain stores were studied. Am I correct in assuming that the criteria established by the 

Government were that only chain stores were to be studied or were co-operative pricing studied, also? 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI: (Minister of Consumer Affairs) — In reply to the question, initially in 

this study which was done under the Youth Employment Service Program, the three major chain stores 

of Saskatchewan were studied and the pricing patterns in those stores were considered in that study. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I have never heard of a greater abuse of the summer employment program 

in my life. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Member realizes he can’t debate an answer. 

 

MR. LANE: — I asked a supplementary question, of why did the Minister of Consumer Affairs 

purposely avoid studying the matter of co-operative food pricing. Was it really to justify and cover up 

the Government’s failure to fight inflation or were they merely looking for, a scapegoat in pricing? Is 

that the Government’s intent, Sir! 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

459 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The comments, Mr. Speaker, by the Hon. Member opposite are on the 

fringe of nonsense. The study was made to determine the degree of integration of the food industry in 

Saskatchewan from the point of view of the major food stores, food chains and to determine what their 

share of the Saskatchewan market was. It was never indicated by myself or anyone else that that was a 

final study. It is an initial study and there may be further studies in the future on the whole aspect of the 

food retail marketing in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

NEGOTIATIONS ON ROUMANIAN TRACTOR PLANT 
 

Mr. A.R. GUY: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) and it is an appropriate question considering there are 

students from Saskatoon here today. What stage are the negotiations between the Government and 

Roumanians regarding the tractor plant that is being established in Saskatoon? 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, the negotiations between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Government of Roumania or at least the commercial companies owned by the Government of Roumania 

with respect to the possibilities of marketing tractors and assembling tractors in Saskatchewan were 

carried on very vigorously in Roumania last March. At that time some understanding was reached 

between the two parties. Late in the summer of 1973 the Roumanians came to Saskatchewan and 

informed us that they would not be able to proceed on the basis of the agreements and understandings 

entered into last March. They now said that instead of having a market area for an assembly plant all 

across North America the market area would have to be confined to Canada. They said also that instead 

of them assuming the major financial ;responsibility for bringing in the parts and carrying the inventory 

that we would have to do that. We told them that on that basis since all of our studies about the market 

potential had been based on a North American market not just the Canadian market, and in view of that 

kind of financial risk which we would be asked to take, we would be unable to proceed on the basis of 

the understanding we had in March unless they would proceed also. They said they would not and 

negotiations were discontinued on a very cordial note on that basis. 

 

MR. GUY: — A supplementary question. Could the Minister inform us of what use is being made of 

the old Fyfe Equipment site that was purchased by SEDCO for the Roumanian Tractor Company, as 

reported in the newspaper? What use is being made of that site today? 

 

MR. THORSON — Mr. Speaker, with respect to that building I am not sure that the title has actually 

been acquired at this stage -by SEDCO but certainly we have an option to purchase it. We took that 

option for the express purpose of providing space and accommodation to a Roumanian distribution 

company. They have organized their own company to do that. They had a distributor located in Alberta. 

I understand that arrangement is being brought to an end and they are looking to establish their own 

distribution agency and we have accommodated them by purchasing this building and offering to rent it 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

460 

 

to them for a time at least. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. K. THORSON (Minister of Industry and Commerce) moved second reading of Bill No. 42 — An 

Act respecting the Conservation, Stabilization and Development of Oil and Gas in Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading to Bill 42. This will be, I think, an historic occasion 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — The Members will be asked to vote on the principles contained in Bill 42. Now 

essentially, Mr. Speaker, regardless of all of the various facts and opinions that may be spoken about in 

respect to energy, world wide, in North America or in this province, in this Bill we are going to have to 

consider three fundamental issues. One issue is financial. What will be done with the profits from oil? 

What will Canadian consumers have to pay for oil products? The second issue has to do with 

federal-provincial relations in this Confederation of Canada. What are the rights of a province in 

resource development? How can we develop a national energy policy in Canada? The third and most 

important issue of all is one of fundamental political philosophy. That is this — will energy from oil, be 

treated as a public utility or will it not? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, those are the three issues we have to decide on. Those are the 

fundamental principles of this Bill. We will determine where people stand on the basis of how they vote 

on each one of those issues. 

 

Let me move quickly to outline to the House the provisions in this Bill. I will go over them in outline 

form. The Bill is in six parts. Part I which becomes effective on January 1, 1974 imposes a 100 per cent 

provincial charge by way of mineral income tax and Crown royalty surcharge on windfall profits 

obtained from the production of crude oil and natural gas in Saskatchewan if the prices exceed average 

1973 levels. That is defined in the Bill as the basic well-head price. 

 

Let me make it clear that an owner of 1,280 acres, that is of two sections of land or less, of producing oil 

and gas lands is exempt from this new provincial charge and therefore he will be able to continue to 

collect royalties on the bases of future prices even if they are higher than average 1973 levels. 

 

Where the extra income obtained is the difference between the basic well-head price, that is the average 

1973 price, and the premium well-head price which is the 1973 year end price, a difference of about 30 

cents per barrel on the average, and where this extra income is spent on research, or exploration and 

development, or processing facilities in Saskatchewan with respect to the oil and gas industry, then such 

expenditures are exempt from the income tax and royalty surcharge. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

461 

 

For expenditures on exploration after a producer has made the deduction of 30 cents per barrel he may 

claim up to 50 per cent of additional exploration when approved by the Minister in an agreement to be 

entered into with the Minister. 

 

Every six months a review of production costs can be made by the Minister upon application to him and 

he can pay back to the producer sufficient to cover these increased production costs, that is over and 

above the average 1973 prices, which are approved of by the Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what will happen to these funds to be collected by this 100 per cent tax on future 

increases obtained from rising oil prices. The revenues will go into a special oil and gas development 

fund and they will be used for the following purposes: 

 

1. They will be available to reduce wholesale prices of refined petroleum products in Saskatchewan. 

 

2. They will be used to fund the activities of Saskoil or any company collaborating with Saskoil in the 

exploration and development of oil and gas resources. 

 

3. They can be used to improve energy supplies for Saskatchewan whether it is in the form of research 

or investigation into yet unused sources of energy in the province. 

 

4. The funds can be used to encourage and assist research in oil and gas production methods. 

 

5. To assist and encourage persons other than Saskoil to explore for oil and gas. 

 

6. And, finally, of course, the funds will be available to improve the general revenues of the province. 

 

Part II of the Bill raises the acreage tax on privately-owned non-producing mineral lands from the 

present level of 20 cents per acre to 50 cents per acre. In that respect I want to emphasize the exemption 

from this mineral acreage tax for individuals owning 3,200 acres or less of undeveloped mineral rights 

will still apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this increase in the mineral acreage tax is being established in order to encourage large 

mineral owners to explore and develop them or if they continue to sit as speculators they must pay the 

Crown the new rate of tax for that privilege. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Part III of the Bill becomes effective on the proclamation of it only, that is this 

part which empowers the Minister of Mineral Resources, to set wholesale prices for refined petroleum 

products within Saskatchewan. Whether that will have to be used or not and how extensively it will have 

to be used will depend to a large extent on what the Federal Government does about retail prices for 

petroleum products. Presently they are frozen and there will be no need to proclaim this Act, so long as 

that federal price freeze remains in effect. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

462 

 

Part IV of the Bill which becomes effective on December 10, 1973, that’s last Monday when the Bill 

was introduced, takes from certain companies, which are listed in Schedule IV, and vests in the 

Provincial Government the oil and gas rights to proven reserves situated in producing tracts in the 

province. 

 

The following will be exempt and will continue to hold their oil and gas rights. First, the owners who 

have 1,280 acres or less of producing lands; secondly, beneficiaries under a trust whose beneficial 

interest is 1,280 or less of producing lands and thirdly, owners who have mineral rights below existing 

producing horizons. 

 

Now, of course, Mr. Speaker, when the Crown takes title, that title will remain subject to any existing 

lease and thus the lessee operator will be able to continue operations under virtually the same conditions 

as he has done in the past. 

 

Compensation to the title holder shall be made by allowing the company to retain its royalty interest on 

the basis of prevailing prices for crude oil and natural gas at the well-head in Saskatchewan on 

December 10, 1973. 

 

The company may also be paid by another option, and the option is up to it to exercise if it wishes to do 

so and if it can enter into an agreement with the Minister. The company may be paid a discounted lump 

sum which is based on the remaining proven reserves and Bank of Canada prime lending rates at 

December 10, 1973. 

 

Now in some cases the owner and the operator will be the same company and consequently there will be 

no lease in existence. In that case the owner shall retain a royalty interest based on the appropriate rate 

under existing Crown royalties for such wells and it shall have a lease from the Crown under which 

production shall continue. 

 

Let me point out for special attention Sections 36 and 37 of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. Under Section 36 the 

Crown may acquire mineral rights by purchase and may acquire liens by purchase as well. Now there 

will be an amendment to that Section, a House amendment, to clarify that the Crown’s authority to 

purchase mineral lands is universal in the province and is not confined as the present wording would 

suggest ‘only to those minerals not otherwise affected by this Act’. 

 

Section 37 contains an error in the wording, which is misleading and is not intended. Section 37 will be 

amended to substitute the word ‘surrender’ for the word ‘cancellation’ so that the Crown may acquire a 

lease by purchase or by surrender from the present lease holder. 

 

Part V of the Bill, which becomes effective on the day it is passed, amends The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act by broadening its scope and enlarging the powers of the Provincial Government to 

control the production of oil and gas in Saskatchewan. 

 

Henceforth our conservation principles, which will apply, will be based on wider concerns than simply 

technical matters of maximum production over the life of the field. It will be concerned with such 

matters as long term supplies and reserves for the province and with some economic considerations. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

463 

 

Part VI also becomes effective when the Bill is passed. It authorizes the Cabinet to make regulations to 

carry out the Act, consistent with its spirit and intent and it also forbids oil operators from stopping the 

production which would cause damage or loss to proven recoverable reserves. 

 

There are also four Schedules to the Act. 

 

Schedule I amends the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulation of 1969, to provide for the surcharge on 

Crown royalties which I spoke of when I began to outline the provisions of the Bill. 

 

Schedule 2 establishes basic well-head prices and as I have mentioned those are average 1973 prices for 

Saskatchewan crude oil. 

 

Schedule 3 establishes premium well-head prices and those other prices related to current, that is this 

month’s (December 1973) prices for Saskatchewan crude oil. 

 

And, finally of course, Schedule 4, lists the companies whose producing oil and gas rights will be taken 

into public ownership subject to existing leases and subject to the right of the company to maintain its 

royalty interests that it has now, based on the basic well-head prices for 1973. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to some of the background which preceded the introduction of this Bill. 

Particularly, let me draw the attention of the Members to price increases and profits of oil companies. 

They have risen sharply in recent months. The trend is likely to continue. All are a combination of 

various factors at work. There is world-wide inflation. There are ever-increasing rates of energy 

consumption, especially in the United States, which creates increasing demand. The oil producing states, 

especially those in the Middle East, are deliberately raising prices and holding back supplies. Shortages 

of oil are showing up in various places and those feeling the pinch are bidding up prices. These factors 

have had a spectacular effect on crude oil prices in Saskatchewan. Using a weighted average, the price 

of Saskatchewan crude during 1972 was about $2.43 per barrel. The average for 1973 is about $3.08 per 

barrel. The present 1973 year-end price averages about $3.38 per barrel. How did this come about? 

 

Well there have been a series of crude oil price increases for Saskatchewan producers and they are as 

follows: On November 6, 1972 up 10 cents a barrel; on January 9, 1973 up 20 cents a barrel; on May 1, 

1973 up 25 cents per barrel; on August 1, 1973 up 40 cents per barrel. That’s a total increase in nine 

months of 95 cents a barrel. 

 

So, the oil producers in Saskatchewan in August 1973 were getting 95 cents per barrel more on the 

average than they were in October, 1972. That’s an increase from $2.43 to $3.38 in nine months. It’s 

about 40 per cent higher in 1973 than the average of 1972. 

 

After allowing for varying times for price increases, the average for 1973 is going to be, as I said, about 

$3.08 per barrel. That’s an increase of 65 cents per barrel higher than the average of $2.43 in 1972. 

 

Now, obviously, this had the effect of increasing revenues 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

464 

 

for crude oil producers in the province. Those revenues, when gas production is included, were about 

$224 million in 1972. They will probably be $276 million in 1973. That’s an increase in revenues of $52 

million. Now to be fair the costs have gone up as well. One item of cost increase for the industry, but of 

benefit for all of Saskatchewan, was the increase in Crown Royalty from the previous average of 10.6 

per cent to an average of 15.8 per cent commencing April 1, 1973. The expenditures or costs to the 

producers in 1972 were $126 million and are expected to be $143 million or $111/1 million in 1973. 

That’s an increase of $16 million. But the revenues will go up $52 million. So the oil producers will be 

better off by $36 million this year than they were last year as a result of their Saskatchewan operations. 

 

Let’s just look at the significance of these changes. Way back in 1954 the oil producers spent $45 

million in Saskatchewan and received in revenues only $8 million. By 1964 the industry started to break 

even, so that by the end of the year the gross revenues received from 1947 to 1964 were equal to the 

total expenditures in the province. In 1964 revenues were $192 million and expenditures were $130 

million. A profitable difference of $62 million. The profit in 1972 alone was $98 million and this year as 

I said, that will increase by $36 million, so that revenues will exceed expenditures by $134 million. 

 

In the 25 years ending in 1973, the oil and gas industry will have spent in Saskatchewan $2.3 billion. 

But its revenues have been $3.1 billion. So, it has taken $800 million from its activities in this province 

in two and one-half decades. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the background which takes us up to the current year, just before the 

introduction of the export tax by the Federal Government on all crude oil exports going out of Canada to 

the United States. 

 

As I said, the price of crude went up 40 cents per barrel on August 1, 1973. The following September 

4th the Government of Canada announced it would impose an export tax of 40 cents per barrel on all 

shipments to the United States commencing October 1, 1973, and also the Federal Government called 

for a freeze on domestic prices. According to the announcement these were temporary measures and 

would end by the 1st of February 1974. 

 

But the outbreak of hostilities in October in the recurring Arab-Israeli war and its aftermath has had the 

result of reducing oil supplies available to eastern Canada which is almost wholly dependent on 

non-Canadian sources. It has also resulted in a jump in international prices for crude oil. 

 

To keep pace with these price increases the Federal Government’s export tax was raised to $1.90 per 

barrel on December 1, 1973. 

 

On Thursday, December 7th of this year, the Prime Minister announced that the domestic price freeze 

will continue until the end of this winter and the export tax is to be continued after February 1st next 

year. The rate and expiry date were not announced. 

 

What do these export taxes mean in terms of revenue on exports of crude from Saskatchewan to the 

United States? Well, 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

465 

 

we export about half of our total annual production of 85 million barrels, so when the tax was 40 cents 

per barrel, the Federal Government would have collected $17 million per year on Saskatchewan crude 

oil exports. At the rate of $1.90 per barrel, the tax by Ottawa on our oil production which is exported 

will be at the rate of $82 million per year. 

 

Now, from the time of its imposition the Saskatchewan Government has supported the export tax as an 

efficient way to keep in Canada the revenue which results from the sale of our depleting oil reserves to 

United States’ customers. Without the export tax or an alternative the extra money would go to the oil 

producing companies. We think these windfall profits should accrue to the Canadian public. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — That is to the governments in Canada. 

 

However, we have insisted that the producing provinces have first claim on these extra revenues. I wrote 

to the Federal Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources to that effect on September 21, 1973. I repeated 

our request to him at the Mines Ministers’ Conference in Victoria on October 1st and I wrote him again 

on October 17, 1973. I followed that with a telegram to him on November 7th. I attended on him in his 

office in Ottawa on November 9th and again repeated the Saskatchewan position. The most recent 

occasion when this question was discussed was on November 23 in Toronto when all provincial 

governments were represented at a meeting with the Federal Minister. 

 

So far, the Government of Saskatchewan has nothing but press reports and verbal statements from 

Ottawa which suggests to us that we will get a share of these revenues. I was told verbally by the 

Federal Minister that Saskatchewan would get 40 per cent of the revenues but would receive some 

reduction in equalization payments as a consequence. Since the Prime Minister’s statement in 

Parliament last Thursday, I understand the percentage has been raised from 40 to 50. Again, I expect 

Ottawa still wishes to reduce the equalization payment to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is clearly not satisfactory. And all of us have to ask ourselves what can be done? Well, 

it is obvious to us in the Government of Saskatchewan that we have to impose some form of tax which 

we have the authority to do under our constitution. Otherwise this province will not receive the 

maximum benefit from the production and export of our oil. 

 

As a province we cannot impose an export tax or do anything else which would amount to legislation 

dealing with trade and commerce. That’s an area of exclusive federal jurisdiction under our constitution 

as it is found in the British North America Act. 

 

However, we can legislate to deal with property in the province and to impose direct taxes in the 

province. That is what we intend to do by passing Bill 42. When it is passed there will no longer be any 

necessity to impose the federal export tax on crude oil leaving Saskatchewan for United States markets. 

Should we do this, Mr. Speaker? I say under our 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

466 

 

constitution we can and we should. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — In support of that position I call to witness none other than the Hon. Donald 

Macdonald, Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources in the Federal Government. In the House of 

Commons on October 25, 1973 the Minister was speaking about the appropriate division of revenues 

which accrue from the rising crude oil prices. He made it clear in his statements (as indeed his export tax 

has made it clear) that he did not think the oil companies should get the windfall. But on the position of 

the producing provinces he had this to say as reported on page 7222 of Hansard: 

 

It seems to me that if the province has chosen to protect a particular level of royalty as being the best 

and equitable return to that province from the resource, then we should take their word for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a statement from the Federal Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources in October 

of this year. 

 

Now if the Saskatchewan Liberals are going to support the Federal Liberals I would expect them to take 

heed to what the Federal Liberal Minister said about the right of the province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — The right of the province to collect what it deems to be, as the Minister said, “The 

best and equitable return to that province from the resource.” Indeed, Mr. Speaker, both the 

Governments of Saskatchewan and of Alberta have been told by the Federal Minister that we should be 

capturing these windfall profits for the public. In Saskatchewan, Bill 42 will do just that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Now what will be the financial consequences for this province? As I said, this 

legislation gives to the Minister powers to collect additional revenues. It will be done by defining the 

international price for oil as either the price at Chicago or at some other place in the USA less the 

transportation charges from Saskatchewan and, of course, it allows the Minister to define that 

international price at a lower figure. The revenues we collect will be the difference between that 

international price and the lower basic price, the average 1973 price in the province. 

 

Now obviously, Mr. Speaker, we can vary the international price from time to time and from place to 

place. Exports can be based on Chicago prices. Sales in Canada can be based on alternatives which 

apply in Canada, let us say for instance, the Montreal price. 

 

How much revenue is likely to be available? Well let me give the House two examples based on current 

sales of 85 million barrels per year going half to the USA and half to Canada. I wish to emphasize that 

these are examples only, and while 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

467 

 

they could be reality, they are not intended to be the current situation nor necessarily a precisely accurate 

prediction of what may apply in the future. In the first example, let us suppose that the price at Chicago 

is $4.98 per barrel, that would be the basic price of $3.08 plus $1.90. Let us suppose that the domestic 

price is $4.03 per barrel, 95 cents less than Chicago. Then Saskatchewan should receive either $120 

million per year, if we tax everything over the basic well-head price, or $95 million per year if we tax 

everything above the premium well-head price. The difference is $25 million per year. That’s the sum 

that would be left with the industry provided it spent the money on research, exploration or processing 

facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me give a second example by way of illustration of what could happen. Suppose the price at 

Chicago is $5.28 per barrel, that would be $3.09 plus $2.20. Let us suppose the domestic price is $4.33 

per barrel, still 95 cents less than Chicago; then Saskatchewan should receive either $145 million per 

year if we tax everything over the basic well-head price or $120 million per year if we tax everything 

above the premium well-head price. Again the difference is $25 million per year, if the industry spends 

that sum in Saskatchewan on research, exploration, or processing facilities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I emphasize that these examples are based on what could happen in the future. 

Revenues in the hundreds of millions of dollars will be available to us if prices for crude exports either 

remain as they are about $1.90 per barrel above domestic prices or go up another 30 cents per barrel and 

if domestic sales realize only 95 cents per barrel more than the present price for oil. The domestic price, 

as I said, is now held down by the Federal Government’s temporary freeze on prices, so that freeze 

which we are told will end at the end of the current heating season, could easily mean that prices for 

Saskatchewan crude on the Canadian market would rise by at least 95 cents when you consider that that 

would still be way below the international price. 

 

Please note, Mr. Speaker, that these anticipated provincial revenues will still leave the industry making 

profits at current levels. In other words the industry will still have the benefit of the price rises that 

occurred in the last year or so to the commencement of the federal export tax on October 1, 1973. That 

will mean that the industry will be taking out of Saskatchewan about $130 million more per year than it 

spends here. 

 

No one can say that that is a bad deal for the industry in Saskatchewan. No doubt they would like to 

have more money. Who wouldn’t? But they have no right to more. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — The future windfalls should come to the people of Saskatchewan. The people have 

a right to demand that for public benefits. Under our legislation they are going to get it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, there will remain a useful role for the private sector in the oil 

industry in Saskatchewan. No one in 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

468 

 

that sector will be worse off in the future. Each will have full advantage of price increases to the average 

1973 level. There are going to be incentives to expand. If there are expenditures on research, 

development and processing facilities that incentive will be at the rate of 30 cents per barrel which will 

be exempted from the new tax, provided the money is spent here. Further exploration costs can be 

exempted up to 50 per cent of the level of expenditure. 

 

Rising production costs will be recognized as a legitimate deduction from tax. 

 

If some say that better geological prospects and greater financial incentives will attract capital 

investment elsewhere then that strengthens the argument in favor of retaining more future oil revenues 

in public hands to expand Saskoil’s activities so that exploration and research in Saskatchewan is given 

some priority. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — As the exploration and research expands by the private sector and by Saskoil there 

will be increased opportunities for work by consultants, drillers, service personnel and all others who are 

needed in the oil industry. We need to increase our long term supply position as well as hold down 

wholesale prices, but, Mr. Speaker, we can’t do either without the additional revenues which the 

measures in this Bill will provide 

 

I turn now from financial matters to the rights of the province in Confederation. As I have always 

understood the position we have the right to control and reap the benefits from the development of our 

natural resources. For Saskatchewan that was surely the situation at least after 1930 with the transfer of 

these resources to the province by the Federal Government of the day. We all understood that to be the 

situation. But in the third week of October of this year we were shocked to find the Federal Government 

challenging that fundamental principle. The Minister of Justice, Otto Lang, is applying to be joined as a 

plaintiff in action started by a company opposing the Province’s potash conservation regulations. From 

January 1970 to June 1971 under a Liberal Government in Saskatchewan no challenge by Ottawa. In 

fact the present regulations on potash were worked out in 1969 in consultation with the then Minister of 

Justice, John Turner. Why the change of attitude? Mr. Speaker, it must be the Liberal Party, in Ottawa 

and apparently in Saskatchewan. The Liberals are trying to prevent this province from controlling 

development of its natural resources as it sees best. 

 

Fortunately the British North America Act affords us some protection from this assault on provincial 

rights. We can legislate on property. Therefore we must gain legal title to the oil in the province in order 

to protect ourselves from further attacks by Ottawa. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Now it is true, of course, that a simple imposition of tax would be easier but it 

would not be safer is we are to 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

469 

 

accomplish our objective of determining who gets the windfall profits from future increases in oil prices. 

Mr. Speaker, those who vote for the Bill are supporting the principle of provincial rights to control 

resource development in the province. 

 

This Government, Mr. Speaker, looks forward to participating in a federal-provincial conference on 

energy by first Ministers early in 1974. We think that will speed up the development of a sound 

comprehensive national energy policy. There is an urgent need for such a policy. We want to play our 

part. When we attend the conference the position of Saskatchewan should be clearly understood. The 

passage of this Bill will tell other provinces and the Federal Government where we stand. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — We assert our rights under the Constitution. We want the benefits available from 

the development of our resources. We are willing to negotiate on such matters as the price of our crude 

oil sold in Canada but concessions on our part should bring reciprocal benefits in the form of redress, of 

freight rate inequities, stability for our agricultural economy, more rapid industrialization of the prairie 

region of Canada. 

 

We want a truly national policy so that the term Canadian unity has a significance and value for our 

children that it has so far not had for us or our fathers before us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, that is not a parochial or provincial attitude. Quite the contrary. We 

have always been proud to be Canadians and we, in the West, have always paid the price for being 

Canadians. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Sometimes that has been a very high price indeed. We have had freight rates 

which discriminate against us; we have had tariff walls that keep up the prices of the things we buy. We 

have been, on international markets, often forced to sell at low prices the products of our labor here in 

Saskatchewan and in Western Canada. But, Mr. Speaker, we have paid. 

 

Now others will share with us the burdens as well as the benefits of being Canadians. Surely the spirit of 

sharing does not suggest that people in eastern Canada will pay foreigners a high price for oil but will 

only be willing to pay us a lower price. What kind of Canadianism would that be? Let me be clear. 

Saskatchewan is prepared to co-operate in maintaining a price for energy in Canada that is related to 

Canadian conditions and Canadian costs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — But that has to recognize all our conditions and all our costs in western Canada. It 

is in that truly Canadian spirit that we look forward to a national conference on energy. We need the 

support of this Legislature and the passage of this 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

470 

 

Bill when we go to that Conference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by setting out our position on the most fundamental issue of all. This Bill 

affords every, Member an opportunity to vote according to his fundamental political convictions. More 

important than financial matters or federal-provincial relations is the question of the right of every 

citizen to have his government serve him and at the same time be responsible to him. That is the kind of 

government we try to be. That is why we have brought forward this Bill at this time. It is a Bill that puts 

the public interest first. We are not inhibited by any other doctrine and we are not restricted by any 

masters except the people of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — We do not hesitate to have the Government take an active role in the economic 

activity. After all the job created in the public sector and a service rendered by a Crown corporation is 

no less valuable than if it was in the private sector. Nor do we think it necessary for the Government to 

own and have title to all productive assets in order to make them serve the public interest. Insofar as Bill 

42 takes public ownership of oil it is only because that method is now necessary when the rights of a 

province in resource development are under attack by the Federal Government. 

 

In the energy industries we are convinced of one thing. The so-called market economy will not 

satisfactorily allocate resources or distribute benefits. All energy industries are characterized by the 

monopolistic positions of producers. Therefore their prices and profits must be regulated in the public 

interest by democratically elected governments. Decisions about what to spend and where to spend 

investments in energy require public participation which seeks a greater good for all individuals in 

society than the narrow view of private investors or corporate managers who are not answerable in a 

truly democratic sense to the public. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — For those who say that public funds should not be used in risky matters like 

searching for oil, I remind them that the public is already providing the money. Mr. Speaker, there is no 

classical, economic competition of the Adam. Smith type in the oil industry. And, indeed, there cannot 

be. We should not deceive ourselves by a myth that has no reality but which can only allow private 

greed, armed by corporate economic power, to overcome the public good. 

 

We know, in Saskatchewan, how we should proceed in energy matters. The history of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation affords us an outstanding example of how the public utility concept can be of 

service. I ask the Members to remember the features that are so outstanding about the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. First let’s look at the expansion of the corporation in the electric system, in the gas 

system. That expansion over the last 25 years would not have been possible if we had not had one 

system which can cross subsidize between various areas and various consumers and which has a 

deliberate policy of universal service. And, Mr. Speaker, in that expansion, 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

471 

 

particularly in the last two years, we have been extending our gas reserves by exploration undertaken by 

a publicly owned Crown corporation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — I ask the Members to look at the cost to customers for the SPC. It’s a well-run 

corporation. We get full value for the rates we pay. These low rates would not likely have been possible 

under private enterprise. 

 

Thirdly, I ask Members to look at the effect of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation on our economy. 

We need low cost energy which is essential to industry. There is a place in that for outside contractors, 

particularly in matters of construction and in coal mining, to contribute to the work of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. 

 

Because of the expansion and the position of the Power Corporation, many service industries have 

expanded, the electricians, people in appliance stores and the like. In Saskatchewan our farmers are well 

served by having more power available to them because of our publicly owned Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. 

 

Fourthly, I ask the Members to look at how easily we are able to borrow money for the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation to invest in capital expansion for present and future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Canada, in Saskatchewan, we have to apply the same principle to oil that we have 

applied to electricity. These are not matters for private profit. The energy we need is too important to be 

left in private hands alone. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — Those who incur costs and render service in the energy industry must be paid and 

should be paid well. But after that is done, the surplus funds, which are now available in the oil industry 

belong to the public and not to private corporation or interest groups. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — I do not mean by this that the structure and organization of the oil industry must 

follow in every particular and detail what has been done in the various provinces in electricity. But the 

principle of public interest before private profit has to be established and institutionalized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 declares that principle and provides the means to make that principle effective here 

and now in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THORSON: — I urge Members to support the Bill on the vote. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

472 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 42 be now read a second time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, it was two days ago that the 

Blakeney Government presented to the Legislative Assembly a new law which they claim will conserve, 

develop and stabilize the supply and price of natural gas and oil in the Province of Saskatchewan. This 

Act will give the NDP Government almost total control over every aspect of the oil industry from the oil 

well to the service station. This law that the Blakeney Government intends to bulldoze through the 

Assembly with no consultation, no open hearings and no honest opportunity for public discussion, will 

also allow them to literally confiscate and seize leases now owned by private individuals and companies 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Everyone, everyone, Mr. Speaker, should be clear and should clearly understand that this law is the 

beginning of the takeover of another industry by the NDP Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Using the oil crisis in eastern Canada and other parts of the world as an excuse, the 

Blakeney Government is moving in to nationalize this vital industry. To accomplish this, they will break 

long standing agreements, they will confiscate other assets. The NDP will decide themselves, no one 

else, exactly how much will be paid for the leases thus seized with no negotiations or no opportunity to 

appeal their decision to any board or to any court. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, common decency and common justice would allow any individual, or 

company, to at least a hearing before a price is set on the value of their private property before it is 

seized by any government. But, this, Mr. Speaker, is not the NDP way, as we have seen in their 

treatment of the timber industry just a year ago; of the hearing aid dealers, just a few months ago; and of 

the hog producers over one year ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look at the crisis that set the stage for this power play by the NDP Government. 

 

The Arab countries, in an effort to apply pressure to Israelis and their friends, have sharply reduced the 

flow of oil to some western nations and sharply increased their prices. This has resulted in a serious oil 

shortage in the United States, in other countries and in eastern Canada. The reduction in oil supplies has 

caused industry to curtail production and lay off workers in some cases. In fact, many of the western 

nations affected by the Arab oil boycott are in the midst of a recession. Eastern Canada has not been hit 

this hard as yet, but a long cold winter could put Canadians in that part of the country in a most difficult 

predicament. What about the Province of Saskatchewan? 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

473 

 

We, Mr. Speaker, in the Province of Saskatchewan, we have all the oil we need now and for a long time 

in the future as long as the Province of Alberta does not cut us off. Let’s make that very clear. Thanks to 

the Federal Government, to their price freeze, we have not faced any exceptional price increase in the 

cost of oil and gas to the public. In fact, the only price increase which we have had to pay here in 

Saskatchewan was caused in part by the NDP Government when they raised oil royalties, thus adding to 

the cost which was passed on, in some cases, to the consumers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have no immediate crisis here in Saskatchewan, but we do have a problem and this 

problem should be dealt with by the Provincial Government. It is, of course, the responsibility of the 

Blakeney Government to take whatever steps are necessary to guarantee reasonable prices to our people 

for oil products and an assured supply for as long into the future as is possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this regard, we in the Liberal Party, would and will support any measure brought in by 

the Government to keep prices at proper levels and to conserve our energy resources for our own use, 

now and in the future as well. 

 

How would we go about this if we were the Government? Well, first we would tell the people the truth 

about our own oil and that is that we have very little of it that we use for our own selves here in 

Saskatchewan. Most of our crude oil is either too heavy or too sour to be refined in our present 

Saskatchewan refineries. As a matter of fact, we sell it to eastern Canada, or to the United States, where 

they have constructed refineries especially to handle Saskatchewan crude. So the first thing we should 

be doing if we want really to ensure our farmers and other citizens of an adequate supply of gas and oil 

for the next 20 or 30 years, is either to get guaranteed contracts from Alberta, or change our refineries so 

that they can, in fact, refine Saskatchewan crude oil or both. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we do this we had better hope that the Government of Alberta is prepared to honor 

leases and contracts better than our own NDP administration. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Or the deal won’t be worth the paper it is written on. Ninety-six per cent of the oil 

used in Saskatchewan comes from Alberta, and if the Alberta Government took the same attitude as the 

Province of Saskatchewan, the economy of this province would be in danger of coming to a standstill. I 

don’t think that the NDP Government should forget this when they take the very narrow, narrow 

regional view that they are taking in regard to our oil resources at the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something else. The NDP Government had better quit spending millions on part interests 

in meat packing plants and steel industries which don’t need or want their money and start looking at our 

present refinery capacity. Anything less than this, giving us a guaranteed supply from Alberta, or doing 

something about our refining capacity in this province, is just play acting and is doing nothing to ensure 

either price or supply stability for the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

474 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, as far as price is concerned, we in the Liberal Party, do not, and I 

repeat, do not believe that our oil and gas prices should be set by an Arab power play or by international 

oil companies or anyone else over whom we have no control. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

We, in Canada, are the only industrial nation that is actually self-sufficient, in oil and gas as well as in 

hydro power and nuclear energy. So we can, and must, control both the price and the supply of all forms 

of energy. This means governments at all levels should use their power to control the production and the 

price of both oil and gas. But, Mr. Speaker, it does not mean the confiscation or the nationalization of 

the oil industry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It means that proper and reasonable controls to safeguard the best interests of our 

people and at the same time encourage the development of more oil and gas reserves by independent 

companies, by the government, by themselves through incentives, or through joint ventures. This does 

not mean that we in the Liberal Party would stand idly by watching oil companies reap fantastic profits 

because of the present artificially created world shortage. 

 

In fact, it was the Federal Liberal Government that moved in to control prices with the export tax and 

price freeze months ago. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I want to repeat that so the people of this province clearly understand that it was 

the Federal Liberal Government that moved in to control prices with the export tax and the price freeze 

months ago. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, Premier Blakeney has done nothing. He sat in stunned silence while 

international oil prices climbed and these large oil companies he complains about today, stood to make, 

and in some cases did make, huge fantastic windfall profits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Let the people of this province remember that it was the NDP Government of the 

Province of Saskatchewan that sat idly by, doing nothing about profits, about supply, until the Federal 

Liberal Government moved in and put on export tax and put on the price freeze. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why did the Blakeney Government fail to act? Was he too busy playing games with 

the breweries, giving away our money to Mr. Mendel and the Intercontinental 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

475 

 

Packers, to recognize the real crisis developing in the oil industry? I don’t know the answer. Maybe he 

wanted oil prices to skyrocket and supplies to become short so that he could move in to take over the 

industry claiming he was saving our farmers and car drivers from the clutches of the great giant oil 

monopoly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this was the case, his plan backfired because the Federal Government acted with speed, 

decisiveness, and they stopped runaway prices before they began. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I can tell you — they ask me who writes this — well they have a little trouble 

understanding the truth, if they believe what we heard from the Premier last night and the Minister 

today. Let me make it clear that we in the Liberal Party will support proper government legislation to 

control the oil prices and make sure our people have their needs looked after, now and in the years 

ahead. But just as emphatically, we will oppose this NDP move to break agreements, seize leases and 

take over the oil industry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We will oppose it because it is another example of the Blakeney Government 

failing to honor its contracts, breaking Government commitments, driving investment, men and brains 

out of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We would oppose it further, Mr. Speaker, because it will in the long run result in 

less oil and gas discoveries in Saskatchewan and will mean eventually higher prices for all forms of 

energy for our people and make no mistake about that. This has already happened with our hard rock 

mineral resources. 

 

Since the Blakeney Government came to power, there has been little or no mining exploration and not 

one new mineral discovery made anywhere in the Province of Saskatchewan. The two uranium mines 

that are coming on stream - Gulf Minerals, Rabbit Lake and the Mottka Mine south of Athabasca Lake, 

came in when we were the Government and as a direct result of our incentive program. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — The timber industry have had every contract and every lease broken by Mr. 

Blakeney and his Government, the man who will soon unveil his plans for a great number, I understand, 

of Government owned sawmills and veneer plants, all of which I predict will eventually fail, costing the 

taxpayers millions of dollars. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the real harm in this Bill is what it is doing and will do to our reputation as a province. 

Seize control, grab power, break contracts, take away property, put people out of business, are actions 

one would expect from a 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

476 

 

banana republic in South America. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But, Mr. Speaker, seizing control, grabbing power, breaking contracts, taking away 

property, put people out of business are fast becoming the hallmark of the Blakeney regime. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I have said before that the NDP Government declared war on business as soon as 

they came to power. This vicious law proves it beyond a shadow of any doubt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill does something else. It is blackmail to eastern Canada, 

including the Maritime Provinces. Not just Ontario and Quebec, but the Atlantic Provinces as well are to 

be held up to ransom by the Blakeney Government if they want our oil. 

 

The Premier said last night — Oh, they can have our oil, but someone, someone must pay us the full 

world price. What I say today — and someone says Hear, Hear! What you people in the NDP are saying 

to other Canadians is this — and remember you don’t really have that much oil — but what you are 

saying is exactly this: Whatever the Arabs can gouge out of the Yankees, Blakeney will gouge out of 

eastern Canadians. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I looked over at the NDP benches and I saw some of 

them applaud. They may applaud this but I will point out that this knife cuts two ways. We just got, after 

years and years of fighting, the two-price system for our wheat after many years of fighting and 

negotiations. This means now that when the world price of wheat drops below $3 per bushel, and it will 

unfortunately, our farmers will still be paid $3 for every bushel of wheat consumed in Canada and the 

Federal Treasury will make up the difference. That was put in by a Federal Liberal Government and 

negotiated by many western Canadians of all political stripes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — That two-price system has already meant millions of dollars to Saskatchewan 

farmers and I say it will mean hundreds of millions of dollars in the years ahead. Most of it will be paid 

by eastern Canadians. 

 

Now, of course, Mr. Speaker, we have many complaints and have had ever since we came into 

Confederation about unfair treatment from the East from successive federal governments about freight 

rates, about financial matters and about tariffs. I say that we are beginning to make some progress. I say 

to the NDP and to the people of this province that this cheap ‘dog in the manger’ attitude will balkanize 

this country, will 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

477 

 

set East against West and will set back our fight for equity and will help to pull this country apart, not to 

unify it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I found the Minister’s statement that he and the NDP were acting as Canadians, the 

most blatant piece of hypocrisy I have ever heard in this House. What they are actually doing is 

blackmailing everyone in eastern Canada because now at this moment in time they think they have some 

little advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let it be remembered that the amount of oil that we in Saskatchewan supply to Ontario and 

the Maritimes and the rest of the eastern Canada is relatively a small amount of their total needs. And for 

this small immediate little gain, I say the Premier is acting in a very irresponsible manner in the face of 

all the other important negotiations that he, as the head of our Government for all our people will be 

facing as long as he sits there as Premier. 

 

I say if we do this, if we blackmail eastern Canada, we will be paid back many fold and we will deserve 

it. Sure we have been treated unfairly in the past, but again we are making some progress. I believe that 

the Premier should at this time, because this advantage won’t last that long, I believe our Premier should 

set an example and act as a Canadian and not heap fuel on the problem of Canadian unity to gain a few 

cheap votes that he thinks he might gain by this policy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, why is the Blakeney Government really taking this action to 

nationalize the oil industry and to gouge the rest of Canada for every cent we can wring out of them 

during this short-lived crisis? 

 

First, the NDP have promised to nationalize or socialize, yes socialize, our resource development. They 

started last year with our timber industry. This year with the oil industry. Next year I suggest it will be 

the potash industry. However, let me say this, to those farmers, for example, who think the NDP will 

stop with the big fellows, the resource development. Let me remind them of the Land Bank and the 

compulsory Hog Commission. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Let me remind the farmers listening in that this Government, the only government 

in the history of this country that has already launched a program to acquire more and more of our farm 

land, in fact, they have now bought something like $30 million of prime farm land. They have not, I 

repeat, have not sold one acre nor do they intend to. 

 

I say how can anyone, any farmer with a lease, for example, with the Blakeney Government who openly 

boast of breaking contracts. They did it here to our people who came from the North the other day. The 

Premier boasted, yes, we have in fact, broken every contract with every timber industry, large and 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

478 

 

small in the Province of Saskatchewan. I say how can any farmer or anyone else feel safe when they 

have signed a lease with that outfit, the NDP, the Blakeney Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Why else have they done it? Saskoil, and as has been mentioned Saskoil has been a 

failure, Saskoil was laid in front of this Legislative Assembly in an attempt, I guess, to appease the left 

wing of the Party. Saskoil has been a failure. I think the Blakeney Government hopes by grabbing some 

land with great oil potential that they still might make Saskoil some kind of a success before the next 

provincial election. 

 

I say to the people of this province, who is next on. the list of NDP takeovers? I would say our number 

one industry, agriculture will be next if this Blakeney Government survives the next election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I say again, with already $30 million of farm land already bought up and not one 

acre returned, I warn our farmers that they, the major industry in this province with our single greatest 

resource, our farm land, will be next if the NDP Government survive the next election. 

 

What about the money grab? Why has this Government moved in to take advantage or joust with the 

Federal Government? Of course they are entitled to most if not all of the taxes from oil. And, of course, 

he should negotiate and, of course, the Federal Government will give some of it to him and we will 

support him in his negotiations to get all that is coming to the people of Saskatchewan from our oil 

industry. Why this money grab? I think it is to pay to begin with for the so-called free hospitalization, 

so-called free medicare; the meat packing plant, more welfare, Cabinet world travel and a host of new 

Government employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tragedy of this is that after the oil crisis is over, and it will pass, we will have kicked 

our best customers when they were down. We will have guaranteed an end to serious new investment in 

our province. We will stand, in fact, they the NDP, the Blakeney Government and he is Premier, we will 

stand for all to see as a Premier and as a Government whose word and whose contract mean absolutely 

nothing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — You, Mr. Premier and your NDP Government will have,consigned us, the people 

of Saskatchewan, to continue as a third rate province not to be trusted by anyone as long as you are in 

power. 

 

This has been described as a vicious Bill and it is. It will have the most serious repercussions now and in 

the future. Not even your supporters deny that. The Government is going to rush this through with no 

chance for anyone in the industry for anyone in the public to be heard or to make suggestions. This 

Session was called to present to the people serious 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

479 

 

legislation and then give them time to consider it. This is the only really controversial Bill we have seen 

and they say they are not going to rush it. Well, you didn’t watch your Premier on television last night, 

he said we will sit here until we pass it. And with 45 to 15 you will be able to steamroller it through in a 

short time. But I challenge you if you are serious about democracy, if you are serious about listening to 

the public as you say, refer this Bill to a committee. It wouldn’t hold it up, you could still have your 

meeting in January, with your Bill in your pocket. Refer it to a committee. What’s the rush? What’s the 

mad rush for a week or two? Refer this Bill to a committee, have hearings even if they only last three or 

four days. I tell you there will be people who support you, there will be people who oppose you and 

there will be people in the public that neither support or oppose you, but really want to know. And it is 

just possible, Mr. Premier and your Members of your NDP Government that there are people in this 

province and outside this province who might come forward with good well intentioned, sincere 

suggestions that would help you do what you say you want to do. If, in fact, you say you want to control 

prices, and we applaud that, if in fact, you say you want to really conserve our oil, our gas, for the best 

and long term use of our farmers and other people in this province, we applaud that and so do all people 

in this province, then take the public into your confidence. Give the public a chance to say what they 

really feel about this Bill and to offer suggestions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I say to you, Mr. Premier, don’t use your huge majority to steamroller this Bill 

through, a bill that will change the direction, not just of the oil industry, I am not talking about the oil 

people, they can look after themselves. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It won’t mean anything to the oil industry if they leave this province and it won’t 

mean anything to our party. But I say to you, what you are doing now will affect the development and 

the future of people in this province, not just now but for decades ahead. So I say, give the people a 

chance for at least two or three days to come before you, make their case, listen to them and by some 

chance you may find that someone might have some intelligence beside you. You know you are not the 

possessors of all the intelligence, you are not the people, just because you got elected with 45 Members, 

who have all the knowledge or all the good will, or all the desire to make this a better province, you are 

not. So I say, I challenge you to listen to the people. In two or three days they would flock here, they 

would put their case for and against and neutral, then bring the Bill in and I guarantee you if you do that 

we will do everything to assist in the passage of the Bill, even if we don’t agree with it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I challenge you to do that. As the Bill now stands your arrogant dictatorial attitude 

now stands, we, in fact, will oppose the Bill with everything we got. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

480 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD: (Regina Albert Park) — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister in presenting his case 

to the Legislature a few minutes ago, seemed very impressed that the oil industry had spent $2.3 billion 

and have taken out $3.1 billion in a little over a quarter of a century. I can reflect that this $800,000 

profit taken by the oil industry in a quarter of a century . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . $800 million. 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — I am sorry, this $800 million taken by the oil industry in just over a quarter of a 

century is just about double what the New Democratic Party cost the farmers of Western Canada in two 

years by their attack upon the Grain Stabilization Bill brought in by Otto Lang. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Premier on television last night. I have listened to the 

Minister in the House today, I do not accept their interpretation of the Bill, I do not accept their facts in 

support of the need of the Bill. I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the total principle of this Bill is whether 

or not you believe in federalism in Canada today. A vote in favor of this Bill by any Member of this 

House is a vote against federalism. It is a vote against Canada in Confederation as we now know it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — In case there be anyone in doubt about where I stand in this House, I can assure the 

Members that as this Bill is now structured with the hodgepodge that it now is, of the various claims and 

the various items in the Bill, I will not support the Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — I can assure the Members that there should be no mistaken view that this is any 

conflict with the oil companies. It is not. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — If it were simply a conflict with the oil companies, if that is all it was, then of 

course, this Bill would simply be a question of ideology, it would find rapid traffic through this House 

with comments from this side and that is all. But I can assure you that it is our intention to oppose this 

Bill every step of the way, simply because it is an attack upon Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — I can assure you that what has happened here will not go unnoticed across Canada 

and I can assure you that the fate 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

481 

 

of the NDP in other parts of Canada may well stand in the balance. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — To begin with, there is some talk about windfall profits. Well, these windfall 

profits occurred because world prices of oil rose. But they did not rise in Canada. The so-called windfall 

profits are excess purchase prices paid by Americans to Canadians. But that excess profit is taken by the 

Government of Canada as a tax, a tax which was supported in Ottawa by David Lewis. This windfall 

profit is created because the Americans are going to pay more for crude oil coming from western 

Canada and other parts of the world. But the price in Canada has been held down by Federal 

Government action. The extra price that Americans pay is an extra amount of money from our natural 

resources which goes into the Federal Treasury for the benefit of the Canadian people and large amounts 

of that have been offered to the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill proposes, to do two things. First of all it wants to 

jack up the price of oil so that the rest of Canada pays the same amount foreigners and United States 

people pay and, secondly, having created that artificial windfall, the Government of Saskatchewan 

proposes to take it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last night on television the Hon. Allan Blakeney said the following — while he supported 

many of the measures, in fact, all the measures put in by the Federal Liberal Government with respect to 

the energy crisis, he said as follows: 

 

We do not, however, accept the Federal Government’s division of proceeds from the export tax, which 

gives to the producing provinces only half of the windfall profits on exported oil. 

 

Further he said: 

 

Shortly, our policy is to capture for the people of Saskatchewan the full benefit of all future windfall 

profits. 

 

What he meant by that, Mr. Speaker, was simply that he wanted to create windfall profits out of the 

pockets of other people in Canada and put that into the hands of the Provincial Treasury. Mr. Speaker, 

he said further: 

 

We intend to see that all future windfall profits go entirely to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if they simply were taking money out of the pockets of the oil companies and putting 

it into the Treasury, it would be a matter of taxation well within the power and perhaps well within the 

desired policy of the Province of Saskatchewan. But that isn’t what he is doing. That isn’t what the 

Minister is doing and that isn’t what the Government is doing. 

 

What is happening today is that the Government of Saskatchewan is putting itself in direct confrontation 

and playing 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

482 

 

confrontation politics with the Dominion of Canada. It is a conflict with the Federal Government. And I 

can suggest also that it is a conflict with David Lewis. Because I can assure you that David Lewis will 

have some fine time to explain to the people of Ontario and Quebec and the Maritimes and British 

Columbia and other parts of Canada, why the price of their fuel has doubled and why it was done by the 

NDP. In fact, the only two governments in Canada that are taking this narrow and dangerous attitude are 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Alberta. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this was therefore designed to create a windfall and then take that windfall. We do 

not agree with the efforts of the New Democratic Party to balkanize Canada, to split Saskatchewan off 

as a separate state and I can assure you that the conduct of the Province of Saskatchewan, of that 

Government, has never been duplicated in confederation before. No other province in Canada has 

attempted to gouge another province the way the Province of Saskatchewan is now attempting to gouge 

its fellow provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it takes a good deal of courage to present the kind of case that was presented by the 

Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson). He said that the revenue must go to Canada. He is now 

speaking of the export tax, but the provinces must have first claim. Not only must they have first claim 

but they want it all. Not only do they want it all they want every nickel of the equalization payments that 

they have been getting up until now. Not only that, in this House and in the Throne Speech, the 

Government indicates that it is continuing to demand from the Federal Government further equalization 

payments, further payments for projects such as the Qu’Appelle River Basin. I can assure the 

Government of Saskatchewan that it will have a very little amount of sympathy from the rest of Canada 

the next time it appears at the bargaining table with the Dominion of Canada, with provinces elsewhere 

in Canada. If this Government gets Saskatchewan a good severe kick in the pants it will be just exactly 

what the New Democratic Party deserves. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — What is really happening is this. The Minister of Mineral Resources says that they 

are putting on a 100 per cent tax. He is not pretending that he is entitled to do this because of The British 

North America Act. He has rightly said that the Federal Government has the right to deal with trade and 

commerce. He has rightly said that the Province of Saskatchewan has the right to deal with mineral 

resources, all of its natural resources. But what the Province of Saskatchewan is attempting to do is to 

take away from the Dominion of Canada its rightful powers in trade and commerce by means of a trick. 

The Province of Saskatchewan is saying that although the Federal Government does have, for the benefit 

of all of Canada, the right to regulate trade and commerce under the pretence of regulating natural 

resources, the Province of Saskatchewan will take away a federal right which the Dominion of Canada 

has. 

 

I can assure him that in my opinion the courts will look very carefully at this and I suggest that they 

might declare this ultra vires because it is simply a trick by the Province 

 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

483 

 

of Saskatchewan to do what it ought not to do, and what in confederation it can’t do if we are to have a 

confederation. 

 

What was said by the Minister was this. He quoted the Hon. Mr. Don Macdonald, the Federal Minister, 

saying that the province should do what is best and equitable for a return to the province. In fact the 

province should take its best in equitable return from its natural resources. 

 

Surely to goodness no one in his right mind would consider a 100 per cent tax as equitable. A 100 per 

cent tax is not equity, it is confiscation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not do some of the things that it might have done. What 

about the oil leases and the oil titles a few years ago that were taken from farmers in Saskatchewan by 

unscrupulous brokers. In the late ’40s and ’50s many of the farmers in Saskatchewan lost their minerals 

because of the travelling around Saskatchewan of these unscrupulous people. Usually they were not 

legitimate, national or multinational corporations, they were just simply unscrupulous people who 

walked around Saskatchewan, taking away the farmers’ mineral rights during the time that the CCF 

Government was in power. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — The CCF Government at the time and the Minister the Attorney General of the 

day, made a number of noises. They said how sad it was, they passed a Bill which wasn’t really a Bill; 

they passed a Bill which urged some renegotiation, but the fact of the matter is this — that at no time in 

history, at no time has the CCF Government done anything to rectify the wrong they permitted upon the 

farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — And nothing in this Bill proposes to return to the people of Saskatchewan or to the 

farmers, their rightful share of mineral rights which were taken away from them, so wrongfully, so many 

years ago at the time when the CCF Government was in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what bothers me so much about this Bill, besides its obvious attack on confederation, is the 

credibility, the image creation that it attaches to the Province of Saskatchewan. It convinces the rest of 

the world — and if it convinces everyone else it should convince every person in Saskatchewan — that a 

deal with the Government of Saskatchewan is not worth the paper that it is written on. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — No agreement which is made by anyone with the New Democratic Party in power 

is of any real value. Not only have they torn up the timber regulations and the timber agreements and the 

Athabasca Pulp Mill agreement, they have now destroyed 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

484 

 

the very basis upon which trust is normally built. The urging of the CCF Government in the ‘50s 

brought many of these companies to Saskatchewan. At the urging of Tommy Douglas, then the Premier, 

at the urging of the Minister, these companies came to Saskatchewan and in all sincerity and honesty 

they developed the province, as requested by the province. 

 

These people at the behest of the Minister of Mineral Resources in those days, bid upon Crown lands. 

These companies got permits from the Province of Saskatchewan to drill wells. These companies 

actually spent millions and millions of dollars at the request of the CCF Government and brought some 

prosperity to Saskatchewan. That deal is now over. It has been totally cancelled by the present 

Government. It has been totally cancelled and brings shame upon the province. I don’t care but if you 

make a bad deal and don’t have the courage to live with it you shouldn’t be in power and you shouldn’t 

be allowed to make a deal. 

 

What is happening very simply is this, that the Government is confiscating. It is baying to the oil 

industry — what you now have you may keep, but we will confiscate all surplus values in the future. 

And, because of this, because today’s value is below what the future value is, we won’t pay you for it. 

The Minister said that all future values are going to be subject to a 100 per cent tax. 

 

When I was about the province a year or two ago with the Foreign Ownership Committee, a number of 

New Democrats brought briefs to the committee. A number of them spoke privately about it and they 

were of the view that the province should take and keep all future values that accrued to anyone in 

Saskatchewan, including the farmers. And they said that if a farm was in existence in Saskatchewan and 

the value was $100 per acre, there was no reason why the farmer couldn’t continue to farm that land, but 

if it went beyond $100 in value that the increase in value should belong to the Government and not to 

the farmer. 

 

Now that is the very kind of confiscation which this Government is now bringing about to the producing 

oil lands in Saskatchewan. This is larceny! Now, true, there may be larceny in the soul of more than one 

person and may be a little larceny in the souls of some people in this Legislature, but let us not pretend 

that it is anything else. We have given these people contracts and they had every right to expect, that 

over the years, values would accrue to them. They had every right to expect that oil would go up in 

value. They did not have the right to expect that the Province of Saskatchewan would say, we set the 

value today, all future values will belong to us. 

 

Now quite frankly that is not an honorable position for this Province of Saskatchewan to be in. Of 

course, the Government is not, in any way, daring to put its money where its mouth is. This 

Government, very wisely, chooses not to take over the operation of the oil industry. Now I admit that it 

is a very clever plan to say to them that the value that you have today you keep but all future values 

belong to us. But more than that, you must continue to operate the fields. You must continue to operate 

the fields or you don’t get your own value out. You must continue to operate the fields or you will be 

punished by a fine up to $1,000 a day. 

 

Now what the Government of Saskatchewan has done is that 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

485 

 

it has said to the oil industry, having come to Saskatchewan at our request, having in good faith put 

money into the ground in Saskatchewan, having discovered oil and having commenced to operate these 

fields, you will now be punished if you dare to leave. We have created a captive slave in the oil industry. 

We will fine them if they do not continue to operate on our behalf and on behalf of themselves. 

 

Surely to goodness the day of slavery would have been passed. Now you can shake your heads all you 

like, if you shake your heads at your conduct, you are at last coming to some form of conscience. But I 

can tell you that you gentlemen have no conscience or you wouldn’t be doing what you are doing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — The courage of the Government of Saskatchewan, with 44 Members out of 60, is 

very clear. They don’t trust to have this deal put before the courts. They don’t trust to have a fair-minded 

independent individual say what the real and fair market value of this oil business is today. They have 

deliberately said that The Expropriation Act of Saskatchewan shall not apply to this, consequently the 

courage rests with members but not with an impartial arbitrator. The Government of Saskatchewan, if it 

had any courage at all, if it believed it was doing the right thing, it would do two things. 

 

First of all, it would take over the oil industry and it would pay a fair price for it. And if it took over the 

oil industry and paid a fair price, it would be prepared to let some independent party decide what that 

fair price is. But the buyer of the business is setting the price and forcing the price upon the industry. 

That takes a lot of courage when you have 44 trained sheep over there. 

 

I wish the Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) were in here because he might well agree with me that 

some of the Members who attend church the oftenest are the most larcenist when it comes to taking from 

someone else. And that is exactly what is happening in this House. The Hon. Members over there who 

go to church the oftenest, are the most eager to steal from the people they enticed to come to 

Saskatchewan in the first place. And if you had any courage at all, you would allow this thing to go to 

the courts; you would allow the value today, not tomorrow’s value, not some other year’s value, but 

today’s value to be determined in the courts. And then you would make a fair deal with the oil industry 

if you wanted them to keep on operating the fields and you would make a fair deal with them to allow 

them to do so as operators. And I can assure you that many of them would be very pleased to carry on 

just as operators and not as owners. 

 

The Government, not only does it not dare to have the value fixed by an independent party, it forces by 

fine and threat the companies. It will not allow them to go from Saskatchewan even if they should 

choose to do so. 

 

I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that some of the remarks made by the Government are totally intended to 

fool the public. I now believe, Mr. Speaker, that some of the comments made by the Premier and by the 

Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson) were also intended to deceive and confuse some of the 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

486 

 

Members of the House opposite. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, in his remarks the other day the Hon. Premier said the following and I should 

like to quote some of his remarks, very briefly. He said: 

 

The Federal Government is before the courts contending that we, in Saskatchewan, have no right to 

control our potash production through a potash conservation board, that we must leave all decisions on 

how much potash is produced solely to the private companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that is false. The Premier knows that is false, he is a lawyer. The Hon. Attorney 

General (Mr. Romanow) knows that is false and the Minister of Mineral Resources knows that that is 

false. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if he wants to confuse the public, perhaps while I regard it as inappropriate politics, 

while we don’t think that it is the kind of thing that we should see in this day and age, it is obvious, Mr. 

Speaker, and bad enough that it is, it is obvious that the Premier is using that to fool the other Members 

of the New Democratic Party. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the Federal Government is merely attempting to restate its position that it 

has the right to control trade and commerce within Canada. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Why didn’t you do it? 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the Member, the reason that the Government did not go to 

court is because at the moment it was not before the courts and the Federal Government had made up its 

mind that it would not go to court, it would only go to court as an intervener if someone else took it to 

court. If the Hon. Member for Nutana (Mr. Rolfes) knows anything at all about law he would spend a 

little time checking his facts before making ridiculous remarks. 

 

The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that this was brought to court by one of the potash companies, 

which is attacking the very program which was brought in by the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan, 

which was attacked by the New Democrats when they were out of office, which is supported by the New 

Democrats now that they are in office, which is the kind of flip flop which I don’t mind, because if you 

admit that you are wrong, say now we are wrong and we are going to change our position. At least I can 

respect you. The fact of the matter is that that potash pro-rationing program is now being supported by 

the New Democratic Party. And the fact of the matter is that one of the potash companies is attacking it 

in the courts. And, because it is attacking it in the courts, the Federal Government must make sure that 

the position of the Federal Government, as to trade and commerce, is properly presented to the Supreme 

Court of Canada. That is the long and the short of it and if any Member over there has the courage to 

look at the case he will find out that what I am saying is totally correct. If you nod your head it is 

because you don’t have the courage to go and find out what the facts are. The matter is a public 

document, it is in the courts. It is not necessary for any one of you to take my word for it. All you have 

to do is go and look at the court records and you will find out. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

487 

 

The fact of the matter is that the Premier knows that very few people, including the Members of the New 

Democratic Party, will go to check it out. As a result, Mr. Speaker, the Premier perpetrates this kind of 

nonsense on the air and his caucus and it just, frankly, isn’t true. The fact of the matter is that the Federal 

Government is protecting its marketing position under the British North America Act and does not at 

any time attempt to attack the position of the Provincial Government on conservation boards and, in fact, 

that is a matter accepted by us, by the Government of Alberta, all the provinces in Canada and by the 

Federal Government of Canada. The right of the province to regulate production is not under attack. It is 

not under attack by the Federal Government and it is not under attack by the Opposition because we 

supported it all along when in Government and will continue to do so in 1975 when we get back on that 

side of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — I can assure the Hon. Members, if they have any courage at all, and aren’t so 

blinded by their ideology, the fact of the matter is this, that conservation boards are now and have been 

supported by all governments of Canada. The fact of the matter is this, that the Premier is telling a total 

untruth when he suggests that the purpose of the Federal Government is to attack conservation boards, 

because it just isn’t the fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must confess that the Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources, in presenting the Bill to the 

House today, in moving second reading, did touch very firmly upon the kind of problem we face. He 

talked about the question of federal and provincial relations. I appreciate that because that is in fact what 

this whole problem is about. The Minister of Mineral Resources actually allowed me to tear up the first 

three pages of my speech because he, in fact, clearly to the House laid it on the line that it was a question 

of Saskatchewan versus other provinces of Canada, Saskatchewan versus the Dominion of Canada. 

 

When we deal with that, we deal squarely on the real fundamental policy and the very fundamental 

issues. The New Democrats will vote one way and we will vote the other, because I believe that a vote 

in favor of this Bill is an attack upon confederation. That is where the debate must and will rest. Any 

effort to bring it anywhere else is not an accurate presentation of the Bill. 

 

We can argue about such things as Section 15. The Government says that this Bill will increase the 

development of Saskatchewan. I say, it will not. That is a matter of fair and reasonable debate. I say that 

the Government of Saskatchewan will find that the Milk River reserves of natural gas, for example, will 

not be developed unless the price rises. The Minister himself said so one year ago. This is a matter of 

fair and reasonable debate. But I can assure the House that what the Government is probably doing is 

killing the goose that laid the golden egg. They are going to try to hold prices down, they will thereby 

make further developments particularly of such reserves as the Milk River gas reserves — and I give 

that only as an example — they will continue to have them uneconomic and as long as they are not 

economic they will not be developed. In my view what will happen as a result of this Bill is that there 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

488 

 

will be less rather than more development in Saskatchewan. Now that is a matter of debate, it is not a 

question of policy so much as the fact, we think what you are doing is wrong. It isn’t a question of 

ideology however. We think you can not have development when you put a 100 per cent tax upon the 

company or upon anyone else and that is a matter of ideology. 

 

Now, we support a national policy. I enunciated it the other day and with every respect to our good 

friends in the news media, when I read my speech in the House and then read it in the newspaper I was 

not sure that it was the same speech, but I am not in any way accusing the newspapers of bad faith. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . socialist Press. 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — No, it isn’t a socialist Press. The Hon. Attorney General can not persuade me that 

it’s a socialist Press. Surely they’ve got more sense than that. 

 

What I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that sometimes these words do get out to the public in a way that we 

wonder about, but certainly no bad faith was involved, it’s just that my national policy statement didn’t 

come out in the paper as clearly as I had hoped. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — We need a Press Council. 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — No, we don’t need a Press Council. I would sooner have the human failing of good 

faith than a Press Council which may avoid errors except the deliberate ones. 

 

Now, I can assure you that a national oil policy does not involve the 100 per cent taxation of the profits 

of an industry. It does not involve the kind of conduct we have here today, where one province sets itself 

against all other provinces. 

 

If the Province of Quebec with its huge steel resources decides to take the same action, if tractors double 

in price for our Saskatchewan farmers, there will be the greatest scream from that side of the House you 

ever saw. It will be an eastern attack upon the West. We will go through all the same arguments we have 

had before. When we have a chance to build a new Canada, when we have a chance to act as responsible 

citizens in Canada, the Government of the day leads us down into the path of narrow selfishness. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest that there is no reason for hurry, there is no reason for haste in this 

Bill. The export tax will remain in place, prices of gas and oil in Canada will remain at a stable level, 

thanks to the actions of the Federal Liberal Government. There is no reason why this should be hurried 

through the House unless it is in the furtherance of a design by the Government to attack the Federal 

Government. 

 

I have a few more remarks to make to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. No, I 

withdraw that motion. While I did beg leave I withdraw my request, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to suggest 

to the House that we will, before closing debate on this, make a motion to the House that this be set over 

until the resumption of the Session in the new year. I think it goes without saying that because of the 

federalist principle 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

489 

 

involved in this Bill, I will not support the Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS: (Saskatoon University) — Mr. Speaker, whenever I have to sit in this House 

and listen to the energy policy of the Members to my right my heart fails me. 

 

Quite seriously I challenge the Members on this side of the House that when they start criticizing 

Government policies they at least make an effort to get the facts right. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — It’s all right, I’ll be getting at you in a minute Roy. I’ll be getting at you in a 

minute. 

 

When the Member on this side of the House talks about 100 per cent tax on the profits of an industry, 

that’s the most drivelling misrepresentation of the facts pertaining to the oil industry that I have heard 

today. 

 

The profits of the oil industry in western Canada doubled between 1972 and 1973 due to price increases. 

The legislation which the Government has introduced plans to leave those past windfall profits in place 

and the Member from Regina Albert Park talks about 100 per cent tax on profits. I challenge the 

Members that when they start criticizing this Bill, when they start talking about energy they take the 

trouble to get their facts at least moderately correct. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Government for having belatedly recognized the problem of 

profiteering in the oil industry. I’d like to undertake a very slight, very quick review. 

 

In 1972 according to Canadian Petroleum Association of Canada the industry had spent a total of $1.28 

billion to discover approximately two billion barrels of oil, making an actual average capital cost of 

discovery of oil in Saskatchewan of 64 cents. Again, according to the Canadian Petroleum Association 

the operating costs of producing a barrel of oil in 1972, including provincial royalties, was 86 cents, for 

a sum total of $1.50. That, Mr. Speaker, is based upon figures coming out of the Canadian Petroleum 

Association and there could be lots to challenge about double accounting and whether the figures are 

generous or not, but they are not liable to be accused of being something originating in Next Year 

Country. Here are some hard concrete estimates of costs in that industry of $1.50. The average price of 

oil sold in 1972 from Saskatchewan — $2.44 making a 94 cents per barrel profit for the industry, given 

the 87 million production last year, 82 million in profits. 

 

Then, November came and then came the 10 cent oil increase. January 1973 came and there came a 20 

cents per barrel oil increase. May of 1973 came and a 25 cents per barrel oil increase. August came and 

there was a 40 cent per barrel increase. And now, Mr. Speaker the question has to be asked, those 

figures which I quoted about 94 cents per barrel corresponded with the figures which the Government 

was using at the time, they knew as well as I did that there was this 95 cent per barrel increase, 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

490 

 

announced in four successive stages and by August of 1973 they knew what had gone on, they knew 

what had happened to profits in that industry and yet the Government had done nothing, Far from 

attacking the situation, in August 1973, it bears repeating, what were the comments of the Minister at the 

time of the last increase? I quote: 

 

The Hon. Kim Thorson, Minister of Mineral Resources commenting on the latest price increase for 

Saskatchewan crude said the latest increase of 40 cents per barrel will mean an extra $2 million in 

provincial revenues from royalties on Crown oil produced in the next eight months of this fiscal year. 

Further benefit will accrue to the Treasury next year from mineral taxes on free-hold oil production, 

which will be based on the increased value of the 1973 crude. 

 

As late as August of 1973, Mr. Speaker, far from attacking the problem of corporate profiteering in oil, 

the Government was being bought out because of a mere $2 million increase in royalty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not a situation which inspires confidence and it’s the kind of evidence I alluded to in 

my previous speech, talk about the existence of energy schizophrenia on the part of the Government. 

 

Nothing was done. Nothing was done by Regina to stop corporate profiteering in August 1973, in May 

1973, in January 1973, in November 1973. The first action that came of any type to try and control the 

situation was the belated and half-hearted moves from Ottawa. Ottawa imposed in September, a price 

freeze, and Ottawa imposed a tax on exports of $1.90 a barrel which is to be increased to $2.20 a barrel 

starting next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those were the initial attempts, belated, half-hearted measures, I’m the first to agree, to try 

and deal with the industry. And now in December of 1973 we finally have a provincial response in the 

form of the Bill which was tabled in the House on Monday. I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that one can’t 

understand this Bill, unless one puts it in the context, that this is a provincial response to the Federal 

Government’s moves of the price freeze and the export tax. 

 

The argument is that oil under the British North America Act comes under the definition of local 

properties under the jurisdiction of the Provincial Government and accordingly the provincial argument 

is that the Federal Government should not be imposing the export tax or all revenues from that tax 

should accrue to the province and, secondly, that there should not be an implied, implicit subsidy to the 

remainder of the country by under pricing Saskatchewan oil relative to the international price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the thrust. The thrust is that this is — to use the analogy with the union negotiation 

— this is the initial offer of the Provincial Government to the Federal Government in an attempt to 

bargain over who is going to get the money from that export tax and who is going to pay the subsidy 

involved in holding the prices down. 

 

I could quote the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. The Throne Speech alluded to the intent that future 

unearned increments in 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

491 

 

crude oil prices over and above the level of prices which have prevailed during the immediate past 

period must be retained for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The clear indication from the Throne Speech, from the comments of the Minister today, upon 

introducing second reading of this Bill, was that this Bill was not aimed at the oil companies. The oil 

companies were to be allowed to maintain the profit that they have unjustifiably earned, given the price 

increases in the previous 12 months. The whole thrust of the Bill is directed at Ottawa. 

 

On the one hand, the Minister said he would leave the profits for Ottawa for the oil companies that they 

had earned in the past, that this was not a punitive measure and he was at pains to elaborate this is not 

punitive legislation against the oil industry. Surely the profits of $130 to $150 million, which they are 

earning currently, given the price increases in the last 12 months, do not indicate penury. On the other 

hand at the end of his speech the Minister talked about the need for private ownership, talked about the 

need for public control, talked about the fact that we must develop the oil in the interest of the public 

and not the corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we have this problem of the energy schizophrenia. On one hand, the Bill which 

allows the profits of the corporations to remain in place, on the other hand a great deal of elevated 

rhetoric about the need for public control and public benefit from the energy industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make it perfectly clear that I do find myself in agreement with the 

Premier and the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Thorson) about the argument that this resource is 

essentially under provincial jurisdiction and I think that the argument can well be made and it should be 

made well. But let’s back up just a minute. How in the past has provincial jurisdiction been used with 

respect to resources? The Member from Regina Albert Park made reference to the Potash Conservation 

Board. I think he’d be most unwise to make such references. Because if ever there was a conservation 

board which was designed to increase prices in one fell swoop, that was it. It increased the price, which 

was then prevailing at $20 a ton to $33.75 a ton floor. If ever there was a Bill aimed against the little guy 

that was it. Forcing up, nearly doubling the price of potash as an essential ingredient in fertilizer which 

was used in eastern Canada and the United States. 

 

That has been the history of the Potash Conservation Board and given that history of the use of that 

board, the use of provincial jurisdiction in order to ensure the profit of the potash companies there is 

some justification, I must begrudgingly admit, for Otto Lang getting in there on the side of Central 

Canada Potash and arguing that something should be changed. 

 

Also if we look at what Alberta is doing. What’s Alberta doing? They are arguing exactly the same case 

with respect to provincial rights. They are establishing an energy commission. I’d like to quote from the 

Calgary Herald, Friday December 7th, the Minister of Mines and Minerals, Mr. Dickie. 

 

The oil will be sold by the Alberta Commission at the highest prices that it may reasonably negotiate, 

having 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

492 

 

regard to market conditions prevailing at the time of the sale. The producer will get the entire proceeds 

of the sale and the Commission will make no money on this oil. 

 

Let me repeat that: 

 

The producer will get the entire proceeds of the sale and the Commission will make no money at all. 

 

In other words, Alberta is using the argument for provincial rights in order to be the agent of the oil 

corporations in getting back any tax money from Ottawa to give it to the oil companies. I think the 

appropriate analogy there is to say that the Alberta Government is very roughly speaking as the pimp of 

the oil industry. But we can carry on. 

 

If we want to use provincial rights, if we want to use provincial rights in order to argue a case with 

respect to energy policy, let us be crystal clear that we are not doing it in a narrow selfish sense of 

merely enriching ourselves. Let us be sure that we have a sense of socialist vision about what we would 

do with the revenue. What we could gain if we did publicly own this industry. I think that in that context 

it’s totally unbefitting any socialist government, Section 15 of the Bill, which specifies that the funds 

which will be garnered perhaps by this tax will be spent within the domain of the oil industry. That 

section talks about reducing the wholesale price of refined petroleum products. Surely from an 

environmental perspective, we should not be arguing for cheap fuel. We should make exceptions for 

farmers, for heating fuel, but in general we should be arguing the case for higher energy costs, in order 

to serve as an effective barrier to wasteful use of a wasting resource. 

 

Again, the fund could be used to encourage and assist persons to explore and develop the oil. The 

Premier has talked about it, I have talked about it, everybody in the New Democratic Party has talked 

about the boondoggle involved in subsidies to pursue exploration. Here again we have a subsidy to 

exploration. 

 

If we are going to make a credible case to the public for provincial rights in oil, it is not good enough to 

make reference back to the British North America Act. We have to say what we are going to do which 

makes a significant change in society in order that the people should be prepared to support our struggle 

to get the rights and the profits from the oil industry. 

 

We should be prepared to state that these funds will be used to end poverty in northern Saskatchewan, to 

buy back our most important resource, the land, or various other imaginative schemes which could be 

thought of. The money should not be siphoned aside and said that it belongs to the oil industry and 

should be used in some selfish manner to keep down our gasoline prices or to finance exploration in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must at this time request the attention of Members. I am going to engage in some very 

elementary arithmetic and if Members have not had their grade four arithmetic they are going to find it 

very hard to follow. So I invite all Members to wake up and take their pencils and if need be, make notes 

about these appropriate numbers. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

493 

 

At the beginning I mentioned the costs in 1972. Capital costs 64 cents a barrel, operating costs 86 cents 

a barrel, total cost $1.50 a barrel. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a very elementary calculation might be made to say there are approximately 800 

million barrels of oil left in reserves in Saskatchewan. It costs historically the companies approximately 

64 cents on average to discover their oil, that oil in place, we shall say is approximately worth $500 

million. All right, $500 million we are going to save the historical cost of discovering the reserves which 

remain in place. The profits, as I said, in 1972 at the price then prevailing of $2.44 a barrel was 94 cents 

a barrel — $2.44 less $1.50 — 94 cents a barrel times 87 million barrels for a total profit of $82 million. 

1973 — let’s allow a certain inflation cost, let’s allow the cost per barrel has gone up to $1.63, being 

quite generous here not wanting in any way to halt the argument by failing to take account of inflation, 

let’s say $1.63 is a reasonable estimate for 1973 costs. I would say it’s high but I am willing to use these 

Canadian Petroleum Association figures to emphasize the argument. The average price according to the 

figures released by the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) for 1973, $3.08 for the year — that’s not the current 

price, the current average is $3.38, I’ll come to that later. The average price was $3.08, that leaves a 

profit per barrel on average in 1973 of $1.45. Now using that figure $1.45 a barrel, total profits this year 

are $125 million and taking that on $500 million capital to be the rate on return on capital of 31 per cent. 

In other words by leaving the present situation in place there is a 31 per cent rate of return on the capital 

invested by the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I must demand the attention of Members for a few more figures. I took the liberty of 

phoning the National Energy Board this morning in order to get from them — right from the horse’s 

mouth — what is the international price of oil on average laid down in Chicago. The Minister, during his 

speech, made reference to figures like $4.98. That’s out, Mr. Speaker, by $2. The average laid-down 

price of oil in Chicago of Arab oil, light, which is somewhat inferior to Saskatchewan on average. The 

average was $6.80 laid-down price in Chicago, Middle East Arab oil. The cost per barrel through the 

pipe line from Saskatchewan to Chicago is 42 cents a barrel. So net, the price for Saskatchewan oil on 

average, the international value of it and deducting from that transportation cost to Chicago is $6.38. 

Now had the oil industry been able to increase their prices to the international level of $6.38 this year 

and assuming again this $1.63 cost figure, they would have had the most incredible situation of $4.75 

per barrel profit, multiplying by 86 million barrels, giving a total of $408 million in profit for a rate of 

return on capital of 84 per cent. Now obviously they couldn’t do that, obviously they didn’t manage to 

do that. Another point which must be realized here is that the price laid down in Chicago of Canadian 

oil, an average $3.38 plus $1.90 making $5.28, is nowhere near the international price. What the 

international companies have obviously done is they are taking in the States, through their refineries and 

retail operations part of the profit by keeping down in some sense the Canadian price. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another piece of very elementary calculation I did, when I said let’s assume that we 

are going to allow the oil industry a fair rate of return and that word ‘fair’ 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

494 

 

is obviously a dicey concept to play with, and I won’t use the socialist definition of it, we’ll use what the 

average was in mining as reported in Corporation Financial Statistics 61207. The average rate of return 

on mining in Canada in 1970 was 9 per cent. Assuming that there should be a 9 per cent of return on 

assets, not on equity, not on shareholder equity that would be a higher figure, there should be 51 cents 

per barrel profit over and above the $1.63. Therefore the maximum price which the oil companies 

should be allowed to earn in Saskatchewan on their oil is $2.14, $1.53 plus 51 cents, if we were prepared 

to force them down to a ‘fair’ rate of return. I want people to realize the dimensions of these figures; 

$2.14 a. barrel provides the oil companies a fair rate of return defined as the average for mining in 

Canada, not $3.08 as is provided in the Act under the base-price system, not $3.38 as is provided in the 

premium level, but $2.14 provides a fair rate of return, including all costs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the Bill supposed to do if we take it at face value. If we take it at face value 

and we calculate the tax based upon the difference between the international price, which I quoted $6.38 

less $3.08 average base price, you’ve obviously got a very large sum. You’ve got a sum $6.38 less $3.08 

which is $3.30 and if that tax were levied on the oil companies it would result in them losing all but 8 

cents of any revenue they gained. Clearly the Bill is not intended to be taken at face value if the 

Minister’s comments about leaving past profits in place are to be taken seriously. The point to be made 

is, as I said et the beginning, this Bill constitutes an initial offer in a bargaining process with Ottawa. But 

let’s assume the Bill, for the sake of argument, Mr. Speaker, were to be taken at face value and there was 

to be the imposition of this kind of taxation — there are many, many places in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

which would stand a good deal of second thought. In the definition under Part 2 of what is to be the 

international price, the Minister has got complete discretion and can obviously reduce it. 

 

When we come to look at Section 6, Mr. Speaker, the Minister can increase the base price where there is 

a cost increase every six months. Surely giving the analysis which I went through previously about 

$2.14 providing a fair rate of return, we don’t need to legislate into the Bill, increases, allowing for cost. 

 

Section 10 of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, allows for the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to exempt anybody 

from the taxation. Section 14, allows for deduction from the tax payable for exploration. Back into the 

old boon-doggie of subsidizing exploration which we have all berated so many times in other 

administrations. Now let’s make it perfectly clear what Section 14 is about. Section 14 states that for 

exploration purposes the industry can get a rebate on the difference between the $3.08 figure and the 

$3.38 figure, the difference between the prime and base level. And if you multiply that difference of 30 

cents by 86 million barrels, the total potential rebate if all rebates were made, merely amounts to about 

$26 million. Since the oil industry is already conducting about $40 million in exploration and 

development activities in the province it is a fairly safe bet that the province would, under this clause, 

return the full $26 million in subsidies. In. other words the base level becomes a kind of an arbitrary and 

useless set of figures which was thrown in for the sake of the public, 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

495 

 

I assume. 

 

If you turn to Section 15 (3), I made earlier reference to Section 15, Mr. Speaker, as unbecoming a 

socialist administration in implying that all the funds which were earned by this oil industry had to be 

plowed back into it. But Section 15(3) is even worse because it allows the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to make rebates out of the fund, or make such exemptions from the tax 

imposed by Sections 3 and 4, as the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council wants to do. In other words this 

Section allows the funds to be used to subsidize the oil companies. 

 

Back in Section 5, Mr. Speaker, it refers to exemptions from nationalization of freehold rights of up to 

1,280 acres. Now this figure of 1,280 acres intrigues me because I was interested in precisely what that 

meant in terms of potential oil under the ground to be exempted. Obviously the lower level is zero and 

obviously under any given acre which is held under the freehold there can be little, none or a lot of oil. If 

we use some of the mere high density oil planes in Saskatchewan in the Weyburn-Estevan area and the 

various thicknesses and the various calculations about recovery, it means up to 2.5 million barrels of oil 

may be exempted under this 1,280 clause. Do we seriously want to leave in private hands that kind of 

oil. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I trust that I have made the point that the Bill is fraught with loopholes if one is 

interpreting at face value, but that the Bill should essentially be viewed as a bargaining tool with Ottawa. 

The Bill, given the statements of the Government and the Throne Speech and the Minister in introducing 

second reading, explicitly states that the Bill should not be interpreted as punitive on the oil industry in 

terms of extracting profits which have been earned in the past but that the Bill is expressly designed as a 

back up to the federal legislation and regulation which limits price increases. One realizes that the thrust 

of the Bill is against Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me make passing mention about the freehold issue. The Bill, in its appropriate sections 

which refers to bringing freehold rights of certain 25 companies under public control. I think the basic 

reason for doing that is to strengthen the constitutional position of the province in laying claims to 90 

per cent of the oil which would then be Crown oil should that nationalization be effective. I am fully in 

agreement as far as it goes. However, why are we exempting those under 1,280 acres provided we 

provide the kind of compensation allowed for in this Bill which is the most generous of compensation 

based upon immediate cost prices. Hardly any of the freehold oil people, oil right owners, can complain 

if they receive the compensation spelled out in this Bill based on the premium prices of $3.38 on 

average. But when it comes to the corporations that are listed at the end of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, why 

do they deserve any compensation at all? I would argue that the logical position for any socialist 

government to argue with respect to these corporate villains at the end of this Act — it’s a fine black list 

that they have got there on pages 20 and 21 — such great contributors to Canadian prosperity as 

Hudson’s Bay Company, Canadian Pacific Railway and its subsidiaries. These people have long since 

received in the form of royalties far more than they ever invested to get these freehold rights and in 

many cases they never paid a penny for these freehold rights. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

496 

 

Let’s go back to the Canadian Pacific Railway for a minute. The Canadian Pacific Railway in 1881, it 

might be interesting to refresh the memories of Members opposite, under the agreement which was then 

signed by the Federal Government, showed that the largess of the Canadian people was almost without 

limit. The Canadian Pacific Railway was to receive as a direct subsidy from the Government $25 million 

in cash and 25 million acres of land. Those sections of the railway already completed by the 

Government would be handed over to the company without charge. All material required for 

construction of the operation of the railways and the entire capital were exempt from taxation. Freight 

rates charged by the company were to be free from parliamentary regulations until a 10 per cent profit 

had been earned. Mr. Speaker, under the largess of 19th century capitalist governments in Ottawa, 

Canadian Pacific Railway, just to cite one example, got itself cash grants, railway stocks, railway lines 

and land which was to be in alternate sections and it was to be fit for settlement. They achieved the 

freehold rights which later turned out to have oil on them for nothing. How much land have they got? 

Well the Canadian Pacific Railway — 2.8 million acres, Canadian National 3.1 million, Hudson’s Bay 

2.3 million. Very roughly I would estimate that that means that there is about $1.8 million in freehold 

income being earned by the Canadian Pacific annually, $2 million for the CNR, $1.6 million for 

Hudson’s Bay, just to cite these three companies. Why should we, the Saskatchewan taxpayer, pay 

anything further to these companies unless they can prove that they have not under freehold income 

earned more than they have paid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having at some length discussed what I think to be failures of this Bill inasmuch as it is 

directed at Ottawa and not at the oil companies, the proposition that I should like to make is that what 

the Government could do given the time I know it took them to do this, it didn’t take that long, would be 

to come back to this House with enabling legislation not designed solely at Ottawa but aimed also at the 

oil companies. Come back to this House with enabling legislation which would allow Saskoil, although 

Saskoil under its previous Act does in general terms have broad powers, but with specifics about how 

Saskoil could become a nationalized oil industry in Saskatchewan with a monopoly on provincial oil 

activity. The Bill should provide for the nationalizing of all freehold rights, the revoking of Crown 

leases. Compensation should be paid for those who can show they have not yet earned a fair rate of 

return on their investment. For others there should be no compensation because they have already been 

compensated by the petroleum purchasing public of Canada for years and years and years. The Bill 

should come back and provide for negotiations to be entered into with the Regina Co-op Refinery for the 

establishment of a refinery in Saskatchewan to provide sufficient refining capacity for the Saskatchewan 

market. The Bill should come back with a new deal for the retail service station operator which would 

allow him to get relieved of the drudgery and the slavery and the uncertainty under which he labors in 

the present situation. As I said previously, being a service station operator is almost as uncertain as 

being a farmer. The mortality rate of service station operators is in the order of 25 per cent a year. They 

are locked in with the oil companies in various punitive arrangements which regulate times of opening 

and with products they can sell, etc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Government came forward with that kind 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

497 

 

of legislation it could do what it is trying to do now in terms of arguing provincial rights; it could do 

what it is trying to do in getting a commitment from Ottawa that the oil is basically a provincial 

resource; that returns from it should flow to the provincial government and it could simultaneously spell 

out how it intended to run the oil industry as a publicly owned industry to the benefit of the people of 

Canada and it could also spell forth an imaginative program whereby how it proposed to use the great 

surpluses which could inevitably be generated from such an activity. If the Government were prepared 

to come forward with that kind of legislation as its initial offer to Ottawa I would feel quite happy about 

supporting it. That kind of an opening gambit would show to the people of Canada that the Government 

in Saskatchewan is prepared to take a lead in establishing as a precedent the need for nationalizing the 

energy industry across the country. It would show how we envision using the profits which, to date, 

have been flowing to the foreign shareholders of the multinational oil companies, we could show how 

we propose to use these funds to end poverty in Saskatchewan to do wondrous things which would 

really in some sense make this the new Jerusalem. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have that. What we have before us is a clever piece of legislation whereby 

the Provincial Government stakes its claims for the taxation revenue which Ottawa is earning and 

demands a subsidization for the frozen price of petroleum. The great danger is that there is no 

imagination to that, Mr. Speaker. It merely can sound like two fish wives haggling over the price of cod; 

Ottawa and Regina haggling over who is going to get the profits which are going to be earned from 

having frozen the oil industry prices. It doesn’t challenge the basic power of the oil companies to 

determine the energy industry in Canada. It doesn’t challenge the profits they have made in the last 12 

months and for years past 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a sufficient challenge for a socialist response to the energy industry. With 

reluctance, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this in second reading. I shall oppose this Bill in principle 

because it does not provide the guiding light which Canada needs at this time of confused jurisdiction 

both at federal and provincial levels. It doesn’t provide the guiding light that is needed. I give notice to 

the House that I shall introduce a number of House amendments assuming that it will obviously pass, in 

order to try to make it a better piece of legislation. There is no way that one can turn a sow’s ear into a 

silk purse. With regrets, Mr. Speaker, as I take my seat, I state that I shall oppose on second reading this 

piece of legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H. OWENS: (Elrose) — Mr. Speaker, I take part in this debate on Bill No. 42 and I shall have a 

different approach than the previous speakers. 

 

Bill 42 faces the so-called energy crisis head on and I am pleased to support this Government on this 

very important action for the people of Saskatchewan. Energy covers a much broader field than this Bill 

covers, as this refers only to the conservation, stabilization and development of oil and gas in 

Saskatchewan. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

498 

 

This Bill is designed to protect this one energy resource of Saskatchewan for ourselves and future 

generations. But further, Mr. Speaker, it is also a protection for the corporations that presently have 

investments in gas and oil production in Saskatchewan. 

 

I cannot weep crocodile tears for ruthless industry that has sapped our non-renewable resources making 

millions in the process without thought or concern for the present or future generations. Now that the 

cream has been skimmed off they withdraw and gradually slow down their development programs just 

in case the profits they are so accustomed to pocket are not there. Much has been said about these 

industrial corporations losing some of their rights and privileges, implying that they never have or never 

would do any wrong and probably they do stay within the limits of the law. Their operations begin by 

the drilling of the well and end when the finished product is delivered to the retail buyer. 

 

There is no need for me to remind the Members of this House as to when gas and oil exploration started 

in Saskatchewan. There is also no need for me to remind you of the lack of legislation at that time 

adequately to protect the landowner by compensation for damage to his property when the drilling rig 

moved on to explore for liquid gold. Or to remind you of the cost of road maintenance experienced by 

some of the rural municipalities and often urban municipalities as a result of the movement of 

equipment. Did these super industrialists show concern for the rights of the property owner? Not until 

group action was taken and in some cases court action. No, Mr. Speaker, these great industrialists 

poured large sums of money into the industry simply because and only because they realized a bonanza 

for themselves. Little did they care about Saskatchewan or Saskatchewan people or the conservation of 

the resources as long as profits flowed into the shareholders’ accounts. 

 

Certainly the Province of Saskatchewan profited by the oil and gas exploration programs, but only by a 

small percentage in comparison to those enjoyed by the corporations. Let us remind ourselves of the 

great service we enjoy in the use of natural gas. Were our friends prepared to invest in this service for 

the people of Saskatchewan. In no way. We can still hear the resounding echoes that it cannot be done. 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan decided that it could be done. Under a mandate by them to the 

then CCF government, they set up the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and did the job. The network of 

natural gas distribution in Saskatchewan is a memorial for the people of Saskatchewan who had the 

foresight, the courage and the determination to do the impossible. 

 

According to the judgment of profit oriented people, the people of Saskatchewan enjoy the benefits of 

better living and the profits accruing from this great corporation, not many magnates living in luxury in 

other parts of the world have it better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to say a word about retailing of petroleum products. It would be an interesting 

and educational activity to make a detailed study of this distribution system. As motorists approach any 

urban centre and especially our larger cities, they see service station after service station, most of them 

quite fancy and luxurious establishments vying 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

499 

 

with each other for the privilege of filling your tank with gas and checking engine crankcase oil and 

almost all of them are courteous and efficient. But that is only part of their job or responsibility. 

Accessories of all kinds are on display. Motorists’ needs and gadgets are on the forefront with bargains 

you cannot afford to pass up. Mr. Speaker, this is all part of the deal. There is a deal between the 

operator and supplier, with the supplier-owner or overseer of the operation and the operator in most 

cases a lessee under contract to handle and sell the products of the supplier. Most of us can remember 

many, many changes of operators and in most cases they did not retire to the Bahamas. The profusion of 

filling stations leaves me with the feeling that the oil companies are concerned with only one thing and 

that is the profits of the corporation. If the individual operators fail either from poor management or lack 

of business it seems a small concern to them. I ask: do these companies care about persons or person as 

merely statistics? Mr. Speaker, feelings are pretty faulty when write-offs for depreciation are more 

important than write-offs of people. I feel governments have a responsibility to take action under such 

circumstances. 

 

Bill 42 is designed to correct some of these injustices and retain for the people of Saskatchewan some 

say in the future over our gas and oil resources. Big business represented by the Liberal Party Members 

opposite are decrying the fact that this Government is taking action that is unpopular with corporations 

and suggesting that these businesses will collapse from need or withdraw from active participation in 

petroleum production in Saskatchewan. It might be more correct to say, further withdraw, as they are 

already doing so. 

 

I will admit that my interpretation of some of the lawyers’ legal jargon in much of our legislation may 

not always be exactly correct, but in this particular Bill I can see no reason for the screams of robbery 

and all the other phraseology we hear from the Opposition. 

 

May I compare what I hear now about this Bill to what we have heard even in this Session about the 

Farm Income Stabilization Bill proposed by the Liberal Government in Ottawa that was not accepted by 

the western farmers, not accepted because it stabilized the farm income at, or below, the poverty level. 

Our friends opposite call that non-acceptance a disaster for our farmers. Well it would have been to be 

stabilized into poverty. 

 

What does Bill 42 do? Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 stabilizes the income of the field petroleum producers at a 

price to be established, and as I understand it this price will be based on the average well-head price of 

1973 along with other factors. Accordingly, the prices would include the recent increase in prices made 

by producers. In effect then, the producers can continue to enjoy the fairly handsome returns that are 

now theirs and in addition adjustments may be made periodically in January and July to cover the 

increased costs of production according to returns filed by the producer to justify the increased costs. 

There are also other incentives in the Act in favor of the producer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know of no other sector in our economy that has a guaranteed stabilized income with a 

built in escalation clause; stabilized at the present profit level which has been 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

500 

 

quoted by the Minister and others and which is certainly considerably above the poverty level. How can 

anyone suggest the petroleum producers in Saskatchewan are getting a bad deal. Some say the people of 

Saskatchewan should be getting a better deal. Saskatchewan will be getting the best deal, Mr. Speaker, 

ever from the oil and gas industry from its own natural non-renewable resource. This Act will give the 

individual producers a guaranteed and profitable industry, but more than that the people of 

Saskatchewan will be in control of this very important resource and will receive a fair and justifiable 

revenue from it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are still people living in this great Province of Saskatchewan with foresight, courage 

and determination. Generally, Saskatchewan people are imbued with a strong pioneering spirit as has 

been demonstrated so many times since the CCF Government took office in 1944. Bill 42 will be 

another first for Saskatchewan under our New Democratic Party Government. Bill 42 points out our 

desire to co-operate with industrialists. However, we were elected to oversee and conserve 

Saskatchewan resources for Saskatchewan people. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will be accepted enthusiastically by our people and will be praised by many 

more thousands across Canada. I urge all Members to support this legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD: (Cannington) — Mr. Speaker, I enter this debate with considerable 

concern; I enter it with concern because it is one more step in the erosion of the freedoms and the 

democratic principles that Saskatchewan has enjoyed for many years in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear that we in this side as our Leader said today, support the export 

tax that has been employed by the Federal Government. We agree that the windfall profits that are being 

enjoyed in the oil industry today should be a part of the Canadian public domain and, indeed, should be 

part of our province’s financial means. However, Mr. Speaker, I was absolutely and outrightly amazed 

today at the narrow parochial point of view that the Government opposite has taken. I was surprised and 

amazed because I expected better from a Premier for in the past I had respect for and thought that he had 

a somewhat greater vision for Canada than just within our own provincial borders. Mr. Speaker, this was 

an attitude that I think will be deplored by all the people of Saskatchewan. I honestly believe that the 

people of Saskatchewan look at our country as much more than just ten countries unto themselves, I 

think they will rebuke the party opposite very, very strongly for the taking of that attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that has been the attitude and the philosophy put forth in this whole Bill. It is a pity and 

much less meets the aspirations of the people of our province. 

 

MR. MESSER: — All in the input from the East. 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Well, I can assure my friend that the cost will be much higher if he imposes 

the highest price he can possibly get in Ontario. The price of machinery is going up along with a lot of 

other things. If he thinks the high costs are going 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

501 

 

to stop by charging Ontario the full price for oil he is very wrong. 

 

I want to review just for a few moments the Government’s record in this field because it is their past 

record, I think, now is of much more concern than anything else. There is a certain degree of unanimity 

between ourselves and the Party opposite regarding the pricing policy and windfall profits. That has 

made clear today and it was borne out long before the party opposite made their intentions known to 

Ottawa. It was long borne out by the Federal Liberal Party in Ottawa that they did not allow the private 

oil companies to be able to possess all the profits that come from the world problems in oil. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Only after the NDP did something about it! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Oh, a long time before the NDP even started thinking about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this added together with the Land Bank in the Government’s buying of substantial 

quantities of our land in an extremely short period of time, this added with the. Government’s attitude in 

breaking of contracts in our forest industry, the Government’s known and well known attitude towards 

Intercontinental Packers, the purchasing of part of this packing house, the Government’s investment in 

Interprovincial Steel; the Government’s action in such a wide range of activities that I might. add are 

indicative of the socialist philosophy of government ownership of practically everything you can lay 

your hands on. This, Mr. Speaker, being the background of the situation existing today must be a 

concern to all of the people of Saskatchewan and I think is a major issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said at the outset that we definitely support the province receiving its fair share of 

windfall profits that are being accumulated by the Federal Government. At the same time we should 

show some concern for the other provinces of Canada. I might say that I have personally been in favor 

of the Federal Government’s attitude towards the oil rights, the mineral rights off our Atlantic Coast. I 

think we have been supported by other governments of the Provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba in 

the past when the Federal Government has said that they were part owners, at least part owners, of other 

mineral rights off our Atlantic provinces. I think that anything of the magnitude of oil, where large 

quantities of money are involved, certainly must be distributed more than just to ourselves but it should 

be distributed at least partly to all Canadians. I think, Mr. Speaker, that our federal provincial relations 

are hitting an all time low because of the attitude of the provincial government of Alberta and the 

provincial government of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — . . . about nickel? 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Well, I’ll tell you about nickel. We get 50 per cent of everything 

International Nickel earns and that is distributed across Canada in equalization payments. If you don’t 

know that, you are the stupidest Finance Minister Saskatchewan has ever had. 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

502 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — I want to talk for a few moments about the utility aspects the Government 

opposite like to use. The Government opposite, they want to talk about the correlation between Saskoil 

and the development of energy resources in Saskatchewan. There is a tremendous difference in this 

analogy, Mr. Speaker, because it is obvious to anyone who puts any thought into the matter. 

 

First of all, when you develop electrical energy, it is very easily predictable as to what the on-stream 

power production will be. Engineers are easily able to calculate what the profits or what the potential 

from electrical development is and in actual fact this is extremely well calculated before the production 

facility is built. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we have the technology in engineering services to be able to provide the 

development of such electrical energy. So the electrical energy field is one that the Province of 

Saskatchewan can and does easily operate and should be operated and is supported by all of us through 

Saskatchewan Power. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan oil doesn’t fall into that category. Saskatchewan oil falls into a 

category of requiring substantial numbers of technicians which are not available to the Province of 

Saskatchewan. They have made little headway in being able to obtain this type of employee to develop 

and make Saskoil work. Saskoil will require extremely large mounts of money, for which there is no 

guaranty of return and in all likelihood given our record of the past few years, that even given a 

widespread exploration program, the likelihood of any substantial oil finds in Saskatchewan is very 

small. The development of our oil resources by the Government of Saskatchewan and the expenditure of 

large amounts of funds, is much, much more difficult from a financial point of view than is the electrical 

power development. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, through Saskoil the Province of Saskatchewan is taking widespread risks 

that are not necessarily taken when you develop electrical energy. 

 

I want to say just a few words, Mr. Speaker, about why I think that the oil industry should be regulated, 

which is the Liberals’ way, and why we do not need to own all of the oil and mineral rights in our 

province. 

 

I want to point out to the Government, that the Government thinks that they have cleverly eliminated the 

individual from any problems so far as the oil production is concerned. For example, they make a great 

case in saying that individual. oil rights are not disturbed, but I can assure them that this is not the case 

whatsoever. By raising the tax from 20 cents to 50 cents on private oil leases, Mr. Speaker, there are 

many oil leases in our province that have been signed and the individual owning the mineral rights will 

be a participant with the company for say 10, 12, 15 or 20 years. That individual, in signing, is also the 

recipient of possibly $1 an acre per year from the company over this period of years. The Government, 

in raising the tax from 20 to 50 cents, altering all the rules of the game will make it extremely likely that 

many 



 

December 12, 1973 

 

 

503 

 

private oil companies that are now paying that individual $1 per acre and in some cases higher revenues 

that those leases will be terminated. So in actual fact we have many individuals . . . 

 

MR. CODY: — Your friends are breaking leases. 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — They are not breaking leases because it is the option in the clause which is 

in each of the contracts signed. An option in the contract which gives the company the right to terminate 

at any particular time and what the recipient is usually receiving over a period of time maybe $1 per acre 

per year. As an example, the companies will, in many individual cases, throw up these leases because of 

the Government’s increased tax and there will be many individuals in Saskatchewan who will not be 

receiving that revenue they have been receiving each year in the past number of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I intend to say considerably more about this matter today and I now beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:25 o’clock p.m. 

 


