



















































Hansard: February 08, 1973


474 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

11th Day 

 

Thursday, February 8, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — I should like to introduce to you and to the Members of 

the Legislature a group of 70 Grade Seven and Eight students from the Dr. George Ferguson School 

located in my constituency. They are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery and are accompanied by their 

teachers, Mr. Jordan and Mr. Edinal. I should like to extend to the students and to the teachers a warm 

welcome to this afternoon’s Session and express the hope that their visit with us this afternoon will be 

informative, educational and that they have a pleasant stay with us. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, it likewise gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

introduce to you, Sir, and the Members of this Assembly a group of students from King George School 

in the city of Saskatoon. I believe they are in the west gallery, all showing the victory sign or the peace 

sign I suppose today. I don’t know if many Members will know that King George School is one of the 

oldest and certainly finest schools in the city of Saskatoon. It, I believe, is the school of one of the 

greatest hockey players that the NHL has seen, Mr. Gordie Howe. I know that King George has always 

produced tremendous hockey players because they used to beat my school, Westmount, regularly. In any 

event I welcome the students, Mr. Christianson, I believe, accompanying them. I hope they have an 

informative time seeing democracy in action here in Regina. So I welcome them through you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

ROBIN HOOD OATS MILL IN SASKATOON 
 

Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I have an 

announcement I should like to make. Members may not have seen a story which appeared in last night’s 

edition of the Leader-Post on page 28, amounting to about three or four column inches. The lead 

paragraph says: 

 

Robin Hood Multifoods Ltd., has announced it will build a $650,000 Oats Mill in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Since last night, Mr. Speaker, 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

475 

 

a member of our Department of Industry and Commerce has been in touch with Mr. H.L. Hingley, the 

Manager of the Robin Hood Mill in Saskatoon and I am happy to inform the House on the basis of the 

information he supplied that this investment may go as high as $700,000 of which only $20,000 will be 

for a building, the rest is for machinery which has been on order since last October. The company will 

proceed with this addition to its milling capacity in Saskatoon and eventually this will result in an 

addition of employment opportunities for 15 permanent personnel in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to comment on the statement of 

the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) and I want to say that we are delighted to see him stand up for 

the first time since he has been the Minister of Industry and make a comment about a new industry in 

this House. I should also like to say that I found it unusual that he had to read it in the paper. You know 

normally a Minister comes in here if the Government has had anything to do with it and reads it himself. 

I am sure that the people of Saskatoon are delighted that Robin Hood is going to expand its facilities in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. Another of those multi-national corporations that are contributing to 

work and employment in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

GOVERNMENT POLICY ON HIGHWAY TENDERING 
 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden:) — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the Hon. 

Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer). What is the Government’s policy with regard to preference bidding 

or Saskatchewan preferences on highway tendering? 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Highways): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that only in cases where 

the bidding was very close, and where the bidder had most of his plant or a great proportion of his plant 

in Manitoba or Alberta on the basis of a narrow percentage we would probably consider giving a 

Saskatchewan preference. 

 

Mr. Lane: — A supplementary question to the Hon. Minister. Does that mean that any agreement 

between the three Prairie Provinces with regard to inter-provincial tendering is now at an end? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — No, it does not and I think our Western Highways’ Ministers conference to be held 

next week will discuss and firm up some of those things that have to do with liaison between the various 

provinces. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 

question to the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Tchorzewski). I hope he realizes that 11 days of this 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

476 

Session have gone by and we still have not received Returns for Nos. 1, 2, 8, 79 from almost a year ago. 

I think it is utter contempt of the House that we are expected to carry out our work when all these new 

planners and researchers can’t even provide answers for a few Returns that were asked for last year. 

When can we expect them? 

 

Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski: (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Hon. 

Member is well aware that there have been a number of Returns tabled, 58, 59, 69 and many others. I 

can assure the Member that within a very short period of time within the next few days the other Returns 

will be forthcoming. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE — UNEMPLOYMENT 
 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I ask leave 

under Rule 17 to move a motion asking for a priority of debate for the purpose of discussing a definite 

matter of urgent public importance and I state the subject matter to be the jump from 5.5 per cent to 7 

per cent in the month of January of the seasonably unadjusted unemployed rate for Saskatchewan, and 

the failure of the provincial Government to implement programs and policies to create employment in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SPEAKER’S RULING 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE — UNEMPLOYMENT 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Well I may say that while I had a foreknowledge of this under Rule 17, these motions 

are very difficult to decide on because Rule 17 states: 

 

The motion must not anticipate a matter which has been previously appointed for consideration by the 

Assembly or with reference to which a notice of motion has been previously given and not withdrawn. 

 

Now Resolution No. 4 deals with Government policy or attempts to as does No.8, part of No. 11 and No. 

12. Resolution No. 14 deals with the unemployment situation of Canada. Now this motion handed me 

now by the Opposition deals with three topics. It deals with unemployment, it deals with the 

Government program and it deals with Government policies. Standing Order No. 17(10)(b) states: 

 

Not more than one matter can be discussed on the same motion. 

 

I would say that while there is some anticipation in this, it deals with three topics, namely 

unemployment, Government policies and Government programs. I think standing Order No. 17 says that 

it must be definite and deal only with one point. While there will be other occasions to debate this as it is 

included 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

477 

 

in some of the resolutions, therefore, at this time I will say under Rule 17 that I will have to rule this out 

of order. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, with deference, now you say it deals with three subjects. I must disagree 

with you. It deals with one subject — unemployment and the problem of the Government and what they 

are going to do about it. Now last year we had an emergency debate, for example, on the question of the 

blockage of the railroad and the failure of the railroads to move grain. Now that surely dealt with more 

than one subject by the ruling you just gave. It dealt with the inability of the railroad to move grain and 

it asked in there that we take action as a Legislature to urge the Federal Government to take action. 

Certainly there were at least two topics and we debated that. I recall other times in this House we have 

debated the situation concerning the sale of grain and part of the discussion had been not just the urgent 

situation that grain was not selling and the farmers were in difficulty but also the urging of the Federal 

Government to take some immediate action. I think under your ruling that would have been absolutely 

impossible. What would be the point in talking about unemployment if we don’t say what we are going 

to do about unemployment. Now to begin with, there is no question that the rate of unemployment this 

January is the worst in years. The prediction of this Government was last fall .  .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! We are not debating the motion, we are debating the ruling, that’s all. We are 

not debating the pros and cons of the motion. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I am simply trying to point out that the basis, the whole basis, surely, of this kind of a 

debate is whether in fact there is an emergency. Now the question of whether there are other topics or 

related items to be brought up later in this Session may well be on the Order Paper. Surely that doesn’t 

preclude the fact that we should be in a position, that’s what this rule is there for, to give the Members of 

this Legislative Assembly the opportunity to debate something that is of an absolute emergency nature. 

Surely with thousands and thousands of jobless people and the rate climbing in this province, you are 

not going to tell me that your ruling will be that this is not an emergency and it’s not emergent. We look 

through the Throne Speech, there was never a mention about unemployment. I want to point out, Mr. 

Speaker, why we need this debate, why it is an emergency. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I can’t permit that. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, let me ask you this then — how did you allow one year ago a debate on 

the railroad situation which covered at least two topics and which this Legislature and this Government 

had no power to do anything about: Even with all the best will in the world we couldn’t help because we 

don’t have anything to do with railroads. I must say that this would be a subject about which this 

Government, our Legislative Assembly directing the Government can do something about it. It is within 

our jurisdiction. How can you say that this is not an emergency and should not be debated at this time 

when you allowed that same debate to take place a year ago? 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

478 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, further to the point of Order I should like to refer you to 

the Debates and Proceedings of last year or the Journals of last year. Request for priority of Debate was 

asked for by Mr. MacDonald from Milestone and this was the subject matter of that request which was 

granted by you, Mr. Speaker. It was, “The continuing Exodus of Established Industries from 

Saskatchewan”. That was one item that was involved. “Corresponding loss of jobs, wages and provincial 

revenue”, now there are three more items right there — jobs, wages and provincial revenue — “Which 

have been climaxed today by the confirmation that Smith-Roles of Saskatoon .  .  ”, there is another 

topic right there, “is moving to Alberta as a result of the provincial Government’s taxation policy”. Now 

we are not only talking about loss of industry, loss of jobs but we also get into the realm of taxation 

policy. Surely to goodness if that was in order last year the motion today which deals with 

unemployment has to be in order. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — May I comment on those points of order firstly with respect to the 

point raised by the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy), I am really quite ashamed of his performance. He 

has .  .  

 

Mr. Guy: — You can be ashamed. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — He has the Journals before him, he quoted the Journals and he failed to quote the next 

line, “Mr. Speaker ruled that matter was not of urgent public importance under Rule 17.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, if he will turn to page 114 which I asked him to, you will 

find and I will read I am ashamed of him and of his performance .  .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the Hon. Member from Athabasca let the Premier finish his comment 

because I can’t adjudicate on a cross-fire. 

 

Mr. Guy: — He called me a liar. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, surely the 

question of this debate is, it is an emergency or it is not and that fact the Premier will not admit. He 

stood up in this House in the Throne speech, Sir, and said that the Province of Saskatchewan had 7,000 

more people on the work force .  .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. We can’t debate what happened in the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I will not debate what happened in the Throne Speech. I 

clearly want to point out, Sir, that 

 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

479 

 

there are 11,000 less people on the work force .  .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — We are not debating the statistics or anything else but what is before the House now is 

the Speaker’s Ruling is on this Motion. That is all that is before the House not the subject matter of the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. You have made a ruling. The simple alternative 

for the Opposition is whether they challenge your ruling or not. May I respectfully suggest that if they 

challenge it that they get up and challenge the ruling and have the House determine whether or not your 

ruling will be sustained. That is the procedure, Mr. Speaker, and I respectfully suggest that the 

Opposition stay to the rules of this House and stay to the rules of democracy. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, on that Point of Order, we don’t need a lecture, Mr. Speaker, and I am 

sure you don’t either on the proper procedure. We know we can disagree with the ruling of the Speaker 

and then put it to a vote. We have every right to do exactly what we are doing and point out to the 

Speaker, precedent and our opinion and don’t you try to deny us that, Mr. Speaker, you know we have 

the right. For example, I am now going to read the motion that was made by the Premier about a year 

ago on which Mr. Speaker, allowed an emergency debate, and I am going to suggest to him for his 

consideration with due deference that this also covered, as does our motion I agree, more than one item 

because I just don’t think you can talk about the movement of grain or unemployment without having 

more than one subject under discussion. Let me read. 

 

The matter of the report that the interruption of the export of grain through the Pacific Coast Ports 

consequent upon inadequate rail routes (that’s two questions, the holding up of the grain, inadequate 

rail routes); insufficient number of box cars ( I suggest that is the third); insufficient handling of grain 

at the ports (four); resulting in a drastic reduction of exports (five); and possible loss of buyers (six) be 

given priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with deference you allowed that. Surely that covers more than one subject. How can the 

Government say: we are not happy with the movement of grain, as they did then, they weren’t happy 

neither were we. They suggested two or three things we would cover. I suggest you reconsider your 

ruling, Mr. Speaker, because this is an emergency and of course we have covered more than one subject, 

but by your very ruling a year ago you allowed the Government, the Premier, to have this similar type of 

debate and I suggest his motion covered more than one subject. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would draw to the Hon. Member’s attention that when I gave my ruling I pointed out 

what I thought were different reasons, under Section 10(d), it says the motion must not anticipate a 

matter which has been previously appointed for consideration by the Assembly, or with reference to 

which a Notice of Motion has been previously given and not withdrawn. That is if it has already been 

discussed or whether it was a 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

480 

notice on the paper. I quoted four motions that are on the Order Paper where this topic can be partly 

dealt with. In order to strengthen that, I quoted also subsection (b) of Section 10, that not more than one 

matter can be discussed at the same time. I think the Hon. Leader of the Opposition will agree that when 

that motion he referred to was discussed last year it was on the second day of the sitting when no 

motions were on the Order Paper. So my ruling is, and it is available to be challenged, that at this time 

this is not an emergency motion. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, on your ruling, I suggest to you at this time .  .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am not going to permit any more debate, you can either challenge my ruling, I have 

allowed some debate. Debate on the Speaker’s ruling is not supposed to be permitted at all, but I allowed 

a debate on it. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I’ll be very brief, Mr. Speaker. I suggest that .  .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I cannot permit debate. I have ruled that it is not in order. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, let me say this, and I’ll challenge your ruling. Let me say why I am 

challenging it, because I don’t think it is your ruling, I think you got orders from the Premier and from 

the Attorney General .  .  this is an emergency. 7 per cent unemployment, is thousands and thousands of 

people walking the .  .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — .  .  they ought to be ashamed of themselves, and I challenge your ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Speaker takes instructions from no one, he takes advice from the Clerk, but he 

takes instructions from no one. 

 

The Speaker’s ruling has been challenged. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The Speaker’s ruling has been challenged. The motion before the House 

is: Shall the Speaker’s ruling be upheld. 

 

Ruling of the Chair sustained on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 42 
 

Blakeney MacMurchy Matsalla 

Dyck Pepper Faris 

Meakes Michayluk Cody 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

481 

 

 

Wood Byers Gross 

Smishek Thorson Feduniak 

Romanow Whelan Mostoway 

Messer Kwasnica Comer 

Snyder Carlson Rolfes 

Kramer Engel Lange 

Thibault Owens Hanson 

Larson Robbins Oliver 

Kowalchuk Tchorzewski Feschuk 

Baker Cowley Kaeding 

Brockelbank Taylor Flasch 

 

NAYS — 14 
 

Steuart MacDonald (Milestone) Lane 

Coupland Gardner MacDonald (Moose Jaw N) 

Loken Weatherald Wiebe 

Guy MacLeod Richards 

Grant McPherson  

 

MOTIONS 
 

RAIL LINE ABANDONMENT 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — At the close of my remarks I intend to move seconded by the Hon. 

Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson) the resolution as it appears on the Order Paper dealing with the matter of 

rail line abandonment. 

 

Some may feel that rail line abandonment is a tired old subject but let me warn this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan that it is very much alive. Nowhere will the railway companies’ proposals for 

rail line abandonment across Canada have a greater impact than in Saskatchewan. Let me go back a bit 

in history. This whole business of rail line abandonment started with the MacPherson Commission in 

1959, that was the Commission appointed by the Federal Government which brought down 

recommendations for the abandonment of branch lines, the recommendations coming down in 1961. 

That was the action of a Conservative Federal Government. It is just about 10 years ago that we in the 

Saskatchewan CCF who were the government at that time, were mounting the first fight against rail line 

abandonment. What we and the farm organizations won at that time was a partial victory, a stay of 

execution until 1975; a stay of execution for which Members opposite can take absolutely no credit. 

Although that doesn’t stop them from seeking credit, and that is understandable since they have no other 

accomplishment to point to. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Obstructionism in this House that’s all! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But it was all started by a Conservative Federal Government. Then came the 

Transportation Act of 1967, which was enacted by a Liberal Government at Ottawa — it enshrined rail 

line abandonment in Legislation. Another Federal Liberal Government created the Canada Grains 

Council, and the Grains Group. The Grains Group was created by the Hon. Otto Lang, 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

482 

whom we hear a great deal about in this House. We understand that the Grains Group will say once 

again that the country elevator system is outmoded and branch lines are too costly to operate. This may 

be partly true. 

 

Let me make two points. Each of these steps from the MacPherson Commission to the Grains Council 

and the Grains Group today has been concerned with solving the problems of the railways and to some 

extent the elevator companies and not the problems of farmers, of small communities. This becomes 

crystal clear as you look at the successive recommendations and plans. That’s point number one. They 

were focusing their attention on the problems of the railway companies and the elevator companies. 

 

My second point is that what was started by the Conservatives is being finished off by the Liberals. The 

two old line parties have the same order of priorities, the problems of the railways and the line elevator 

companies are right up there at the top, and way down at the bottom are the problems of farmers. So 

when Federal Liberals and Federal Conservatives and Provincial Liberals tell you what great things they 

have done or plan to do for Western agriculture — and they are telling us a lot about those these days — 

remember rail line abandonment and elevator abandonment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Let me remind you of just what happens when rail lines are abandoned. Let me tell 

you what will happen if the railways had their way. We have a total of 8,500 miles of railway in 

Saskatchewan. The railways have proposed to close down 3,000 miles of track, more than one-third of 

the total 8,500 miles. The elevator companies now operate about 2,700 elevators in the province. 800 

would be slated for closure. Perhaps 375 delivery points would be affected. If we take all three prairie 

provinces we have proposals before us from the railway companies to abandon 5,500 miles of railway 

track in the three Prairie Provinces, 3,000 miles of that in Saskatchewan. Now I suppose this is 

something of a game with the railway companies. Part of the game is that by making their losses look as 

large as possible the railways may get a higher subsidy from the Federal Government. I am sure that the 

railway companies don’t expect to get approval to abandon all this 5,500 miles of track. That would go 

across Canada once and almost back again. So they put every possible branch line on the list in the 

hopes that they can get a fair number of approvals for abandonment. On the other hand we have to 

assume that the CPR and the CNR are playing this game for keeps. They claimed losses on branch lines 

in Western Canada of $27 million in 1969 — I don’t have figures for later years. What happens if this 

5,500 miles of branch lines are shut down? 

 

We became alarmed at this prospect when we took office and we set up a study group headed by the 

former Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Harold Horner, who is eminently well qualified to look into 

this problem. We are in the process of studying the impact of wholesale rail line abandonment on 

farmers, small communities and rural municipalities. We have a lot more work to do, but our 

preliminary analysis indicates that to save the railways $27 million a year — and that’s their figure, 

frankly I don’t think it is nearly that high — rail line abandonment 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

483 

 

would shift $20 million at least, even in relatively direct costs, to farmers, businessmen and taxpayers of 

the three prairie provinces. I have been talking about all three prairie provinces but the number one 

target is Saskatchewan. As I said before, of the 5,500 miles proposed for abandonment, fully 3,000 are 

in Saskatchewan. Three out of every nine miles of track in Saskatchewan will disappear if the railways 

had their way. You can stand on the railway platform, if there still is a platform, at, say, Bladworth and 

look down the line to Davidson about nine miles and imagine what would happen if three miles of that 

track was lifted. That is the sort of thing, in a graphic way, that is going to happen everywhere in 

Saskatchewan — three out of every nine miles will go. You will get some inkling of what rail line 

abandonment in this province would do if every time you see three miles of track you think that one 

mile wasn’t there. 

 

Let me return to this $27 million figure which the railway says they are losing on the branch lines across 

the prairies. We have estimated that the abandonment will shift $20 million onto the farmers, 

businessmen and the local people. Let me break this down for you. 

 

First of all, there are increased trucking costs for the farmers affected. To a farmer whose rail line has 

been abandoned, whose elevator is gone, it means more miles to haul, more time spent in hauling, 

probably a bigger truck, certainly higher truck maintenance costs. We conducted three studies in order to 

get an idea of what the impact would be of rail line abandonment. We conducted particular studies in the 

Melfort region, the Medstead region and the Kerrobert region. These covered 850 miles of line which 

was up for abandonment. We did a study of the additional yearly increase of trucking costs which would 

be incurred by the farmers that use that line. We reached the figure of $1,525 in extra trucking costs for 

each mile of line abandoned. We think that these studies are relatively typical. And if they are, then if 

you apply that to the 5,500 miles up for abandonment, it means a shift of costs from the railways to the 

farmers for trucking costs, of $8.3 million a year. 

 

I don’t need to tell any Member of this House that if we start hauling millions and millions of bushels of 

wheat fairly extensive distances on municipal roads and provincial highways, there is going to be a very 

high annual maintenance figure and there is going to be a high annual capital cost figure to construct and 

keep up these roads. And it is going-to go up year after year. I have to point out that the road beds for 

the railways are already there. But in many cases to haul heavy loads by trucks we would have to 

construct fairly good road beds if farmers are going to have to haul loads, 30, 40, 50, 60 miles. Our 

preliminary estimate is that this could amount to between $9 million a year and $12 million a year for 

the three prairie provinces, depending on what assumptions of quality of road you make. 

 

There will be business losses in villages and small towns which lose their railway service. It’s difficult 

to put a dollar figure on store closures and business failures — but we included what I think is a very 

conservative figure of $1 million a year. 

 

With the decline in small communities we’ll see a decline in population and we will see significant 

amounts of wasted 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

484 

social capital. By this I mean facilities which aren’t used to their full capacity — schools, hospitals, 

power lines and telephone lines. This could amount to another $1 million a year. Admittedly that is an 

estimate. 

 

In total, just for those four items, extra trucking costs which we tried to estimate fairly carefully, extra 

highway and municipal road construction and maintenance costs, which we tried to estimate fairly 

carefully and losses to small town merchants and wastage of schools, hospitals and the like which we 

have just rounded off at low figures of $1 million a year, we come up with a figure of $20 million or 

more which will be assessed against farmers and ratepayers across the prairies. 

 

These are only the obvious costs to the prairie people in their communities. We all know some other 

costs. Villages will undoubtedly disappear. How do you put a price tag on the disappearance of a 

village? What is the appropriate bookkeeping entry when a merchant boards up his store and moves into 

the city where there are few jobs for him? 

 

The railways and the Federal Government save what they claim to be $27 million — I think it is much 

lower than that — that’s a yearly figure. Farmers and other taxpayers pick up a tab of $20 million for 

these obvious costs. Sure, that makes the railways more economic. It helps the elevator companies. But 

once again the man who pays is going to be the farmer. 

 

Let me remind you again that one mile of track in every three is up for abandonment in Saskatchewan. 

So in order to make the railways more efficient, farmers will have to haul their grain up to 60 miles in 

some areas around Kyle. Up to 40 miles in areas around Mankota, Fir Mountain and Wood Mountain. 

Farmers will have to buy bigger trucks, carry bigger loads. 

 

Towns and villages will lose revenues when the elevators shut down. With fewer people there will be 

tax increases for those who remain and this isn’t included in our $20 million figure. 

 

Grain storage will be lost with the elevators that are removed and that storage will have to be replaced. 

The cost of that will ultimately come out of the farmers’ pockets. That isn’t in our $20 million figure. 

 

Rural municipality taxes will go up because of the increased wear and tear on grid roads caused by 

bigger trucks making longer hauls. 

 

My short question is this: Why should the farmers be called upon to pay an extra $20 million a year to 

improve the profitability of the CPR? 

 

Now I know that the Grains Council is supposed to be looking at the whole picture — and I know Mr. 

Lang’s Grains Group has commissioned a number of studies examining the impact of rail line 

abandonment. I’m not that much impressed. 

 

I’m not impressed with the hastily conceived and produced study on trucking costs commissioned by the 

Grains Group. Our people looked at their estimates of additional trucking costs and felt that they were 

very much understated. They, in fact, assumed, as we think, that farmers could keep their present 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

485 

 

trucks and they wouldn’t need to replace them even though they were going to have to haul very much 

longer distances. 

 

I’m not impressed because in all this preparation for rail line abandonment not once has the Government 

of Saskatchewan been consulted or invited to express its views. Some of our officials have been asked to 

supply data or to supply some technical information. But at the policy level we have never been asked 

for any comment. We are out in the cold. 

 

In fact there was no hint at all, there certainly was no hint that we were going to have anything to say 

about rail line abandonment until the federal election last fall. Then one day in Saskatoon the Prime 

Minister was quoted as saying there would be no rail line abandonment, even after 1975 unless there 

was the agreement of the provincial government. 

 

Then a few days later, Mr. Lang became concerned, the first expression of his concern that I found. And 

he said according to the Leader-Post of September 27th and I quote: 

 

The Government, (meaning the Federal Government), will make changes in the present system only if 

farmers want those changes. 

 

I want to underline the words of the Prime Minister, no rail line abandonment even after 1975, without 

the agreement of the provincial government. Mr. Lang, — “government will make changes in the 

present system only if the farmers want these changes.” 

 

One Liberal MLA, the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) sitting opposite was much more specific. I 

quote from the Leader-Post of October 19, 1972: 

 

It was the Liberal Government in Ottawa that put a stop to rail line abandonment and has given the 

commitment that no railways will be abandoned without the sanction of the provinces concerned. 

 

We were very glad to hear that. But, Mr. Speaker, if such a commitment was ever given, it was not 

given to the Province of Saskatchewan. There has been no letter or communication of any kind 

suggesting that the province would even be consulted, let alone be given the opportunity to say yes or 

no. 

 

We have tried to obtain a commitment on this statement from the Prime Minister. On November 9th, 

1972, I wrote a letter to Mr. Trudeau on this important issue. I will quote from parts of it, I think they are 

fair quotes: 

 

On a trip to Saskatchewan during the recent Federal election campaign you were reported as having 

stated that no rail line abandonments would occur here except with the agreement of the Provincial 

Government. On at least one other occasion the Hon. Otto Lang gave similar assurances. I have taken 

the liberty of enclosing newspaper reports of these comments. 

 

I am sure you can appreciate that the matter of abandonment of branch lines, of elevator points and the 

subsequent erosion of farm services and rural communities which inevitably follow are of grave 

concern 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

486 

to the Government and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our Government has undertaken a study of the effects such wholesale abandonment would have upon 

our economic and social life. Although still not complete, preliminary findings reveal some serious 

cost transfers to farmers and taxpayers. 

 

Because this matter is of deep concern to us, because the planned date of such abandonments is less 

than three years away, and because it has been indicated such plans will not proceed without 

provincial agreement, may I suggest the following: 

 

1. That our Government be supplied with further information on the kind of consultations you 

envisage. 

 

2. That dates, times and places be suggested when representatives of our two governments can meet on 

this matter. 

 

I can assure you that we are anxious to begin discussions as soon as possible, and accordingly look 

forward to hearing from you. 

 

That was my letter of November 9, 1972. My office received an acknowledgment from one of the Prime 

Minister’s assistants dated November 16th, which said that the letter had been received and would be 

brought to Mr. Trudeau’s attention. We have not yet received a reply in substance. I think we all 

appreciate that the Prime Minister has been very busy and he’s got many problems. We do however urge 

upon him that he turn his mind to this matter and at least set up the basis for consultation. This is not to 

suggest that any inordinate amount of time has elapsed, although it is three months. But it is three very 

busy months in the life of the Government of Canada. We are making the point that we should like to 

know where the Federal Government stands. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has had no assurance of commitment of any sort except through the 

columns of the Leader-Post. And I, for one, Mr. Speaker, do not feel entirely comfortable in relying on 

that source or any other newspaper report when it comes to the issue of this importance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only commitment we know anything about with any certainty is the commitment which 

the Federal Liberal Government gave to the railways to remove restrictions on applications to abandon 

branch lines in 1975. That is the only commitment we know anything about, and that date is not far off. I 

think we must be concerned in view of the fact that we are faced with potentially disastrous rail line 

abandonments and that we have no assurance from the Federal Government that they will intervene. 

Indeed their only formal act is to indicate some years ago that they would not intervene, that indeed the 

issue would be open in 1975. We must indeed be concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now let me state two or three assertions which I think will put in perspective our 

Government’s deep concern about this issue. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

487 

 

My first assertion is this; that the continued existence of our pattern of life in rural Saskatchewan is in 

jeopardy. True, we have lived with declining populations on the farms for 35 years. We have seen the 

average size of farm grow to what it is today, perhaps 800 acres. Our network of rural service centres 

has gone through some serious readjustments. But by and large we have hung on to a basic system of 

family-operated farms and a viable service centre system. The question we have to ask ourselves is this: 

how much longer can we permit current trends to continue before there is not only a quantitative change 

but a qualitative change in the whole system of rural life? My own assessment is this; that if nothing is 

done, we don’t have very much time before we’ll see much larger aggregations of land, corporate 

management of farms and further threats to our rural communities. Mr. Speaker, we must stand against 

this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — My second assertion is that people and their governments need to give high priority 

to actions which will slow the trend of rural depopulation and strengthen our basic service centre 

system. The directions in which we must move are many and widely varied. We’ve discussed them in 

the House on many occasions and I don’t pretend it will be any easy job. As a Government we are 

trying. We have put forward many proposals to strengthen rural life, strengthen the small farmer, 

strengthen the small community. We believe they are bearing fruit. 

 

My third assertion is that of all the dangers which loom on the horizon, of all the dangers to rural life in 

Saskatchewan as we know it, the dangers of increasing technology which dictates larger tractors and 

larger combines and the rest, all of these pale into insignificance beside the devastating prospect to rural 

Saskatchewan of wholesale rail line abandonments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Nothing that I can visualize or any Member of this House can visualize would do 

more damage to the rural way of life as we know it than the abandonment of 2,000 or even 3,000 miles 

of branch line. 

 

With this perspective, which reflects the Government’s approach, we plan to fight wholesale rail line 

abandonment right down to the wire. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We plan to fight for a rationalization plan which will strengthen and not destroy the 

family farm .  .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — .  .  which will help us to retain just as many healthy rural communities as possible 

across this province. 

 

We in this province must say this; by all means, we must improve our grain transportation system. No 

Member of this House, I suggest is wedded to the idea that no rural elevator 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

488 

should close or is even wedded to the idea that not one single branch line should be removed. We must 

improve our grain transportation system but not through the wholesale abandonment of rail lines. Our 

primary concern must be to improve the returns to farmers and to safeguard the interests of farm 

communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There are many other things we need to do. We need to improve trackage to the West 

Coast, including new tracks where necessary to provide alternate routes through the winter. We have 

been very lucky this winter, we weren’t last winter. We should act now before we are faced with another 

bad winter. 

 

Third, we need to upgrade port facilities. We need to get the maximum use of such ports as Prince 

Rupert, Vancouver and Churchill. 

 

And in a more general sense we say it’s time that the needs of Western Canada were given recognition 

in a new National Transportation Policy. We will be pressing the Federal Government in the days ahead 

for a complete New Deal in transportation for Western Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We’ll be calling a provincial conference on transportation and freight rates very soon. 

But our very first job, Mr. Speaker, is to get the ironclad agreement of the Federal Government that 

there will be no rail line abandonments other than on the terms which they themselves have stated. That 

there will be no rail line abandonments until every alternative has been explored, until all the social and 

economic costs to producers, businesses and communities have been added up, until the Government of 

Saskatchewan agrees to the abandonment and in any event that we get a commitment that there be no 

abandonments at least until 1980. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re asking for is a commitment by the Federal Government 

along the lines which senior members of the Federal Government including the Prime Minister and the 

Minister in Charge of the Canadian Wheat Board have given during the election campaign. We are not 

asking people to adopt our program. We are asking the Federal Government to adopt their program. And 

that surely is reasonable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I urge all Members on both sides of the House to support this 

Resolution, to support it unanimously and support it resoundingly. Mr. Speaker, I think there should be 

no doubt in Ottawa about where Saskatchewan stands on the matter or rail line abandonment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

489 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by Mr. Larson (Pelly) this motion. 

 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government that no railway branch line abandonment be 

considered in Saskatchewan before all the alternatives are thoroughly studied and the social and 

economic costs to producers businesses and communities be ascertained and, further, that no 

abandonments be allowed without the prior agreement of the Government of Saskatchewan and, 

specifically, that no abandonments be authorized until 1980. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin:) — Mr. Speaker, before I begin my regular remarks I should like to 

make one comment regarding something the Premier said. Mr. Blakeney said that villages will 

undoubtedly disappear and I should like to inform him that we lost our railroad about 12 years ago in the 

villages of Kennedy, Wawota, Windthorst and some others. And I can tell him that the people of these 

villages are alive and well and the villages are alive and well. They had no intention at all of 

disappearing and I am sure that the people of these villages will see that this doesn’t happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion we are discussing today is rail line abandonment and I am sure it’s going to be 

an interesting debate. It is interesting not so much because of the arguments and statistics that we are 

hearing but because of the motives behind such a motion in the first place. You may well be asking 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, why the Premier of this province, Mr. Blakeney, early in the Session would be 

making his first major speech, other than the Throne Speech 30 minutes on radio on the subject of rail 

line abandonment. I can tell you the reason is fairly obvious. The Premier, in the past year, has made a 

conscious and deliberate effort to stay away from controversy and stay out of trouble. You don’t get into 

trouble, Mr. Speaker, talking about rail line abandonment. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) is committing political suicide, first with the recent fiasco 

regarding the Foreign Ownership Bill and now, of course, with the disastrous Land Bank Act, and the 

Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman) because he failed to win the Athabasca by-election 

in spite of massive expenditures of taxpayers’ money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) is in trouble because of his arrogant attitude 

toward the general public and toward the Press. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) has both the teachers and the trustees 

after him. He doesn’t know which way to turn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

490 

Mr. Gardner: — The Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) is the laughing stock of the province because 

of the Roumanian Tractor deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — At this time, Mr. Speaker, the province is faced with major problems in the fields of 

health services, welfare, unemployment and I repeat, unemployment, lack of industrial development and 

so on. The NDP are increasing our taxes at an alarming rate. But what does Mr. Blakeney make his 

major radio speech on? Rail line abandonment. You don’t get into trouble talking about rail line 

abandonment. Of course, you don’t do too much good either. The Premier is willing to let his Ministers 

accept the blame for the mess the NDP have created in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Perhaps their unpopularity will make them less of a threat to his leadership. The 

Premier has sacrificed his Ministers for his own political ambitions. You know, Mr. Lewis is finished 

federally. I think this is an accepted fact. I am sure Mr. Blakeney would like to go to that federal 

leadership convention free of any political blemish. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — So, Mr. Blakeney talks about rail line abandonment. It’s like talking about saving the 

family farm. Everybody wants to save the family farm — you can’t lose. And I am sure that no one in 

this Legislature, Liberal or NDP, wants to see any railroads taken out if it will be harmful in any way to 

the farmers or other residents of rural Saskatchewan. I am sure that no political party in Canada, 

provincial or federal, favors the wholesale abandonment of rail lines. But it makes good material for a 

political speech. 

 

During the latter days in the federal campaign last fall the NDP in this province realized they were in 

deep trouble. Expected NDP gains became hopeless and they faced the loss of present members such as 

John Burton. Then they decided to talk about rail line abandonment. There was an almost hysterical rush 

by the NDP to jump on the railroad band wagon. We saw numerous reports of this in the paper in the 

last days of the campaign and I have many of them here: “Loss of Railroads Feared by Knight”; “Rail 

Abandonment Rapped”; and so on. Even David Lewis came out and got in the act. He was invited too. 

Just prior to the federal election last fall Mr. Lewis announced the NDP agriculture program which calls 

for a halt to rail line abandonment. This is what he said, “Now this is a little bit ridiculous to be calling a 

halt to something that has already been halted for over 10 years in this province”. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — But the NDP probably felt it was good politics. Everyone got into the act, both 

provincial and federal. I have many quotes here of this. “Benjamin Concerned About Abandonment”. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

491 

 

We turn it upside down and we see another one about Mr. Taylor. “Rail Line Abandonment 

Repercussions Outlined”. And Mr. Taylor is reported, as follows: 

 

This will kill over 300 communities in Saskatchewan over the next few years according to Social 

Services Minister Taylor. 

 

I don’t know where he gets his figures. He’s got 3,000 miles being abandoned and so on. I am sure that 

most of the Ministers will recall that they were very quick to get in on the rail line abandonment band 

wagon. “MacMurchy Says Rail Line Decision Made”. He quotes at Gravelbourg the fact that the 

decision is made and Mr. Trudeau will announce it right after the federal election. He has it on his desk 

and he is going to reveal it right after the election. So we find that Skoberg, MacMurchy and many 

others are telling us that those terrible Liberals or Conservatives are going to take away our railroads. 

Even Frank Buck in Qu’Appelle-Moose Mountain. 

 

And you know, we received some very strange information during late October 1972 when the federal 

campaign was coming to a close. For example, I have a letter here which was sent to all MLAs in late 

October. I will quote from that letter. And I am not critical of having received this letter at all. I was 

pleased to receive it. It’s addressed to all MLAs and it says: 

 

Mr. Don Faris, MLA for Arm River has asked that we send to all MLAs a map showing the rail lines 

that are proposed for abandonment in the Grains Group Report. A map is attached which is a slight 

enlargement .  .  

 

I am still quoting from the letter: 

 

.  .  of the map that is included in the P.S. Ross Report on grain-handling and transportation costs. The 

black line railways are those that are termed light density lines devoted to grain traffic which would 

have to be abandoned to reduce the total number of elevators in the West in 1969 to 3,600 from 

approximately 4,900. 

 

Now I don’t know who P.S. Ross is or who ever. You get a lot of people doing some kind of a study 

these days and making a report. I don’t know if anybody pays any attention and certainly no government 

is bound by their suggestions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — You know, this is similar, Mr. Speaker, to the example of the Task Force Report on 

Farming. In the Task Force Report on Farming a group of university people made some vague 

recommendations referring to farms in Nova Scotia or some place down East. And the NDP for political 

reasons tried to mislead the people into believing that this is somehow government policy. Anyway, we 

got this map with some black lines on it and naturally I looked at the ones in my area as a matter of 

interest. 

 

Strangely enough about the same time and this was late October or right at the end of the election 

campaign, we also received a pamphlet from Mr. Frank Buck, the NDP candidate in Qu’Appelle-Moose 

Mountain which included a similar map with 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

492 

rail lines also shown in black. The heading is here and I am sure everyone would be interested in looking 

at it. Mr. Buck says: 

 

We can’t afford the Liberal and Conservative plans to abandon all these rail lines, (says Frank Buck). 

 

The only catch, Mr. Speaker, apparently the map which Mr. Faris sent to us and I have it right here in 

front of me also, wasn’t politically impressive enough to suit Frank so he added a few black lines of his 

own. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, I have the map right here and you can see the line from 

Maryfield up through Kipling and up to Kendal and this happens to be the line, Mr. Speaker, which is 

used both by the Member from Cannington and myself to ship our grain. It wasn’t on any other map but 

Mr. Buck pencilled it in on his. It looked pretty good to have that big, extra, black line. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague, Tom Weatherald or myself were 

particularly worried. And I am sure that we both look forward to shipping our grain on this railroad for 

many years to come in spite of Mr. Buck’s dire prediction. 

 

Someone asked who drew this map. This is, of course, the same Frank Buck who was hired by the 

Blakeney Government right after the election for over $13,700 per year. Now I don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker, what job Mr. Buck is doing for the Blakeney Government. I don’t know if anybody else knows 

what he does for the Blakeney Government. I only hope, Mr. Speaker, that he is not sitting in some little 

room in this building drawing black lines on maps indicating railroads to be abandoned for the Premier 

of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to give you massive statistics on railroads but I should like to make one 

thing very clear. I’d like to make this point very clear, Mr. Speaker. The only major rail line 

abandonment that ever took place in Saskatchewan occurred in the early 1960s when the NDP were the 

government in Saskatchewan and the Conservatives were the government in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The railroad that passed through my home town and it served the town of Tom 

Weatherald where Tom delivers his grain, was ripped up and abandoned by the CPR, 122 miles of 

railroad at that time. The local people had very active committees trying to save our railroads. I was 

involved in that. I appeared as a witness at some of the hearings and so on. Appeals for help were made 

to the NDP in Regina and the Conservatives in Ottawa. They appealed to the NDP here. They asked the 

Premier of the time to help them out, the NDP. No help was forthcoming. We lost our railroad at that 

time with an NDP government here. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

493 

 

But note this, Mr. Speaker. Shortly after this the Liberals were elected in Ottawa and the Liberals were 

elected in Saskatchewan. In the 10 year period after we lost our railroad the Liberal governments 

involved didn’t allow this type of action to take place anywhere in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — In spite of all of the fancy talk and fancy speeches, Mr. Speaker, I ask you to very 

carefully note this fact. The only major line abandonment occurred in this province with an NDP 

government in Regina and a Conservative government in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Now, Mr. Speaker, of course, we are opposed to any plan that would deprive our rural 

people of needed rail lines and, of course, we will support any motion which indicates that. My 

sympathies are not with the CPR or the CNR or any other railroad. That should be obvious. And I wish 

to say this, Mr. Speaker, that the railroads may be capable of using devious means to support their case 

for rail line abandonment. I am well aware of that. Mr. Speaker, we are in general agreement with the 

motion but it appears inadequate in this very important aspect. To improve the motion and to make its 

meaning clearer I am going to propose the following amendment seconded by Mr. Weatherald 

(Cannington). I have it right here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That the following words be added to the motion: 

 

and further that the railroad companies be obligated to: 

 

1. Provide a high standard of service on present lines. 

2. Provide adequate maintenance and improvements on rail lines and equipment so that a high 

standard of service can be maintained. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. L. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, the performance of the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) 

never ceases to amaze me. He spent about 20 minutes talking about how wonderful rail line 

abandonment is and all the great things that happen when rail lines are abandoned. How the towns of 

Wawota and Kennedy are flourishing after the rail lines have been abandoned. Then he turns around and 

he moves an amendment that is totally nebulous and against everything that he has said. He has again, 

Mr. Speaker, totally and completely outlined the position of the Liberal Party in this whole Legislature. 

They speak for and against at the same time. I am wondering how long they can continue “to ride both 

sides of the fence”. The people of Saskatchewan, of course, are very aware of them riding both sides of 

the fence. If they think there is an inch of politics involved they will ride one side. If they think there is 

no politics involved they will ride the other. What an image, Mr. Speaker, what an image. 

 

I want to say the Premier has given a very good outline of some of the reasons why this Resolution 

should be given unanimous consent by this House. When proper account is taken of the historical 

development of transportation in Saskatchewan, 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

494 

it has to be said that it reads almost like a fairy tale. It’s full of dreams, full of ideology, full of faith, 

work, adventure, and it even has a taste of romance to it. To those who spun the dreams and the ideas, a 

debt and a tribute is due. To those who had faith in the whole project several generations are indebted. 

To those who provided the brain, the brawn, the sweat and the toil, the whole of Canada will be eternally 

indebted. 

 

Out of a vast wilderness, untamed, traversed by canoes, small boats and wagon trails, the completion of 

the railroads transformed the West into the highly developed, prosperous and well travelled country we 

have today. The history of the Canadian West may be divided into three overlapping but distinct eras. 

That of the Indians, that of the fur traders, and finally, that of assimilation to modern culture. 

 

From the viewpoint of transportation there is no marked break between the first two eras, but the change 

from the second to the third is a radical one. The building of railways from Lake Superior to the Pacific 

Coast revolutionized conditions in that area and led to its exploitation from the eastern centres. 

 

The growing interest in the West, which became effective about the middle of the 19th century was 

focused on three aims; to preserve it as a British or Canadian territory; to people and develop it and to 

establish overland communication with the East. 

 

The fusion of the Hudson’s Bay and North West Companies as early as 1821 under the name of the 

Hudson’s Bay Co. ushered in a new era in the West. The end of intense competition brought order into 

the West and to the native people. 

 

The impact of this merger coupled with the genius of Sir George Simpson, Governor of the North West, 

was to be felt for a long time to come. Although somewhat earlier, the need for railway transportation 

was very evident, water transportation continued to be the most important, yet it was basically designed 

for an unpeopled country. The fact that to the south the American railways were being built, and in fact 

had reached the Red River in 1871, put a severe strain on what was basically a water transportation 

system. 

 

It became very clear that if agriculture was to develop in the Canadian West a railway had to built. 

 

After much political controversy and change of governments in Ottawa MacDonald’s Railway Act was 

passed in 1872. This Act allowed for the granting of 25 million acres of land in aid of building a Pacific 

Railway. 

 

In 1873 the Canadian Pacific Transport system under private jurisdiction came into being. The 

mammoth job that it was confronted with was not evident to its founders. It was felt that with 

government concessions of land sufficient capital could be realized to complete the job. 

 

The financial requirements and the funds needed were much greater than ever had been anticipated. As a 

result after much negotiating, political manoeuvring, and bargaining several arrangements were finally 

agreed on and worked out. The basic motivating factors in all this was the great need for building the 

railroad. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

495 

 

In total some 25 million acres of land valued at $1 per acre was granted. $37.7 million worth of road bed 

from Selkirk to Lake Superior and to Port Moody were granted. With this land went mineral rights, sales 

concessions, choice of quality, as well as control of running rights and monopoly of freight hauls. With 

all these problems and concessions on November 7, 1885 the dream of Sir John A. MacDonald and a 

very great many other Canadians were realized. The last spike was driven. Canada was joined by steel 

from coast to coast. 

 

The principal factor that permeates this great achievement was based on good faith. Faith in Canada as a 

nation, faith in the future of this nation, but probably more important, the faith that by contracts and 

agreements it would serve the transportation needs without failure or favor for a long time to come. 

 

That this principle has been adhered to and that the service rendered has been satisfactory, is proven by 

the growth and development of the West. In the ensuing years since the railroads and branch lines were 

built and operated this growth can only be described as phenomenal. 

 

The role and the development of the railroads kept pace during this era. For a time it seemed that all rail 

transportation had been solved. That all this was not so, became evident when highways, roads and 

automobile travel began to cut into passenger service of the railroads. The reaction to this threat is an 

interesting one. 

 

Rather than meet the challenge with improved facilities and better services, the easy route was taken. 

Loss of passenger traffic was a serious and the first real threat to the principle that had built the railroads 

in the first place. Revenue losses were used as the prime factor. Little thought or action was given to any 

other factor. The net result of this has been a virtual loss today of passenger services. The role of the 

Government and the Department of Transport in this development is very significant. 

 

By application and by evidence the CPR has virtually abandoned the passenger service, while the CNR 

has curtailed it very much. The loss of passenger service, however, it not the most serious and the most 

damaging factor in today’s transportation. 

 

The advent of mechanization on the farms in the ‘40s and the ‘50s was paralleled by mechanization on 

the railroads. The introduction of the diesel engine heralded a totally new era. It replaced thousands of 

men’s jobs. It lengthened by several hundred miles the need for divisional points and services. It made it 

possible to carry much greater loads at higher speeds with smaller crews. 

 

The change and impact of this was felt very severely in a great many communities. The closing of the 

round house has been the toughest economic blow that many of the western towns have felt. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that these changes were absorbed without too many complaints 

on behalf of the railroad patrons. It was not until a general program of station closing and the removal of 

the agent that the public became 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

496 

alarmed. Again, this entailed the loss of jobs, the displacement of families and disruption of services. 

The public generally, was receptive to some change in this direction but at no time were they prepared to 

accept the long-term objectives that were envisioned by the railway management. 

 

The process of station closures and the removal of agents has been a very subtle and rather sporadic one. 

The pattern is now a very familiar one. The station that is designated for closure is known only to 

divisional management. The performance for several years is carefully documented and studied, with the 

emphasis not on service or need, but on economics. 

 

A careful plan is prepared of how to convince people that the loss of the station agent will not really be a 

hardship is prepared. A glowing picture is presented of how services will be maintained or improved. 

Finally, a meeting at the local station is called and a very high pressure public relations person is sent 

out to attend the meetings. He is well armed with statistics. He is well able to present a glowing picture 

of how and why the station is not needed. In short, he usually is able to convince the local people that 

they are getting a good deal. 

 

Out of this procedure has evolved the program now known as Servocentres. What Servocentres really do 

is totally to destroy the concept of personalized service and attendance by an agent at the station. The 

principle of the Servocentre has a much further and damaging objective. If the purpose was only to 

computerize services it would be liveable. As the services of the railroads have declined and been 

abandoned there have been other serious side effects. 

 

These side effects are now threatening the very basis and principle of the building of the railroads in the 

first place. The effects on the whole way of life in the West is being threatened. It is now quite generally 

accepted that rail line abandonment is to go ahead. The protest and fears of the consequences have, to a 

large extent, gone unnoticed or been ignored. Some vague attempts have been made to try to pacify the 

fears and consequences. The real culprit in the whole exercise has been the Federal Government. As a 

result of these very weak and feeble attempts, we had in 1960, the MacPherson Commission 

investigation and report. 

 

It is to be regretted, that in the terms of reference in this investigation all the emphasis was put on 

economics rather than other values. Little value was placed on Saskatchewan traditions or physical 

hardships that its recommendations would create. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, it found that there are about 8,480 miles of track in Western Canada. Of this 

amount, according to the railways, 5,500 miles are solely related to grain, with 3,600 miles of this in 

Saskatchewan. As of September 1, 1966 the two railways had applied for abandonment of 4,100 miles. 

In Saskatchewan the miles of track abandonment would total 2,900 miles. In the year 1970-71, if this 

plan had been followed it would have meant the closing of 377 delivery points out of a total of 991 or 

some 34 per cent. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, would have been the result of the implementation of the MacPherson Commission 

Report. This was the proposal by the Conservative Government. The terms of 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

497 

 

reference, again it should be noted, were purely economic. Farmers who vote Conservative should keep 

this fact in mind. Had the Conservatives been the Government in all possibility we would have had this 

kind of grain handling system in effect today. 

 

But a very interesting thing happened in 1966. The National Transportation Act was passed and very 

significantly provided for subsidies to the railways on account of light traffic density lines and passenger 

traffic. As could be expected with a subsidy program in effect the railroads were ordered in 1967, by the 

Government of Canada, not to abandon any further rail lines until 1975. 

 

However, this has not deterred the railways from proceeding with their plans to abandon lines. Right 

now plans are going ahead to complete the Servocentre programs. In the Dauphin, Swan River, Hudson 

Bay, Kelvington, Canora, Humboldt regions, out of 48 original station agencies only 14 are to be left 

open. The procedure is the same, the decisions have been made, the public relations job is done and the 

agencies are being closed. 

 

This is the procedure that has taken place with regard to Servocentres and withdrawal of passenger 

service. Besides the MacPherson Commission Report sponsored by the Conservative Government, 

several other studies have been made and recommendations made. 

 

This study was conducted by Underwood, McLellan and Associates Limited of Saskatoon on the 

economic effect of rationalization of the grain handling and transportation systems on the Prairie 

communities. Again, Mr. Speaker, the emphasis was on economics. After making several comments on 

the savings to be made, only a very small reference is made to disruptions on community life. After a 

study of the Qu’Appelle Basin Report, Underwood, McLellan and Associates note: 

 

The experience of 21 trade centres studied after closing elevator facilities, the conclusion reached was 

that all the centres used in the comparison were responding to a similar set of forces not much 

associated with the presence or the absence of rail lines or elevators. 

 

Again, the economic factors supersede the human factors. Again, it relates to what seems to be the 

theme for Saskatchewan, depopulate and centralize. I cannot subscribe to this theory, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — It is very interesting to note further conclusions of the Underwood, McLellan Report. 

 

1. Within the next 10 years the smallest 200 of the 540 communities would decline to where they would 

house only the elevator agent, if that. 2. The next largest 100 places would decline to the level of the 200 

now smallest, in the next 10 years to a population of less than 25 and would be on the verge of passing 

out of existence, in spite of what my friend from Moosomin says about his villages affected by 

abandonment. 3. That the loss of elevator and rail services does not weaken 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

498 

or strengthen the life of a town or a community. 4. The loss of a few jobs does not mean too much 

except to the very smallest community. 5. That no more than a total of 200 jobs in addition to the 

railroaders would be affected. 

 

All in all the report fails to consider the very real obligation the railroads have to provide basic services. 

Secondly, it fails to take into account the price Canadians have paid to have and enjoy the use of the rail 

system. 

 

I want now, Mr. Speaker, to make some reference to The Canada Grains Council. This was a search for 

a cheaper and more efficient grain-handling system. This search as chaired by Mr. E.E. Baxter, 

supported by Mr. C. Owen, former assistant of the Canada Grains Council, and Alan McLeod of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Again, we find that the principal concern is economic. 

 

The most startling finding and recommendation of this group is to reduce the number of elevators to an 

economic factor that bears no relationship to reality, to needs, or any form of consideration for people’s 

hardships or disruption. The alarming factors, here again, are that economic, rather than human values 

are paramount. No consideration is given to the position that the provincial governments will be put into 

with regard to road construction, road maintenance or the costs of the same. 

 

The Grains Council Report recommends that the elevator system be reduced from the present 1,900 now 

in operation to 280 by the year 1990. Out of these 280, 24 will be classed as A points for major 

assembly and preparation of grain for shipment and 67 will be classed as B points or points of 

intermediate handling with a capacity of two to four million bushels. 89 points would be classed as 

keeper points only. 

 

Out of this picture a total of 723 miles of railroad would be abandoned. 

 

I want to congratulate the Premier for introducing this Resolution. The whole future pattern of 

Saskatchewan rural life is at stake in what is happening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — I would remind all Members of this House of the great concessions that were granted 

the railways in return for providing a transportation system for the West. I would remind this House of 

the basic principle, the faith, that was the permeating factor in putting the railway through in the first 

instance. The principle that motivated men in the 1800s is as valid today as it was then. To say now that 

we will abandon some 1,000 or more miles of rail lines is to condemn future generations to a social way 

of life that they have no say in, or may not suit them at all. For those reasons and for many more that I 

could give, I recommend all Members of this House, to support the Resolution. I see absolutely no value 

in the amendment and, therefore, see no reason to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper ( Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to enter into debate on this 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

499 

 

Resolution and the amendment, I feel I would be remiss if I did not offer some personal views on the 

significance of this issue. Before we vote, I hope each and every Member in this Assembly will take 

time to study and analyze all aspects involved. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that all Members feel as I do, that we should band together at any time 

when an issue arises which has the potential to impose immense economic and social hardships on our 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — Mr. Speaker, without a doubt, the prospect of massive rail line abandonments imposing 

these hardships is very real indeed. 

 

There are times when political philosophies have their proper place during debate, however, I cannot see 

how being a Member on this side of the House, or that side of the House should affect the unanimous 

passage of this Resolution. Too often, Mr. Speaker, resolutions come forward, they are debated, voted 

on and forwarded to the proper authorities for their attention and nothing more is heard of it. I certainly 

hope that this does not happen with this one, it is much too important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — Mr. Speaker, I have heard it said in the past that this issue has been blown out of 

proportion. I have heard it said, Mr. Speaker, that those opposing the implementation of this policy are 

‘over-reacting’. I want to ask everyone in this Assembly, if it is right to assert that we are over-reacting, 

when we become concerned about the very survival of rural Saskatchewan as we know it today. I think, 

Mr. Speaker, the answer is quite obvious to all of us. 

 

I am sure that I share the sentiments of most when I say that it is very regrettable that this whole area of 

rail line abandonment has become such a volatile political issue. It is unfortunate and, indeed, 

undesirable when political wrangling overshadows the very real implications that are involved. 

 

The present abandonment proposals of the Federal Government will have no greater impact than right 

here in the Province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, as it now stands, Western Canada, in general, 

and Saskatchewan in particular, will not experience the real ramifications of this program until 1975, 

when the recommendations are slated to be brought in. 

 

I would say, Mr. Speaker, that in less than two years, we could find ourselves faced with the reality of 

having to watch a life style deteriorate and fade away, and all because of the very issue which we, as 

representatives of the people, are debating here this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — Some people say with conviction that it is only reasonable to expect some of the lines 

and country elevators will become outmoded and it is logical that they should be eliminated. To me, Mr. 

Speaker, that argument is logical, but 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

500 

only if based on pure economics. Surely it is not unreasonable to expect that any program, regardless of 

its significance, should take into account the social implications as well. 

 

From an economist’s point of view it might be right to tear down country elevators and to eliminate 

branch lines to a community if from a dollars and cents standpoint the profit margin is low. However, is 

it socially acceptable, or morally right to follow this same course if, in the process, the very existence of 

that small community is threatened? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I think the answer is obvious. For a moment I should like to turn to a few specifics 

to further my point. Presently, we are told that we have some 8,500 miles of rail lines in Saskatchewan. 

Present plans call for the elimination of 3,000 miles, or one-third of the total. The elevator companies 

now operate about 2,700 elevators in the province. Eight hundred of these would be slated for closure. 

There are 540 communities served by the branch lines involved. If present plans proceed, up to 300 

communities could conceivably disappear. Now, Mr. Speaker, these are not my statistics, they are rather 

based on the proposals themselves. 

 

Allow me to localize this situation even further, Mr. Speaker. By carefully studying the abandonment 

proposals of the Grains Group we note that the Weyburn constituency will be hit hard. 340 miles of rail 

line will be eliminated. In the immediate Weyburn area, 170 miles of track will be phased out. These 

closures will adversely affect the communities served and if you will pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 

to name them: Weyburn; Goodwater; Stoughton; Heward; Creelman; Froude; Griffin; Hume; Grassdale; 

Colgate; Bromhead; Gladmar; Minton; Tribune; Ceylon; Hardy and Radville. Yes, Mr. Speaker, a total 

of 17 small communities will be adversely affected. Over 2,000 people will be affected if these 

abandonments proceed and I am sure one could find similar conditions in most other constituencies 

around the province. 

 

In the Weyburn constituency, under present proposals, 35 elevators would be closed down which would 

eliminate vast storage facilities, where, during the last crop year, these elevators handled over 7.2 

million bushels of grain. 

 

More specifically, let us for a moment focus on the Goodwater line, a line which I know well. The 

Goodwater line of the Canadian National Railway, a total of 26.8 miles of line will be eliminated, if we 

are to believe what the present proposals state. This stretch of track will hit the small communities on 

this line — Goodwater, Colgate, where the average population of these villages is 65. The four 

elevators, which are on the list to go, last year handled over 600,000 bushels of grain. Some may say and 

think that this is insignificant in the total picture. However, such is not the case. 

 

This case can apply to every area affected. By eliminating storage facilities and taking out the lines 

several hardships will surface. Farmers will have to haul their grain greater distances. To do this, Mr. 

Speaker, they will have to purchase bigger trucks, those that have trucks, are still hauling by tractor and 

trailers, but they will have to get larger trucks in order to carry bigger loads and these trips will result in 

deterioration of municipal road conditions. Towns and villages will lose tax revenues when the elevators 

close 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

501 

 

and if town and village councils are to provide the same level of service, Mr. Speaker, to their 

communities, more taxes will be heaped on the remaining residents. The grain storage which is lost will 

have to be replaced and the cost of that will ultimately come out of the farmer’s pocket. Rural municipal 

taxes will go up as the result of the increased wear and tear on the roads. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have 

listed only a few of the obvious costs which will be imposed on our rural residents, but there are other 

costs as well, costs, Mr. Speaker, which are difficult to tag with a price. I ask you, can anyone put a 

price tag on the disappearance of a village? I think the answer again is obvious. Perhaps being highly 

critical of railway companies for their drive to become more efficient is not the answer, however, more 

importantly it is absolutely vital that legislators take into account all the factors before proceeding with 

this program. 

 

In the West, Mr. Speaker, we have a long standing complaint against Ottawa in regard to a number of 

agricultural matters. Freight rate revisions are long overdue, better transportation systems are needed, 

expanded storage facilities on the West Coast are needed and programs and policies to preserve and 

strengthen the agriculture industry are vital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — I say vital, Mr. Speaker, I say vital because in a province such as ours, where the vast 

majority of all economic activity is generated by the agricultural community, we cannot afford to settle 

for any program which will wreak hardship on this unique life style. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — This Resolution asks the Federal Government to hold off until they have studied every 

possible consequence which could occur. 

 

I am sure that if the Legislature unanimously forwards its concern, that the impact will be felt in Ottawa 

and at least we will succeed in doing our part as public servants to act in the best interest of the public. 

 

Earlier, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the term ‘price tag’. Might I just emphasize again that the contribution 

made by the farming industry has been invaluable. I feel that no price is too great to pay to ensure that in 

the future they are given the opportunity to continue fulfilling the needs of their fellows. 

 

I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by urging all Members of this Assembly to join in and give their unanimous 

support to this Resolution and to defeat the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, the Resolution that is now being discussed 

in this Legislature stems directly in my mind from concerns and apprehensions caused throughout this 

province since the 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

502 

Grains Group studies were made public. 

 

It is of more than passing significance that during the last several years we have seen two major studies 

directed towards the problems of the agricultural industry in Western Canada. The first was the 

celebrated report on the Task Force on Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. The second is the group of studies 

developed by the Federal Grains Group. Both these studies were conceived in the Ottawa labyrinth. 

Their terms of reference and their direction were drawn and given without reference and their direction 

were drawn and given without reference to the provinces or people who were being directly affected by 

them. 

 

It may be, in fact farmers know it to be, significant that the Task Force Report was prepared by a group 

of academics, most of whom hailed from Eastern Canada. It may also be significant that the research 

team of the Grains Group was initially headed up by a very capable employee of the CPR. He has now 

returned to his company and a no less able man has been seconded from the CNR to continue his work. 

 

Now our past experience, Mr. Speaker, indicates that we should derive small comfort from the 

assurances of the Federal Government that the Grains Group reports are for study only. We should 

seriously question that it is not the intention of the Government to force changes in the transportation 

and handling system which are not in keeping with the way of life that people in Western Canada want. 

We were told the same thing about the Task Force Report. 

 

Before that Report was even published we had the LIFT program — a recommendation of the Report — 

imposed with no consultation whatsoever. 

 

The famous Price and Income Stabilization Plan followed soon after and it was only defeated through 

strenuous efforts of New Democratic Members of Parliament supported by major Western farm 

organizations. 

 

We still have before us a slightly modified form of FARM PLAN, now known as Small Farms 

Development Program that I discussed a few days ago in this House. So, I repeat, we take small comfort 

from the statements of the Federal Government regarding their intentions with respect to the proposals 

put forward in these Grains Group studies. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think a legitimate question to ask is, what do these reports really tell us? I guess 

they tell us quite a bit. For one thing, the elevator system, the cost of the elevator system is spelled out in 

some detail in fact. The cost of operating elevators, the cost of divisional superintendents, depreciation, 

interest, taxes and so on are all set out for five years, the five years being 1964-65 to 1968-69. 

 

We find that if 5,525 miles of railway had been abandoned, if there had been 1,300 fewer elevators in 

1968-69, we would have saved 2.3 cents per bushel in elevator costs. 

 

But this saving would have been at a cost of nearly 3 billion extra bushel miles of grain haul for prairie 

farmers. Assume a cost of three-tenths cent per bushel mile for hauling grain, then the cost would be 

around $9 million. The added cost would have been borne by only about 25 per cent of the 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

503 

 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

We are further told that the future of the elevator system may be pretty shaky. 

 

But even accepting the figures in the reports and assuming that elevator companies continue to 

consolidate at the same rate as in the last few years, the saving in elevator costs by 1980 would still be in 

the order of two or three cents per bushel. 

 

We hear, Mr. Speaker, a lot of talk lately about that elevator system perhaps being obsolete. But again I 

think we have to ask, if in fact, there is some obsolescence in that system, to what extent. 

 

Last year it handled practically one billion bushels without any real apparent strain. We are accustomed 

to visitors coming from foreign countries to look at it. Because, in fact, in the world it is judged as one 

of the most efficient grain-handling systems yet developed. That is not to say, Mr. Speaker, that there is 

not need of change in the future. I suppose that is why the Grains Group has looked toward some other 

system and I don’t criticize them for that. 

 

They costed out some systems of high throughput elevators that could be built in their minds for modest 

sums of about $706 million. They also looked at a system of 22 inland terminals with high throughput 

elevator satellites to feed them. That system they estimated would cost $907 million. They also further 

looked at a system of 80 or 100 inland terminals that might be built for $680 million. 

 

Remember that all these systems are suggested as possible replacements of a system we now have, that 

is pretty well paid for and owned, for the most part by Saskatchewan or prairie farmers themselves. 

 

We may not have the best system that could be developed at this time and I am not suggesting that what 

we have cannot be improved upon. But surely, if we are to develop a better system it is not likely to be 

developed in the back rooms of Ottawa or in the back rooms in Toronto. 

 

It seems to me to make common sense that we should start with what we have — a system that can 

handle huge volumes of grain — that farmers know they can work with — rather than fly off with a lot 

of imaginary paper constructed edifices. 

 

As I have said, the country elevator system and the terminals were looked at in detail by the Grains 

Group. The operating companies were questioned in detail about their costs and these were given to the 

Grains Group consultants. 

 

Farmers were also looked at by the Grains Group. They were looked at in some detail. The age and cost 

of running their trucks was determined. They advised researchers of the details of their costs. 

 

The Grains Group also asked the railway companies for their costs. And according to the reports they 

produced them. They very generously supplied the Grains Group with three figures, Mr. Speaker. I have 

no way of knowing whether the consultants 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

504 

tried to get or even whether they did get any more information than these three figures. But they are all 

that are included in their reports. The figures were for 1969 when the railways moved 490 million 

bushels of grain. 

 

The railway companies said that their “Long term variable costs” were $80 million. 

 

The ‘Constant cost share’ said to be allocated based on the proportion of variable grain costs to a total 

variable costs, was $35 million. 

 

The cost of light density traffic lines, said to include depreciation, and cost of money and operating costs 

on lines primarily related to grain traffic was $27 million. 

 

The total cost the railways reported was $142 million or 29 cents per bushel. 

 

I think it is worth mentioning that these costs were based on an 8 per cent after tax return on capital, 

which is a little more than 14 per cent before tax. 

 

As something of an aside I might note here that the return on capital for elevator companies was 

computed at 8 per cent and for farmers 7 per cent. 

 

Now I submit that this kind of information from the railway companies is just not good enough. Why 

should railway costs be cloaked in this aura of secrecy? Is it little wonder that no one really believes the 

estimates and the costs that they put forward? We are told that to maintain their competitive position it is 

necessary that railway costs be confidential. Well, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, whom are they competing 

with? 

 

Both railway companies operate huge fleets of trucks; both are in the marine business. If they are 

competing with each other, we see mightly little evidence of it in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, does not accept the thesis that the railway costs are 

confidential. We call on the Government of Canada to pull aside the veil of secrecy and let us know 

precisely what is included in those railway costs which they brought forward. I suggest to this 

Legislature that there is only one reason for maintaining the secrecy surrounding railway costs — and it 

has to do with the theory of charging all the traffic will bear. 

 

What other reason could there be? 

 

The people of Saskatchewan consider that they have a legitimate stake in the railway system in this 

province. After all, generous federal governments conferred on railway companies more than 15 million 

acres of Saskatchewan land. Not just any land — but good land, fit for settlement and it was selected as 

such in order to provide Western Canada with a railway system. 

 

Regrettably, this gift was not accompanied by any planning of our railway system. We have two major 

railway companies with lines scattered from Radville in the South to Meadow Lake in the North. We see 

inconsistencies and waste in our railroad systems that resulted from the intensive competition that did 

not exist in the earlier days, between railway companies. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

505 

 

We see CPR lines such as the Spalding-Naicam line — or the Nipawin-Smeaton line that cannot ship 

grain to Churchill because the line going to Churchill is a CNR track. 

 

We see the CPR subdivision at Meadow Lake where they have to ‘dead head’ over 55 miles of CNR 

track to get to it. 

 

There are two major railway lines within a stone’s throw of each other all the way between Saskatoon 

and Unity. 

 

I could go on to mention the extra miles that are involved in getting grain from Eatonia — an area in 

Saskatchewan and the Drumheller line in Alberta to the West Coast over CNR lines past Calgary and 

north to Edmonton before they head west. Or the situation of the CNR on the Gravelbourg line, but these 

examples I think are enough to illustrate my point. 

 

This Government holds to the principle that before the people of this province are asked to surrender any 

rail lines, the railway system itself must be rationalized. So far the Canadian Transport Commission has 

displayed complete lack of initiative in seeing that this rationalization takes place. The National 

Transportation Act gives to the Commission authority to recommend exchange of branch lines between 

companies or the giving of running rights. It also confers on the Federal Government the authority to 

implement such recommendations. 

 

We see no evidence, no evidence whatsoever of any planning or positive action by the Transport 

Commission or the Federal Government along these lines. 

 

I submit that the Commission must do more than audit losses claimed by the railways or produce 

information to justify the abandonment of branch lines if they are to fill a useful role for the people of 

this country. 

 

Now, what is the reason behind this little exercise that the Grains Group was launched upon, and that 

has now been turned over to the tender mercies of the Canada Grains Council? I suggest to you that 

there is one reason and one reason only and that is railway costs. 

 

It will be of interest to you, Mr. Speaker, and Members of this Legislature, as it will to people of 

Saskatchewan that the railways gave the Grains Group one other figure. Assuming a four and one-half 

per cent rate of inflation the costs that will be claimed for the movement of grain to export position by 

1980 will be over 47 cents per bushel. That is truly a shocking figure. Whether we believe it or not — 

and I repeat we have no way of assessing it — it must bring to every prairie farmer’s mind and to every 

government on the prairies — indeed to every citizen — the Crows Nest Rates. 

 

These rates average around 13 cents per bushel. The discrepancy must cause all of us genuine concern. 

 

One must ask, Mr. Speaker, is this perhaps the real reason for this exercise? Or is the reason because the 

Federal Government is concerned about the subsidies paid on account of branch lines? 

 

I would just digress here a moment to note the drastic effects of inflation as pictured in the Grains Group 

reports. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

506 

I have mentioned figures that the railways use of four and one-half per cent that escalates costs by 60 per 

cent in a ten year period. 

 

The farmer too is experiencing the relentless pressures of inflation, which is forcing consolidation on 

elevator companies. 

 

If the Federal Government is genuinely concerned over the welfare of the farmer, surely the first thing, 

the most positive thing they could do would be to take decisive steps to control the spiral of inflation 

that escalates all his costs, as well, Mr. Speaker, as those incurred in moving his grain to market. 

 

Now, let us return to this matter of subsidies for a moment. All transportation in this country is 

subsidized. Air transportation receives huge subsidies through the construction of terminals and landing 

runways, two huge terminals are now underway in Eastern Canada, one outside Montreal the other 

outside Toronto. 

 

Marine transportation receives subsidies in their ports and harbours as well as in their ship building. 

 

Provincial governments build highways to accommodate larger and larger trucks with no real charge 

passed on to the trucking companies to offset those increasing costs. 

 

Why should it be anticipated that of all forms of transportation only railways could exist without 

subsidies? 

 

Members of this House will realize too the subsidies paid on branch lines are substantially below what is 

paid to support passenger traffic on railways. We understand that losses claimed on account of passenger 

traffic are of the order of $100 million compared to $30 or $40 million for branch lines. 

 

Of course the Federal Government has recently provided 2,000 hopper cars to the railways for hauling 

grain. One might venture to wonder how necessary this was when the CPR can allocate over 400 cars to 

haul American grain to the West Coast over Canadian railways. 

 

Is this another effort, Mr. Speaker, to illustrate the difference between what we are told it costs to haul 

grain and the Crows Nest rates? 

 

People in this province wonder why it is that railway profits and earnings are high when the grain 

movement is high if the grain haul is in fact so unprofitable as the railway companies try to tell us. 

 

Rightly or wrongly we cannot accept, we cannot credit, the railways’ statements of costs of grain haul. 

And how can we accept it when the actual figures, the actual breakdown of costs are kept secret from 

us? 

 

This Government has been vitally concerned since the beginning of this exercise by the Grains Group. 

We are vitally concerned over the possible prospect of removing almost 3,000 miles of branch lines in 

this province. 

 

Our concern falls into the following categories, Mr. Speaker. 1. We are concerned about the extra cost 

that would be 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

507 

 

involved in trucking grain from the farm to remote elevators. In their suggestions for abandonment, the 

railways have shown no concern over the denuding of whole areas of their transportation system. 

 

There would not be a railway left between Rosetown and Swift Current. The whole area from Leoville 

to North Battleford would be without a rail line. Heavy grain lines such as Eston and Elrose are lumped 

in with lines that have not had a train on them for years. 

 

Lines are proposed for abandonment where farmers would incur the cost of one million and even up to 

two million bushel miles of grain haul for every mile of track abandoned. Where farmers would incur 

costs of more than $5,000 extra annually, for every mile of track abandoned. 

 

2. We are concerned about the effect on communities, especially those where the removal of the jobs in 

the elevators, the taxes from the elevators and the shopping that would leave with the grain trucks would 

threaten the very existence of those communities. 

 

There are over 300 communities in Saskatchewan on lines designated to be abandoned in the Grains 

Group reports. Of these, some are very small but there are many that we would hope could be preserved. 

 

May I emphasize that it is the declared policy of this Government to do what we can to preserve our 

rural scene. We aim to preserve it to the extent that it is possible and to slow down or stop the erosion of 

our rural communities. We aim to maintain our farms at about the present numbers. We will not 

willingly see new costs imposed that would jeopardize their continued existence. 

 

3. Removal of rail lines and the extra trucking that will result will have far reaching effects on our road 

and highway systems as we see them today. Our Department of Highways is studying this problem. Our 

municipalities are also gravely concerned. We all know what extra vehicles can do to a good gravelled 

road in a week or two of bad weather, or to dust free oil surfaced roads. 

 

With all their studies of elevator configurations the Grains Group undertook no such study of this vital 

aspect. 

 

4. The glaring inconsistency of the proposed wide scale abandonment must be plain for all of us to see. 

It says in effect that a farmer can haul grain more efficiently in his 200 or 300 bushel truck than the 

railway can in a 2,000 bushel hopper car. 

 

The Grains Group were very concerned about inflation. Which method uses the most labor? Which 

method uses the most energy? 

 

The per bushel capital cost of the truck is about three times the cost of the rail car. The only reason, Mr. 

Speaker, that such a suggestion for all this abandonment comes forward at all is because we apply 

different rules. Different rules for the farmer’s labor, different rules for his return on investment to what 

is applied for the railways. The highway or road is 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

508 

built by the province, the railway must build its own road and earn a return on the investment. 

 

If we are really going to rationalize our transportation system we must go far deeper than the superficial 

treatment presented in the Grains Group studies. Members of this House are aware that we have, in 

Saskatchewan, established a central office on grain-handling and transportation systems. This office is 

now assessing the costs that will be transferred from railways to farmers through abandonment of branch 

lines. 

 

The Hon. Otto Lang has said that he would consider compensation to farmers who have added costs put 

upon them when rail lines are abandoned. It is hard to find much comfort in this, Mr. Speaker, because 

we recall the shabby treatment of the farm problem proposed through last year’s abortive Income 

Stabilization Plan. 

 

The section in the Grains Group report arrives at a cost of 1/7 of a cent per additional bushel mile or 8.1 

cents per additional truck mile. We note their questioning of allowing even a $2 labor charge for the 

driver of the truck. Because of this we cannot accept these figures. Based on past experience, we fear 

that this is what is meant by compensation. I serve notice now that it will not be acceptable. We do not 

want to see any abandonment until a fair and equitable policy for compensation is agreed upon. 

 

A major study of farm trucking costs has been commissioned by the Agricultural Economics Faculty of 

the University of Saskatchewan. We hope that this study will reveal more of the characteristics of farm 

trucking than was brought out by the limited study done for the Grain Group in Manitoba. 

 

We want to know such things as the influence of distance or added distance on the size and age of farm 

trucks, what commercial truckers are charging for hauling grain, depreciation rates that are fair for farm 

trucks, the use of farm trucks, and so on. This study, we expect, will be completed by mid-summer 1973. 

The office is also undertaking a preliminary look at what might be done to give us a more sensible 

arrangement of the railway system. 

 

We are limited, of course, by the lack of data regarding the railways and their costs. We can calculate or 

estimate the added cost to farmers, and the added cost to municipalities and the province of the road 

requirements that would result from abandonment of rail lines. We hope to make realistic appraisals of 

the effect on communities. 

 

It seems reasonable to suppose that it would be only fair that where a community is rendered non-viable 

through removal of a rail line, compensation to home owners and businesses would be and should be 

made available. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I wish to state that it is not the position of this Government that there should 

be no change in our grain-handling and transportation system. We know that there will be. We know 

that times and circumstances have changed since the system was built. However, we will insist that 

before costs are transferred from railways to farmers or community residents that two things be done. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

509 

 

One is that adequate compensation be forthcoming to the farmers and to the communities. Second, is 

that the abandonments make sense and that the railway system itself be reshaped to give service at the 

lowest possible cost to all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because I believe this Resolution, and embodying these two main considerations, be given 

first priority, I ask for unanimous approval of that Resolution from the Members of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed with great pleasure that I rise to 

enter this debate on behalf of the people of Qu’Appelle-Wolseley. 

 

This question of rail line abandonment is of vital concern to me and my constituents as we are mainly an 

area extremely dependent on agricultural production and marketing of those products. We have already 

lost one rail line which travelled from Wolseley to Wawota and on eastward. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — When did that go? 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Quite a while ago as you are well aware of. The latest report done for the Grains Group 

shows that abandonment of this line did not have disastrous effects on the communities involved and 

therefore concludes that further abandonment of lines would have little effect on communities. I say 

there should be no comparison made between this line and many of the others left unprotected after 

1975. To me, Mr. Speaker, it is like comparing chickens with lions. 

 

The line which formerly travelled through Wawota was a light density run and distances from adjacent 

rail lines never exceeded 10 or 15 miles, thus the alternate delivery point the farmer had to choose meant 

an extra haul mileage of probably only five to seven miles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the lines in Qu’Appelle-Wolseley which will be unprotected after 1975, 

we see a shocking picture. Most serious of all will be the removal of the CP line from Regina to 

Stoughton, more affectionately referred to as the Dinky Line, which runs parallel to Highway No. 33. 

This railway is a Class 2 line with a 224,000 pound carrying capacity. In farmers’ terms, this means the 

line is capable of carrying hopper cars with 3,000 bushels of wheat in each. On this line, Mr. Speaker, is 

a high production area of the Regina Plains, and many high volume delivery points such as Francis, 

Fillmore, Creelman and Stoughton. 

 

The nearest railways run parallel to it a distance of at least 25 miles either north or south, except for a 

piece of track running from Weyburn through to Stoughton which travels through the point of Griffin 

which is approximately 15 miles from Fillmore. This piece of railway is also scheduled for abandonment 

after 1975. I don’t know how the railway officials expect a Class 3 track which can only handle a 

carrying capacity of 177,000 pounds to handle the volume of grain that is produced in our area along 

Highway No. 33. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

510 

The towns along Highway No. 33 are for the most part still progressive communities and two or three 

times as large as those along the southern route, which have suffered severe population losses and 

withdrawal of service facilities. To give a cost to the farmer and losses resulting from the removal of this 

line, I shall use, Mr. Speaker, another line where estimates are available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian National Railway has a spur line running south of Peebles through 

Bemersyde, Corning and on to Handsworth, a total distance of 22.3 miles. Over the last five years the 

Canadian National has done everything in their power to persuade farmers to use other quota points. The 

track has not been properly maintained, weeks on end pass without cars being spotted in the winter, and 

I have heard more excuses and reasons, Mr. Speaker, such as the problems of splitting trains at Peebles 

and then of synchronizing the diesel units after regrouping the cars that are brought in from the spur. 

And after consultation with different railway people, I find that the problems that the railways are using 

to explain their lack of service, to be total hogwash. 

 

These communities, Mr. Speaker, are in severe difficulty now with poor trucking services and maybe 

they will cease to exist as viable service centres, but what of the farmers involved? 

 

I have here an estimate of the extra trucking costs which will have to be borne by the farmers in the 

Corning subdivision. Volumes handled last year by the three points were: Bemersyde — 336,000 

bushels; Corning — 691,000 and Handsworth — 290,000 bushels, making a total of 1,317,000 bushels 

to be delivered. This grain is produced by approximately 200 farmers. Using the figure, Mr. Speaker, of 

1/3 of a cent per bushel mile which was established for the Grains Group report, and in my opinion 

somewhat low and an average haul distance of 12 miles they arrived at a net cost to the farmers of 

approximately $58,000 per year if the rail line is abandoned. Personally, I would expect the cost to the 

farmers to exceed $75,000 per year as the Grains Group figure of 1/3 of a cent per bushel mile did not 

take into consideration depreciation on the vehicle. We look at a one-ton truck hauling 100 bushels of 

wheat 12 miles and we find that under their formula it would cost about $3.96 and I ask you how many 

commercial truckers will make a 12-mile haul — which is a 24 mile round trip — for approximately 

three or four cents a bushel. Not too many of them will hire on for that kind of a figure. 

 

Farmers will also have to replace their 1952, or 1942, or 1954, one-ton truck, which was already fully 

depreciated but served them well to haul two or three miles to Corning. And they will have to replace 

that truck with a newer two or three ton truck. Also to be considered, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that a very 

low labor return was considered in the Grains Group figure of 1/3 of a cent per bushel mile. 

 

The researchers felt that farmers delivered grain usually in their slack time. I challenge this assumption 

especially under the new quota system. I did some quick investigating and found that the breakdown in 

the grain handled by this area to be approximately 2/3 wheat and 1/3 coarse grains. I, therefore, base my 

calculations of value of grain handled or to be diverted, at $1.20 per bushel and find the resulting value 

at 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

511 

 

$1.5 million. Therefore, the theft or tax to the farmers in this area will amount to either four or five per 

cent of their gross income, if the rail line abandonment takes place. Using the estimated figure of 

$58,185, which was in their report, which will be borne by 200 farmers, we find this amounts to 

approximately $300 per farmer per year. This is an insane solution to the railway’s problems, if, indeed, 

they have any problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want everyone in this province to remember that under the Conservative Government, 

and to a lesser extent the Liberal Government, the railways were given 15 million acres of good land in 

Saskatchewan, the selection of said property the choice of the railways. This is 15 million acres, at the 

time of the construction of the railways. That is just about 1/5 of the farm land in this province. They 

gave the railways this 15 million acres in payment for construction of the railway lines across Canada. 

This contract should be binding on the railways, as they were paid in full to provide service to Canada 

and to Saskatchewan, whether at a loss or not. 

 

I should like to relate to the MacPherson Commission on Transportation which was commissioned on 

May 13, 1959 by the Conservative Government of John Diefenbaker, which started the whole movement 

towards abandonment of selected rail lines. 

 

Thank Heaven the Pearson Government passed the National Transportation Act in 1967, which stopped 

further implementation of the abandonment recommendations of the MacPherson Commission until 

1975. It is, indeed, interesting to read the reservations of Mr. A.R. Gobeil, who was a member of the 

MacPherson Commission, but who could not agree with all recommendations, and I refer to pages 78 to 

93 in the volume 1 of the report. 

 

In his reservations he expressed the argument that the railways and the government had a binding 

agreement and could not be amended without agreement by both sides. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, if 

the railways want to abandon trackage, let them also forfeit an equal percentage of the land back to the 

provinces concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Returning, Mr. Speaker, both physical property and mineral rights. If they want to 

abandon 35 per cent of the trackage in Saskatchewan, give us back 35 per cent of the 15 million acres of 

land with all the full mineral rights to compensate our loss. The province can certainly use this revenue 

to build highways to carry the grains that the Canadian Pacific and the Canadian National don’t feel 

obligated to. 

 

As I have pointed out, Mr. Speaker, the judgments of the Commission and the two old-line parties who 

support their findings, does not make sense to Western Canadian farmers. Their rationalization scheme 

displays the rationale of a dog with rabies and the perception of a chicken about to put his head on the 

chopping block. It is an insane plot that cannot be justified, that we farmers cannot afford, and will not 

accept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — I ask you, Mr. Speaker, do 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

512 

we, the farmers, get second and third chances to rectify parts of contracts which we feel are 

disadvantageous to us without the other party having a similar opportunity? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must now embark on a plan to unite the two railways so that complete co-ordination 

develops within the system. Then, and only then, can a plan of abandonment be struck, if, indeed, it is 

ever necessary to remove some lines. Under one administration the railway could sit down with the 

provincial government involved, elevator companies and most important, the farmer representatives, and 

design a plan which would utilize the best tracks with the least detrimental effect to the farmer and his 

community. 

 

May I again mention appreciation to Mr. Pearson’s Government for stalling the Conservative 

recommendation at least until 1975. Mr. Trudeau said, “Why should I sell your wheat?” But at least he 

agreed to move some grain for us for a couple of years. 

 

What the other Party under Robert Stanfield would have done scares me when we look at the history of 

the railways development and the politicians and shareholders involved, many of whom were one and 

the same or closely associated. I say with all sincerity that we New Democrats are the only Party capable 

of representing Western farmers’ interests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to speak in defence and on behalf of the farmers and 

townspeople of Qu’Appelle-Wolseley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hanson: — We cannot sit idly by in our kitchens and take what big brother railway gives us. The 

time to fight is here. Do not use your alternative delivery point if possible, as this reduces volume and 

gives them an excuse to withdraw services. I would also urge people in the province to write their MPs 

and tell them what their stand should be on this subject. 1975 is not far away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, with great pleasure, may I also support and second the motion put by the Hon. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H. Owens (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in support of this most important 

Resolution. 

 

For a number of years we have been hearing and reading about rail line abandonment as proposed by the 

railway companies, and which has been stalled until 1975, which is getting mighty close. 

 

My few remarks on this controversy will centre around the area which I have the privilege to represent, 

the constituency of Elrose, although it will overlap slightly into Rosetown and Kerrobert-Kindersley. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

513 

 

This area of the province, lies north and west of the South Saskatchewan River and Lake Diefenbaker 

and south of the commonly called Goose Lake Line that runs through Rosetown and Kindersley, and is 

one of the finest grain-growing areas in Saskatchewan. I will give you some figures in this regard. I hope 

that you know the area well enough to realize just what will be the result if the railroads are allowed to 

proceed with their plans. 

 

The Eston-Elrose line is one of the heaviest grain lines in the entire province, yet the CNR calls this a 

light density line. Mr. Speaker, may I read from page 386 of The Debates and Proceedings of the 

Saskatchewan Legislature, First Session of 1965. This being a non-political debate, I would record the 

words of my predecessor from Elrose, George Leith, during debate on rail line abandonment at that 

time. I am going to quote two paragraphs, Mr. Speaker, on page 386. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Elrose constituency has particular concern regarding the intentions of the railway 

companies. We are served by two branch lines of the CNR, called the Elrose Subdivision and the 

Beechy Subdivision. There is also a short branch, of the CPR. We don’t know what the intentions of 

the CPR are, but we do know that the CNR has asked for permission to abandon their lines in Elrose 

constituency. These proposals are absolutely unthinkable to the people of that area. If the CN lines 

come out of our area some farmers would have to haul grain at least 36 miles, the cost of which added 

to the already high cost of farming would be completely prohibitive. Then there are other costs which 

are not so easily foreseen, but which must be anticipated in abandonment of branch lines. These costs 

should perhaps be called losses because they will represent the direct and abrupt slashing of property 

values. Even the elevators that must be moved and the ones that are being moved now will be 

immediately worth much less if the track beside them is taken up. Businesses and homes will suffer 

the same overnight depreciation. 

 

This situation is not peculiar to Elrose constituency, it is common to the whole of Saskatchewan if 

abandonment is allowed to take place on the present terms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Leith and I may not, in fact we do not agree on a good many issues, but on this 

particular one we do. Since Mr. Leith has made that speech, the CPR have asked for abandonment of 

their line in the Elrose area. The total trackage involved CN and CP is approximately 295 miles. This 

mileage services about 44 delivery points. According to proposed plans this trackage could all disappear 

and the area included in the Elrose constituency would have one delivery point left on tracks. The grain 

would need to be hauled mostly to the Goose Lake Line to the north and a small amount crossing the 

river at Saskatchewan Landing with delivery at Swift Current. Let me give you an approximation of the 

bushels of grain handled, the present length of haul and the average miles involved under the proposed 

rail line abandonment plans. The figures are for 1970-71. On the Milden-McForgan line in that year 

there were 1,235,000 bushels handled. The present haul is four to five miles, the added mileage from 

four to eighteen with the added bushel miles 9,931,000. The Eston-Kindersley line 3,625,000 bushels — 

the 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

514 

present haul is two to eight miles, the added miles, six to nineteen, with 45,148,000 added bushel miles. 

On the Juniper-Richlea line 6,785,000 bushels of grain handled, with four to eight miles of haul and 

added hauling miles six to twenty-four with the added bushel miles 103,421,000. The Tichfield-Beechy 

line 3,714,000 bushels handled; four to eight mile haul, the added mileage four to forty-four, the added 

bushel miles, 103,172,000. The Eston-White Bear line 1,942,000 bushels of grain handled, four to seven 

mile haul, the added miles for hauling twenty-one to forty-eight with added bushel miles 65,513,000. 

The Gunnworth-Matador line, the grain handled 1,465,000, the present haul four to seven miles, added 

miles for hauling thirty-four to forty-six, added bushel miles 54,806,000. 

 

These sound like mighty large figures and they are. They need to be recorded in order to consider the 

extra cost to the farmer. One of the most significant figures is the added bushel miles making a total of 

381,991,000. The cost of hauling via truck is not firmly established. You will recall that last fall a test 

project was carried out with grain (it was barley I think) which was hauled by truck to the government 

elevators in Saskatoon. The results of this project are not too conclusive evidence of the cost of trucking 

grain either from an individual farmer or on a commercial basis. But in this case they tell me the costs 

worked out to approximately one-tenth of a cent per bushel. On that basis the cost to the permit holders 

for grain delivered to the new designated points from the Elrose constituency would in round figures be 

$382,000. If we assume, Mr. Speaker, the figure that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) used in 

his address of three-tenths of a cent per bushel mile, the figure would be $1,146,000. I might add that in 

the test that was used at Saskatoon that this would have to be considered as an ideal hauling situation. 

All the grain that was picked up in the Saskatoon area and a great many miles would be hauled on either 

oiled surface or hard surface roads, which would not be the case if it was hauled out of the Elrose area. 

 

Let me further point out that last fall was an ideal and exceptionally good fall for transporting by road. 

The weather at that time was comparatively dry and continued to stay dry during the time the hauling 

was being done. We can all recall some seasons when truck transporting would be much more difficult 

with heavy precipitation and soft road conditions. We must also bear in mind that grain deliveries are on 

a twelve-month basis and all kinds of weather and road conditions would be encountered. 

 

Another very important aspect of truck hauling is the effect on our road system, whether they be 

municipal, farm access, grid or highway. Many of these roads and bridges are not built for carrying 

loads of this type, so the cost of building and maintenance will be extremely high. It is doubtful if the 

local municipalities could cope with the high cost of road building and maintenance required when we 

consider the excessive expenditures involved, which I am sure the taxpayers would be unable to bear 

unless the input from senior governments was greatly increased. It appears that we are faced with a shift 

of costs to the producer. The railways are endeavoring to slip out and let someone else pick up the tab. 

Another side effect of hauling grain by truck in such large volume, is that of highway safety, more 

especially as it pertains to dirt roads and the dangerous dust hazard conditions. It is difficult to realize 

the potential menace that will be experienced by the travelling public. 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

515 

 

I have dealt, Mr. Speaker, only with the monetary aspect of the rail line abandonment program which I 

feel is not as important in reality as the social aspects. The effects on our smaller towns and our rural 

community life would be disastrous. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we should take a rational approach to rail line abandonment recognizing that some 

changes in our style and pattern of grain delivery are inevitable and needed; some rail lines will be rolled 

up but let us look at the complete picture and plan accordingly, sanely and soundly. The Elrose area, and 

I am sure many others are similar, just simply cannot allow the withdrawal of railway services as is 

being proposed in the rail line abandonment program. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I urge all Members of this Assembly to support this very important resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Oliver (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to express my support of this Resolution on behalf 

of the farmers and businessmen of the Shaunavon constituency. 

 

It has been alluded to that the history of the railroad is laced with government subsidy of one form or 

another. The Federal Government in those days was weak, as it is now. They didn’t want to risk being 

unpopular with the people by building a railroad out West, which was an absolute necessity if the West 

was going to be developed. The development of the West was rather a dicey issue because there was no 

economic feasibility study that proved to the Easterners that it was necessary. But this was no excuse for 

the Federal Government to procrastinate on the issue, they should have taken the initiative and built the 

railroad and therefore the people of Canada would have had control over it. However, when trouble 

among the Métis and Indians and white settlers began to get very serious, the Federal politicians seized 

this opportunity to have someone else build the railroad with the aid of government funds and incentives 

in the form of land grants, operating guarantees and the like. Then if there was any static they would 

turn around and say, “Well it wasn’t us, it was those bad CPR people etc.”. They would have a 

scapegoat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The branch lines were built with the idea of service to rural Saskatchewan. This seemed to work out 

fairly well if you exclude the fact that the freight rates they charged were exorbitantly high. They 

worked fairly well until the trucking industry appeared on the scene. At about this same time though, the 

railroad companies found the hotel business very lucrative and began to get into the building of large 

hotels in a great way all across Canada. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, in the Leader-Post a few 

days ago, there was an item where the CNR is building the world’s tallest building, called the CN Tower 

in Toronto, it is going to be 1,805 feet high and as the Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Hanson) 

says, all on farmers’ money. I agree with that. 

 

It is only natural though that they should follow their private enterprising philosophy and curtail services 

in rural Saskatchewan, to bolster their hotel business. First, the curtailments began in a very subtle way. 

The first casualty was mail service. Mr. Speaker, I remember when our little home 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

516 

town had two trains a day, six days a week. This was on the Shaunavon-Assiniboia line which runs 

directly through the entire Shaunavon constituency. The mail service was reduced to three times a week 

and then it was withdrawn altogether. So followed the passenger services and then came the freight 

problems. Freight was held back until a carload lot was made up, then it was shipped. Since the 

termination of the passenger and mail service, the local station agents began to disappear. I should just 

like to mention that the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson) stated that in his constituency they had hearings, 

well, no such luck down in our corner. There were no meetings along that line so that the CPR could 

explain or soften the blow. 

 

The removal of the agents had the effect of freight being set off at any station nearest the actual 

receiving point. You can well imagine the absolute chaos this created, long delays in freight delivery and 

losing part or all of the shipment was common. No wonder people started using some other means of 

transportation. The rail companies said the shipments were inefficient and so explained away their 

switch to transport trucks. Mr. Speaker, I had a personal experience of this efficiency. Having moved to 

a new location on the farm, we dug a new well and I ordered, through my local agent, a steel well crib, 

four feet in diameter, 24 feet long from a firm here in Regina. After waiting two weeks and it didn’t 

arrive, I asked the local agent if he would check it out for me. He did, and said it had been shipped. 

Confirmation had been received that it had been shipped from Regina via truck. After waiting another 

week, I got on his back again, and didn’t get off until he found out that the cribbing had been shipped 

out to somewhere between Regina and Aneroid and it got lost. How could a piece of pipe four feet in 

diameter, 24 feet long get lost on a transport truck? That’s efficiency. But this is the type of efficiency, 

Mr. Speaker, that is really a crucial factor in the decline of services and the depopulation of rural 

Saskatchewan. There is nothing more galling than to be driving down our highways which often run 

parallel to railroad tracks and to meet those large transport trucks with the big letters on them, CP. You 

can meet one truck after another on the highway. But why must such heavy traffic be rolling over our 

provincial highways when the owners of those trucks also own about half of the railroads in 

Saskatchewan with road beds that are capable of carrying hundreds of times that of our highways? The 

tracks have been allowed to deteriorate to the extent that in some parts of Saskatchewan, such as in the 

Gravelbourg constituency, Neidpath-Burnham section they can only take locomotive traffic when the 

ground is frozen. These tracks get so badly in need of repair that it is unsafe to use them, so they are 

abandoned by default and not because their potential use isn’t there. 

 

The Premier has alluded to the fact that the Diefenbaker Government inaugurated the MacPherson 

Commission to study the rationalization of rail lines and related problems. The report was legislated 

however, by the Federal Liberals, but since an election was close at hand and our Saskatchewan 

Members, the New Democrats put on such flurry they postponed action. It is obvious that the old line 

parties are not willing to ruffle the feathers of their corporate friends, but are ready to allow 

approximately 3,000 miles of track to be torn up, closing up some 800 country elevators. 

 

The Member of Parliament for Swift Current-Maple Creek, while being interviewed on radio not too 

long ago said, “Well it 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

517 

 

was tough, but since they were inefficient they would have to go.” Mr. Speaker, this is the philosophy of 

the Liberals and Conservatives. As long as they can make a fast buck out of something they could care 

less about services or the catastrophic effect such as withdrawal of services have on rural life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Oliver: — The Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) also talked in costs to the rural villages. In our 

little town of Aneroid, from the facts that I received from the Wheat Pool, the Wheat Pool Elevator 

alone contributes over $3,000 to the Aneroid Town council in taxes each year. The large trucks that are 

in our area, the tandems, do have problems in some of the line company elevators, but since the Pool is 

owned by farmers they thought about the future and built their elevators for the future so they can now 

handle these trucks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rail line abandonment puts a real problem the laps of the farmers who are farthest away 

from the delivery point. They have to truck long distances and when a quota is announced, quite often 

there is such a rush to get the grain to the elevator that the farthest ones away usually are the last ones in 

and don’t always get their quota in before the elevators are plugged. It is very evident, though, Mr. 

Speaker, that only the New Democrats are ready and willing to fight to the last man this ridiculous 

philosophy of inefficiency of the old line parties who are driving the farmers and businessmen out of 

rural Saskatchewan, those Members opposite who are always bragging that the increase in grain sales is 

somehow due to the efforts of Otto Lang. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, thanks to Otto Lang we are going to have 3,000 miles of track torn up and 800 

country elevators closed up also. Well, Mr. Lang and Liberals opposite, the people of Saskatchewan are 

fed up with your cut-throat philosophy and will register their objections at the corning federal election. 

Further, I would urge the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) if he has as much influence on Mr. 

Trudeau as he would like the Saskatchewan people to believe, to have this ridiculous idea of rail line 

abandonment dropped and initiate plans to increase services to rural Saskatchewan and not to curtail 

them. Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, I must say that it has been a very interesting afternoon. I must 

mention as well that it has been a very disappointing afternoon. We have heard MLA after MLA stand 

up on their feet trying to defend their position when they were the government, a position which the only 

time ever a mile of railroad line was abandoned in this province was when they were the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — When they were the government! And they are standing up here this afternoon trying to 

blame a Liberal government, trying to blame someone else for this terrible thing that happened when 

they were the government. They realized that they 



 

February 8, 1973 

 

 

518 

were wrong at that time. They are looking for a political issue and we have wasted a whole afternoon .  .  

 

An Hon. Member: — With John Burton’s speeches. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — .  .  hoping that they in turn could justify themselves. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Should have been talking about unemployment. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Certainly, we could talk about unemployment. I imagine if we did that we would be 

called out of order. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, going back to the Premier’s remarks. He mentioned something about the fact that he 

wrote the Prime Minister of Canada and he hasn’t received an answer for three months. Well, if he has 

as much concern about what’s happening to rail line abandonment that he has to waste a whole 

afternoon debating it in the House, why didn’t he pick up the phone and phone the Prime Minister and 

say, why haven’t I got an answer. Where was his concern? He was looking strictly at some political 

motive which he could bring into the House. 

 

As well this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we heard many comments about those terrible Liberals, those 

terrible Conservatives, and yet how much concern was expressed about the rural way of life? How many 

were really sincere about this rural way of life? This can certainly be made more clear from the 

comments made by the Members and the flippant remarks made by the Attorney General (Mr. 

Romanow). It was basically an afternoon that was motivated for political advantage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — As well, there are a few who wanted to get on record back to their own constituencies 

that they, of course, stood in favor of mother love and this type of thing. Well, talking about mother love 

is nothing new. If the Members opposite want to talk about mother love, I am willing to spend another 

whole afternoon talking about mother love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:27 o’clock p.m. 


