



















































Hansard: May 03, 1973


3231 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

71st Day 

 

May 3, 1973. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

RULING BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

HOUSE PROCEDURE 

 

He said: Before I call Orders of the Day, on May 2, 1973 on the Orders of the Day, two questions were 

directed to the Chair by the member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). Questions of the Chair should be in 

writing to the Speaker, however, at that time I agreed to answer his questions later. 

 

Question number one: How can we get a Recorded Vote on last night’s Bill No. 124? The only opportunity 

to have a recorded vote will be on Third Reading of this Bill. 

 

Question number two: What steps should Members take if they wish to speak before the vote is taken? 

 

In all cases the Chair advises the Members before the mover closes the debate. If the mover is not closing the 

debate, the Chair always asks, is the House ready for the question. If a Member wishes to speak he should 

follow Rule No. 22 which reads: 

 

Every Member desiring to speak is to rise in his place, uncovered, and address himself to Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This does not mean that he just rises and stands there. He must address himself to Mr. Speaker, in an audible 

voice so that the Speaker is able to see and to hear him. Members should not stand in the aisles visiting with 

other Members. If they do, the Speaker doesn’t know if they are trying to get the Speaker’s attention or not. 

 

Members wishing to discuss with other should go to the chairs at the back or sit on the steps near the 

Member he is visiting. Members speaking should be very careful not to refer to other debates or debates 

which took place in a committee. If this is done, the Speaker is not aware of the statements and at a later 

time, when the reply is being made to those statements, it causes the House to become out of order and puts 

the Speaker in an impossible position if a Point of Order is raised. 

 

If further explanation is wished, I shall be pleased to discuss it with Members in my office. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I have just one comment. There is one 

little difficulty and I would hope that the Speaker would appreciate the point of view we are tying to put 

here. 

 

When the Speaker stands on his feet, very often that can take five seconds for the vote to be finished. You 

have asked us, on many occasions, not to stand while you are standing. We 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3232 

would ask that when you call the Vote, to stop and sit down and make sure you check both sides of the 

House, or some pause which would enable any other Member to get on his feet and make the request. 

 

We certainly agree with the presentation that you made this morning about the fact it should be an audible 

presentation. I think, to the one particular important issue, The Forestry Act. I think there were three 

Members that did attempt to do that, but because you were on your feet and reading the Vote, they didn’t 

wish to interrupt you, and bang, the Vote was over without the opportunity of them speaking. 

 

So we will accept your ruling. We would hope that you would have that pause, so that we can ensure that 

every Member would have his opportunity to get on his feet when you are not on your feet, which is certainly 

the rule of the House. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I do not wish the Speaker’s statement to be debated but all that a Member has to do, 

when I am looking down, to just say, Mr. Speaker, then I know that someone is trying to get my attention. 

 

CORRECTION OF STATEMENTS ON REFINERY IN KAMSACK 

 

HON. K. THORSON (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in response to a 

question by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart), I made some statements with respect to the refinery 

at Kamsack, Saskatchewan. 

 

I said, yesterday, that it was my understanding that the local Credit Union was prepared to lend up to 

$100,000 to a local group. At that time I was under the impression that the Credit Union was, indeed, willing 

to do that. 

 

Last night, on the telephone, I spoke to one of the people at Kamsack who had been trying to organize a local 

group with respect to possible purchase of the assets of the refinery and I now wish to correct an impression I 

left because I think that I was in error, when I believe that the local Credit Union was prepared to lend that 

much money. 

 

I want to state clearly that according to the information I now have, the Credit Union has never committed 

itself to lending that amount of money and that discussions may well proceed with the local Credit Union 

and with Canadian Propane officials. But I think that it was in error and it was an error which was my fault, 

because I took the wrong impression from information that had been supplied to me with respect to the 

position of the Credit Union in Kamsack. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

KAMSACK REFINERY 

 

MR. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day I should then like to direct a 

question to the Minister about the refinery in Kamsack. I ask if he would state whether or not the 

Government, either directly or through SEDCO, is prepared to back up the efforts 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3233 

of any group to keep that refinery going by long-term loans, grants or by taking an equity position? 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday, the Government had said that it was prepared to 

guarantee a loan of up to $125,000 liability. When the Government made that decision and that offer to the 

Kamsack group, I was under the impression and the Government was under the impression, that that is all of 

the financial assistance that would be required. Since I spoke to one of the local people on the telephone last 

night, I am led to believe that more assistance may be required form some source other than local sources. 

 

I have undertaken, in my telephone conversation, to say that if the Kamsack group will indicate the extent of 

any additional financial assistance that may be required, I am prepared to present that to the Government and 

support their position within any reasonable limits. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney 

General) that Bill No. 129 — An Act to amend The Attorney General’s Act be now read a second time. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I shall ask the Hon. Attorney General to 

stand this item as I know Mr. Lane wishes to speak to it. 

 

As I understand the rules, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lane not being here can nonetheless speak at a later time to the 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just have on or two remarks about the Bill and I should like to suggest that I have sympathy 

with the general aims of the Bill, but I have some opposition to the Bill also. 

 

The Law Society and the practising Bar believes that the plan instituted by the Liberal Government should be 

continued and extended, that the time has come to put more money into legal aid into the Province of 

Saskatchewan and that the number of areas covered by the Legal Aid Plan should be expanded. 

 

I observe in the Budget that there is more money planned for this current year. I hope that not only will 

criminal cases be covered, but an area of civil cases will also be covered by the expanding Plan started by the 

Liberals. 

 

The problem that I have with this Bill is that it is too nebulous. It puts too much power in the hands of the 

Attorney General. It is possible, Mr. Speaker, with the Government doing the things that they have done, we 

now believe that every path is beset by lions. And we may be reading far more deviousness into the Bill than 

is appropriate. Nonetheless, we have grown cautious on this side of the House and are unwilling to have the 

Government give unto itself a blanket authority to make any kind of a deal, with any person it chooses. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3234 

I, therefore, suggest to the House, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot accept the broad powers which are set forth in 

the Bill, unless the Government is prepared to make amendments; and I have only one suggestion, (there are 

other possibilities), that is: That no contract entered by the Attorney General or the Government pursuant to 

Item 3 or 3(c) or 3(d) or pursuant to the regulations under 3(d), be acceptable without the concurrence of the 

Law Society of Saskatchewan. Unless the Law Society approves each and every plan, contract, arrangement 

or agreement I believe the Attorney General should not proceed. 

 

The Law Society of Saskatchewan is a very responsible body. It has acted wisely and over the years has done 

an extremely good job in protecting the legal rights and the welfare, legally, of the people of Saskatchewan. I 

believe that kind of a suggestion would strengthen the Bill; would go far towards satisfying us on this side. 

At the moment, despite the feelings that I have, that we need a broader plan with more money, I do not 

support the particular amendments set forth in this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, that is mainly our concern as expressed by the Hon. 

Member from Albert Park. 

 

We can see the powers given that the Government can make agreements with any organization he wants. 

There is a potential for abuse which we object to. We think that the Law Society should have the final okay. 

We note that the amendments or the Legal Aid Plan as brought in by the former Liberal Government, was a 

Law Society program and it was specifically set out. This is now, of course, in the Attorney General’s 

program. I realize the need for more flexibility, but we cannot accept the fact that the Attorney General can 

now make agreements with any organization he wants, which is obviously set out in the Bill. 

 

It is that very nebulous position, with the very broad, broad powers given to the Attorney General, that we 

object to without the requirement that the Law Society approve these. 

 

For these reasons we object to the Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will be very brief in rebuttal, but I do 

think that some important points have been raised by the Members opposite. 

 

First of all, we have a peculiar problem with respect to the Province of Saskatchewan. And the problem is 

really two-fold. Firstly, our plan in the present setup does not allow federal compensations or federal 

reimbursements on a per capita basis. Members will know that the Federal Government has offered a 

formula of 50 cents per capita for compensation back to the Provincial Government. 

 

During the course of our rather extensive negotiations with the Justice Department — I’ll just check to see 

whether the letter was personal or confidential, and it isn’t — Mr. Lang, the Minister of Justice, writes as 

follows on March 20th with 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3235 

respect to our plan. He says, quote: 

 

Regarding your final question concerning the eligibility of the current Saskatchewan Legal Aid Plan 

to qualify for Federal contribution, under the terms of the proposed Federal-Provincial agreement, 

retroactive to January 1, 1973, I have examined a copy of the plan which you sent with your letter 

and it is my impression that it would exclude or restrict a number of matters which are required to be 

covered under the proposed agreement. For example, it is limited to only some of the Federal statutes 

and regulations where offences or proceedings contemplated by the agreement arise. 

 

Appeals by the Crown are made discretionary and the plan would appear to deny legal aid to person 

who are subject frequently to criminal charges. 

 

In these circumstances I feel that your existing plan is not sufficiently in accord with the proposed 

agreement to permit a Federal contribution during the period January, 1973 to the date to which are 

able to implement the terms of the agreement. However, given flexibility, the proposed agreement in 

terms of the type of legal aid plan which the province may choose to adopt shortly, I would hope that 

you will be able to give effect to the terms of the agreement. 

 

Signed: Otto Lang. 

 

So what he is saying to us, in short, is that our present plan is inadequate and doesn’t meet the Federal 

standards in terms of getting compensation. So we have to amend out plan if we are going to get the 50 cents 

from the Federal authorities. So that is point number one. 

 

Point number two. We feel that we have to try and organize ourselves to move now in the area of legal aid, 

particularly as has been pointed out to us by Dean Carter for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan, the legal aid services are really paltry. They are next to being non-existent, apart 

from the fact that lawyers are volunteering out of Saskatoon to travel on a regular basis. 

 

So the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) says that they don’t oppose it but they are worried about the 

generality of the Bill. Well, we have two choices. We either make the Bill specific, in which case, there can 

be no Bill this Session, because the letter is dated March 20, 1973, of the rejection and we are just unable to 

implement it. We are unable to make any specific decisions as to what we are going to do with the Carter 

Report. We don’t know whether we are going to accept or reject it or take it under amended circumstances. 

So we have the choice of either waiting until we have something specific in law, in which case we miss this 

Session, and nothing is done. Either, (a) to get Federal contribution, in order to allow us legislation which 

will allow us to amend out agreement, or (b) to allow us to implement in those areas where it is absolutely 

necessary and where we can without any major disruption of the Legal Aid Plan, implement any of the 

recommendations of the Carter Report. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3236 

So that is the one choice. The other choice is the choice that we have adopted. To amend the Act to give us 

some flexibility. As I said in Second Reading, and I can repeat again in winding up, the intention of my 

Government, of our Government, is as follows: 

 

We want to amend this law to do two things. (1) To allow us o amend our present plan in order to allow us 

to receive the Federal contribution. Because we don’t think it should go without Saskatchewan benefiting. 

(2), To start gearing up for the implementation of a new Legal Aid scheme. I want to assure the Members 

before we go ahead and implement any final legal aid scheme, we will be in consultation with the Law 

Society of Saskatchewan. There is no doubt about that. 

 

I must, however, say quite frankly to the Member for Albert Park, that I for one would not approve of the 

suggestion that no Legal Aid Plan be implemented without the concurrence of the Law Society. I think that it 

is highly desirable that we have extensive negotiations and get their approval if possible, but I am sure that 

all Members would agree that we are the Government, and I do not say that in any arrogant way, and we 

must have the ultimate decision-making power as to what we think is in the best interest of the citizens, not 

in the best interest of the Law Society of Saskatchewan 

 

Although we are going to get ourselves involved in negotiations, and we intend to do so, we can’t. I don’t 

think, agree to an amendment which says that nothing can be done until we get he Law Society’s approval. 

That, in effect, would give the Law Society absolute power of veto and I don’t think that is right. 

 

So what do we intend? Basically we intend no change in the plan the way it is presently working. We will 

continue for the summer months working it the way it is. We will start tooling up for an implementation of a 

law plan that we can get some concurrence from the Law Society and hopefully, if not, a law plan that we 

think is right and start tooling up for it. Where possible we will try to implement a northern plan. Where 

possible we will amend our present system without changing it very significantly in order to allow us to get 

the Federal contributions. 

 

So basically it is the same plan that we have been operating on. As I told the Member for Albert Park in 

private correspondence, or private communication, hopefully we will have by the fall session, if there is a 

fall session, a brand new Saskatchewan Legal Aid Plan, which will encompass the entire range of proposals 

for legal aid that this Government will have to make to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I reiterate in closing, this is not to be thought of as the rationale or the legal basis upon which we are 

moving to set up a broad new Legal Aid scheme. We think that that should be debated in this House, at least 

I do. And I intend to present it. But we do think that in the interim period we should be amending our Act in 

order to try to do those two things: (a) get Federal contributions, and (b) try and expand the provisions of 

legal aid where possible to the people of northern Saskatchewan and elsewhere. Now that’s the rationale of it 

and I explained that in second reading, Mr. Speaker. And that, as far as I’m concerned is the extent of the 

Bill. I agree, if you read it 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3237 

strictly in strict law terms, it does give us wide degree of latitude and it’s simple because we just don’t know 

what power we may need or what we may not need in order to accomplish those goals. 

 

By the way, I noticed in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix a third-age story that this was the Legal Aid Plan and all 

the power was to resolve itself into the Cabinet and the like. I don’t want to be critical of the report, but I do 

think in the light of the explanation in Second reading that it was somewhat inaccurate in this regard and 

Members ought not to be misled in that regard. 

 

MR. LANE: — Would the Attorney General permit a question before he takes his seat? 

 

Would you then be prepared to give the Opposition the commitment that prior to the implementation of a 

new Legal Aide Plan for the Province of Saskatchewan, we have an opportunity to debate this in the 

Legislature? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — At present I can give you this if this is a commitment. I can only say this to you — 

my personal hope would be (and I’m convinced this is what will come about) that there will be a Bill which 

will encompass what we propose by way of a Legal Aid Plan. Now I want to just hedge by bets here a bit 

because, we I’ve said, I don’t know what we are going to do with the Carter recommendations. We may 

throw Carter out. He recommends setting up a Legal Aid foundation and we may say ‘no’. Quite conceivably 

we would. We are going to designate the Law Society to do that job for us, under certain terms and 

conditions. That’s very conceivable — in which case I don’t think we need to bring in a Bill, because the 

Law Society is technically still administering our present Act. So that if there is an radical departure from 

this I can tell the Hon. Member that I will have a Bill before this House, if I can get Cabinet concurrence in 

order to have the matter debated. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. H.E. COUPLAND (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce to you 

and through you to the Members of the Legislature a group of students from Meadow Lake. I think this is 

only about half of the group. I understand there is another portion coming later this morning. The staff of 

Jubilee School in Meadow Lake have done a lot of work and put in a lot of effort in brining 170 students to 

Regina to visit the Chambers and other points of interest and I should like to congratulate the staff and those 

responsible for organizing that trip. I understand they are going home through Outlook, viewing the dam. 

 

They are down with three busloads. The teachers who are accompanying the and the bus drivers — the 

teachers are Mrs. Elliott, Mrs. English, Mrs. Wilfing, Mr. Taylor, Mrs. Johnson, Mrs. Cougland, Mrs. 

Heibert, Mr. Pike and, of course, Emil Arraf, and their bus drivers are Mr. Korebo, Mr. Pliska, and Mr. 

Agray. 

 

I am sure the House joins me in wishing them a very 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3238 

successful and informative trip and a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Wood that Bill No. 

104 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1970 be now read a second time. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have just one more comment to make with 

respect to this Bill. 

 

I have sympathy with the position taken by the Hon. Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) who 

spoke with respect to a companion Bill. I should like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that people have the right not 

to vote. They have the right to elect not to participate in civic politics or in any other politics. There are those 

people who, for religious reasons, never participate in the political arena, Federal, Provincial or Civic. As I 

say, I sympathize with the general aims of the Member for Regina North West to encourage greater 

participation in politics, but it is by no means necessary that people should participate to a greater extent than 

they do so now. It is by no means necessary that they should be forced one way or another to participate in 

any form of government, including the casting of ballots. There are those parts of the world, such as Russia, 

where it is inadvisable to avoid casting a ballot and there are other places, such as Australia where you may 

be fined if you do not cast a ballot at an election. 

 

I oppose both of those systems. The rights of the citizen are to participate or to decline to participate. I 

believe that the municipal government should be so structured that every person has an adequate right to 

participate if he so desires, but he should not be required to participate. To the extent that any Bill makes it 

easier for people to participate in government, within reasonable bounds, I suggest those aims. I do not think 

the argument that has been raised, that the lack of participation is evidence of a failure of our municipal 

electoral structure, is sound. I do not agree that people fail to participate because of the way the civic 

government is structured at election time. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I disagree with the arguments. I don’t 

think that the arguments presented support the contention that the motion should be passed or that the ward 

system should be imposed; I believe those who want to participate in civic government and cast a ballot 

should do so. Those who choose not to do so should not be singled out either as supporting a proposition, or 

opposing a proposition, nor should we say that they have been denied their rights. 

 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I oppose the Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon City Park): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to enter debate on this Bill I want first 

to congratulate the Minister of Municipal Affairs, Mr. Wood, on his fine presentation of the Bill to the 

Legislature and I understand that his remarks were added to rather effectively by a number of Members on 

this side of the House yesterday. He included in his presentation a number of solid arguments in 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3239 

support of the division system — some of my remarks will cover some of those arguments, same terrain, but 

I want, however, to discuss some of these from a different point of view, and I want to add some others. 

 

I might point out at this juncture that I have given the concept of a division system a considerable amount of 

thought and study and as my review of this system progressed there emerged more and more convincing 

arguments in favour of a division system. Before I start on this part of my addressed, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

comment very briefly on some of the observations made by the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac). 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Member from Wilkie quoted in the newspaper a number of headlines and these 

headlines were supposed to be opposed to the division system. I believe the Member from Wilkie would be 

surprised where the support for the division system came from. 

 

Some years ago even the Leader-Post had a positive editorial viewpoint on this system. It stated in an 

editorial on the proposed ward system, and I quote: 

 

The Leader-Post is of the opinion, as expressed on previous occasions, that if there is to be a change 

a system of large wards might work satisfactorily. 

 

A report from the Regina Junior Board of Trade, about the same time, argues seven advantages to the 

division system, and let me list some of these advantages that they listed, or that they quoted: 

 

A division system would afford a better opportunity to secure direct representation to the voters to 

the city council. This arises from the point that the representative is particularly familiar with his 

own locality. 

 

Remember that these recommendations or suggestions are coming from the Regina Board of Trade some 

years ago. 

 

Uniformity of representation. 

 

This argument is very closely related to the preceding one. There is however a shade of difference in 

meaning in that the division system would provide the greatest degree of uniformity of representation. This 

is to say, since all of the citizens included in one division or another, each has an equal number of 

representatives. 

 

Since voting in a ward system concerns a relatively small area compared to the city in general, knowledge of 

those seeking office is naturally more intimate. Consequently the voter is in a much better position to select 

the man of merit than he would be if those running for his office were unknown. 

 

Another advantage: 

 

A less complicated ballot will result in fewer spoiled ballots. A vacancy in council would not 

necessitate a city-wide election and under a ward system a candidate would be able to canvass 

personally the entire area and thereby make it easier for the voter to make a wise 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3240 

decision. 

 

Several disadvantages were also pointed out this time, but when the report was published in the Leader-Post, 

through another editorial, five days before the vote took place in the city of Regina, it leaned against the 

ward system. However, on November 26, 1934, electors of the city of Regina approved the ward system of 

voting by 3 to 2 in favour, 6,204 for and 4,191 against. So I think the Member from Wilkie would be a little 

surprised to learn exactly where the support for the division system came from. Even the late Ross Thatcher 

saw some merit in a division system through comments made during debate on expanding the number of 

provincial constituencies. His single statement can be used to argue in favour of a municipal division system 

— i.e., the representation argument. He said: 

 

There is a fact that when the member is elected, how can any member no matter how effective he 

may be look after a constituency of 100,000 or more. We say he can’t do it effectively. 

 

Another quote from the same debate, by the late Mr. Thatcher: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party maintains that the city of Regina, the city of Saskatoon, should be 

divided into single seats, the same way as the rural areas are now divided. We believe that every 

voter should have one vote in an election. We believe that every representative should represent one 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in carrying on with the main part of my address I want to say at the outset that polarization is 

inevitable in a discussion of any issue which affects the individual’s belief and I know that the division 

system, as a valid form of urban government, is one such issue. Few people who have given any degree of 

consideration to the system can admit to having no strong opinion on the matter. 

 

In 1965, Clyde Cocking argued in the February 20th edition of the Vancouver Sun, and I quote: 

 

Who is your representative on Vancouver’s city council? You know who your representative is in the 

Legislature in Victoria, and you know who your representative is in the House of Commons in 

Ottawa. You can sit down at any time and drop a line to your MLA or your MP and draw some 

comfort form the knowledge he will be aware you are one of his constituents. You know, or at least 

are entitled to expect, your man in Victoria and your man in Ottawa will know your problems and 

their environment better than anyone else, but you don’t have a man at City Hall. 

 

Cocking’s thesis is — what is good for us at a provincial level is good for us at a local level. He believes 

strongly in area representation. He points out that if the election-at-large system were to be carried out at a 

Federal level obviously the interests of Prince Edward Island would soon fade from sight. And I might add 

that even under the present system Prince Edward Island often takes a back seat. 

 

In the same article Cocking points out that Vancouver is not a homogeneous community. How else but 

through district representation can special groups, such as the Chinese, get any 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3241 

representation at all. The fact is, of course, Mr. Speaker, very few larger cities are homogeneous groups. 

Cities invariable have income divisions and ethnic divisions. For example, let me draw to the attention of the 

Members of this Legislature the situation in the north west section of Regina, which houses a large 

percentage of people of Indian ancestry and which in general invites low-income inhabitants. No alderman 

lives in this area of the city and there is here a singular absence of amenities common in other areas of 

Regina. The glaring absence is an educational one. There is no high school there. Why in a society which 

lauds education as a fundamental or success it is interesting that in this area of the city where the children 

would clearly need extra encouragement to attend school, the deterrent of long distance travelling should be 

allowed to remain. However, it does remain and has been allowed to remain, by alderman who have been 

elected at large and who apparently feel no urge to rectify the situation. 

 

The opponents of the division system argue heatedly that aldermen under such a system are guilty of 

attending to the affairs of their respective divisions at the expense of the interests of their whole city. 

Obviously such an offence would have been highly advantageous in the area like north east Regina. 

However, the irony is that even if a representative in this area took his seat on the council, there is still a 

chance that his voice would not be heard by unwilling listeners. Yet, the importance of his being there is 

incontrovertible. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the right of every citizen to have an area representative on city council, is 

fundamental to the democratic way of life. 

 

Now in conflict with the views of a free-lance writer like Clyde Cocking, are the views of Alan Jessop, 

Editor of the editorial page for the Province of British Columbia. He looked back into history at the division 

system as it operated in Vancouver and wrote in January 7th issue of 1964 the following: 

 

Each ward has a tiny political empire presided over by the reigning alderman. Ward politics 

prevailed throughout the year. There were all sorts of deals between aldermen to vote public money 

for improvements in their bailiwick. Under such conditions it was difficult to coax men of stature to 

run for council and when they did they were seldom able to win elections being defeated by ward 

political machines dedicated to retaining their grip on city hall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my first question would be, what constitutes a man of stature? If the qualities are easily 

recognizable by the majority of the voters and considered desirable by the majority of the voters, then there 

is no reason why a man of stature should not be elected under any division system, or under any system. If 

being a man of stature, however means being a professional man, with an income in excess of $40,000 

yearly, then the division system would probably not elect very many men of stature, and that might not be so 

bad after all. 

 

With the cost of election campaigns skyrocketing to run for city council in an at-large system requires 

substantial financial backing and since money usually begets money, councillors tend to represent a certain 

sector of the population which is not the majority. For example, the 1973 city council of Saskatoon is 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3242 

comprised of two lawyers, two teachers, (one is a university professor), two businessmen, one realtor, one 

CPR official and two retired individuals. In Regina the 1973 city council is comprised of two lawyers, two 

Realtors, one chartered accountant, one industrial consultant and four retired individuals. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, no one here could deny that in both cases the representation is limited and in both cases it is similar. 

I want to make myself abundantly clear at this point. I am not criticizing the members of the city council at 

Saskatoon since I have the highest regard for the time and effort they put into their jobs and I have been on 

council myself and I know what’s involved. In addition, of the 11 members of the Saskatoon city council, 

eight live in the eastern section of the city and three live on the western side of the city. In Regina not one 

council members lives north of College Avenue. This would seem to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that one half of 

each city has no representation at City Hall. 

 

However, there is more to be said on the subject of representation when the alderman represents the city at 

large. One is forced to wonder whether in fact the aldermen believe they are representing people or 

representing some abstract thing called the city. A questionnaire I sent recently to aldermen in western 

Canadian cities produced some rather interesting replies. The questionnaire asked such questions as: What is 

the general attitude of the public to the division system? In your opinion is the system working well? Let me 

say, immediately, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of aldermen in each city where a division system is in 

operation said that public opinion favoured the system and that they, as aldermen, favoured the system. 

Those who opposed the system did so primarily on grounds of division politics and deterioration in quality 

of aldermen which they felt, Mr. Speaker, were detrimental to the development of the city as a whole. 

However, none of them explained in what way the division system hampered development of the city as a 

whole. It would seem to be, Mr. Speaker, that the division system simply means a division of responsibility. 

It means that each alderman knows exactly which area and which people he is responsible for and conversely 

it means that city inhabitants know which alderman is responsible for their area. As it is we have two bodies 

of individuals in our major cities who as far as people are concerned are not responsible to a given electorate. 

They are not responsible as individuals to a given division or district like an MLA or an MP or a rural 

councillor. They are responsible for a city, city in the abstract, Mr. Speaker. However, city in the concrete 

means people. When a farmer in rural Saskatchewan needs a culvert installed or an approach built to his 

farm, he calls his councillor. He knows this man. He knows his representative on council and his councillor 

knows him. The farmer will expect and should expect that some action will be taken with respect to his 

request with respect to a given situation. The responsibility is clearly defined. There can be no buck passing. 

 

Similarly in provincial politics if there is difficulty with a highway approach or if there is a lack of 

understanding with respect to certain government program, then the person involved can see his MLA. He 

can reasonably expect that action will be taken to deal with his problem and similarly with respect to federal 

matters. 

 

But what is the situation with respect to a city resident? If he needs a street or a sidewalk repaired, if he is 

not 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3243 

satisfied with certain civic programs, whom does he see? Whom does he contact? Who is responsible? I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, that there is the problem because in point of fact no one individual alderman is 

responsible. Because, as Members of this Assembly know and can appreciate everyone’s responsibility is no 

one’s responsibility. In the northern half of Regina and in the western half of Saskatoon there are hundreds 

of people who do not have representation from their area. This fact alone, Mr. Speaker, is sufficient evidence 

that we need a division system in these two major cities. 

 

Most of the alderman who completed my questionnaire, Mr. Speaker, emphasized the advantage of getting to 

know the electorate. I have often wondered how aldermen in Regina and Saskatoon feel, knowing, as they 

must know, that the majority of people in the city have no idea who they are. Surely, they must be concerned 

when they realize that a small percentage of the people that they are supposed to be representing they know 

themselves. Of all the cities in Canada, Winnipeg appears to have given this whole are of urban government 

greatest consideration. The concept of area representation has always been of the core of Winnipeg thought. 

In the booklet which describes their new organization some of the background of thought is included. It says 

as follows: 

 

In seeking a solution in structural problems of the area it was felt that any new structure had to 

provide easier access to government by the citizens. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, this should be the aim of all governments. At all levels we should be constantly looking 

for ways to get closer to the people we represent. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that at the local level one way 

is through the institution of the division system. Give people the opportunity to get to know candidates and 

find out which candidates know most bout them and about their area, then perhaps more people will come 

out to the polls on election day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they will know that it is worthwhile. In cases where there are five, six or seven aldermanic 

seats to be filled at one election there may be 25 or 30 candidates. This places the electorate in a very 

difficult position. In all likelihood many don’t even know six of the candidates, so how can they vote for six 

people. In the division system on the other hand, only the people of the division would vote for one 

alderman. During the campaign they would have every opportunity of getting to know the candidates. This 

would undoubtedly encourage more interest. As it is voters are not inclined to go off to the polls to place an 

X beside a name to which they can pin no face, no personality, no policy. There is little doubt in my mind, 

Mr. Speaker, that we would increase the number of voters markedly if we introduced a division system. I 

could add here that with this system a vacancy on city council does not involve a costly city-wide election 

but a relatively inexpensive election on a division basis. Although countless individuals over the years have 

opposed area representation and yet the question is raised again and again. 

 

In Saskatoon, for example, the city was divided into five divisions from 1911 to 1920. During that time a 

bylaw to erase the system was defeated. However, in 1920 such a bylaw was passe and the division system 

was abolished. In 1966 the Saskatoon city council considered the division system once more 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3244 

but the stage of holding a plebiscite was never reached. The matter was dismissed at the council level. In 

Regina a division system was used for one year, the year 1935. Two plebiscites on the subject have been held 

since then, one in 1959 and in 1970 but the system has never been reinstituted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point in time Brandon, Winnipeg, Calgary, Edmonton, Halifax, Ottawa and Toronto are 

using a division system and it is working Winnipeg, Halifax, Ottawa and Toronto have used the system for 

over 100 years but here we are in Saskatchewan still using an at-large system in our two key cities. 

Saskatoon is not a homogeneous group, Mr. Speaker, and Regina is not a homogeneous group. For too long 

now we have had similar people from similar income brackets, with similar occupational categories and 

from similar resident areas of the city on city council. It is time the city council was comprised of a group of 

people who are more representative of the city, that is the people of the city. Mr. Speaker, I would urge the 

Members of this House and the people of Regina and Saskatoon to take this matter very seriously and to give 

it careful thought and to realize that in a democratic society area representation is an absolute necessity and 

the division system is nothing more, nothing less than area representation. And I wish that the Members of 

this Legislature would place their support behind this concept. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add my support to the proposed 

division system and in doing so I should like the Hon. Members for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and Wilkie 

(Mr. McIsaac) and others to stay in the House for a few minutes because I want to remind them of their own 

policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the debate in 1965 when we had the change in boundaries, and I should like them to sit 

and listen because I think that Liberals forget their own statements and their own policies they enunciate in 

the House and outside the House. Their former political leader, former Minister of the Crown in the Liberal 

House, the Hon. Hammy MacDonald, now the senator, in second reading of the debate on the changing of 

boundaries for Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, had this to say, and let me quote: 

 

I think this House is well aware that the Liberal Party for many, many years has contended that the 

citizens of Saskatchewan ought to have one vote. This has not been the case. We have found in the 

city of Moose Jaw every citizen had two votes. In the last election the citizens of Regina East and 

Regina West had two votes. The voters of the city of Saskatoon had five votes. Mr. Speaker, it is a 

well known principle and especially well known by my friends opposite that one person ought to be 

entitled to one vote, Mr. Speaker, Why should a voter in the city of Saskatoon have the opportunity 

of voting for five people and a voter in a rural constituency have the privilege and the opportunity for 

one person and one person only. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Liberal Party’s position is that in the provincial elections and in municipal elections 

in rural 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3245 

Saskatchewan every voter should have one vote, why should their policy be different when it comes to civic 

elections in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. Surely this is the same principle that applies. In fact, Senator 

MacDonald carries on, and let me quote again: 

 

I think my friends opposite have promoted the co-operative movement and have promoted some of 

the principles for which the co-operative movement stands and one of the main principles that has 

stood for generations has been the principle of one person, one vote, Mr. Speaker. I think this is a 

good principle (said Senator MacDonald) not only in the co-operative movement but also as far as 

the elected Members of this Legislature or to any other Legislature might be concerned. 

 

This is Senator MacDonald, a Liberal. He said, “One vote for one person.” He didn’t say ten votes for every 

person. Then, Mr. Speaker, it appears that Senator MacDonald has apparently changed his mind shortly after 

because he didn’t call for a vote to that other Legislature that he had the privilege of being appointed to. I 

would have hoped that he would have carried on and said, “Let’s carry on with the principle of electing 

everybody to any legislative body”, as he stated in 1965. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he went on: 

 

It has been the desire of this Government (meaning the Liberal Government) to endeavour to divide 

the cities of Saskatoon, Regina and Moose Jaw as fairly as possible to as close to an equal number of 

voters in each constituency as possible. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this was Senator MacDonald’s commitment and pledge but Senator MacDonald went to 

that other place without a plebiscite, without a vote, and apparently with it disappeared the Liberal principles 

of one member, one vote. Apparently at that time the principle of equal representation disappeared because 

in 1970 we saw what happened to the equal division of out constituencies in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, Liberals are saying that they are really not opposed to divisions but that there 

should be a plebiscite. Well, let me deal a little bit with plebiscites. It seems to me that the Liberals’ defence 

for every issue is to advocate plebiscites. Well, Mr. Speaker, remember when we had the fight in 1962 for 

Medicare, the Liberals said let’s have a plebiscite. When the hog marketing issue came up, they said let’s 

have a plebiscite. The division system they say, let’s have a plebiscite. Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, when 

the people of Saskatchewan were outraged in 1968 over the deterrent fees and some suggested that there be a 

plebiscite on this question, the Liberals said, No. All of a sudden their principle changes. When they 

introduced Bill 2 some of the workers suggested, let there be a plebiscite among the workers to see how they 

feel about it an they said, No. But they did say, Mr. Speaker, that they would have a plebiscite in 1967, they 

said that they would have a provincial plebiscite. The Liberals promised the people of Saskatchewan that if 

they were elected in 1967 they would conduct a plebiscite of whether or not the people wanted a drug 

program. Well, Mr. Speaker, we waited. In 1967 we waited. We waited in 1968 and 1969 and 1970 and in 

1971 the people had a plebiscite. We had a plebiscite and people said, look, we’ve 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3246 

had enough of your Liberal administration and their failure to keep their commitments and their failures to 

hold plebiscites on issue where they promised to hold plebiscites. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the scoundrel’s defence is always to pledge hi loyalty to this country. And it seems to me that 

the Liberal position is always when there is an issue that there might be some difference, they say a 

plebiscite. But when it comes down to performance they forget about those plebiscites very quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the division system is important to stop this buck passing in our cities as to who is responsible. 

In the city of Regina and I want particularly to talk about the area that I have had the privilege of 

representing in Regina North East. We are the less fortunate part of the city when it comes down to services 

being provided to our people. You know when a new area is developed where the more affluent settle, there 

doesn’t seem to be any problem for our city fathers immediately to provide the necessary services. But in the 

lower income areas, particularly Regina North East, because I submit because of lack of representation in our 

city council we do not have adequate recreation facilities. Despite the fact that the people of Regina North 

East have helped to pay for every high school in the city of Regina, we still don’t have a high school in 

Regina North East. On the school board, again we don’t have representation from that area. We don’t have a 

spokesman from that area. There isn’t an area in the Province of Saskatchewan that is as large as Regina 

North East with as large a population that hasn’t got a high school. I know that the Minister of Education has 

been trying to persuade both school boards to take action in this area and I have made representations to take 

action in this area. I have made representation but for some reason or another, they are adamant against the 

idea. 

 

Conditions of our streets and sidewalks are inferior to other parts of the city. One of the responsibilities of 

the city council is to ensure that people have reasonably pure air to breathe and to prevent pollution. The 

responsibility for this area still rests with the municipal governments. 

 

I know in my area people are disturbed about the noise pollution that emanates from Imperial Oil. And even 

though it is the responsibility of the city council to initiate action, they keep passing the buck and ask 

somebody else to assume the responsibility. 

 

In recent months there was the issue over the trailer courts in my constituency. Again, a responsibility for the 

civic government to provide facilities for locating of trailer courts for those people who wish to live in trailer 

courts. Even though the people made representation to city council, again they kept passing the buck. They 

said, in our area where we reside as council members that problem does not exist and the dickens with the 

people of Regina North East. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the buck passing has gone on much too long. It is time that we elected people form the areas 

where people will know who their representative is and that that representative has some dedication to the 

particular area, so that he can speak on behalf of the people for the services that they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to go into any lengthy documentation of the need for a division system. It is 

the responsibility of the province to establish and the municipal governments 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3247 

have to accept the authority of the province to set the guidelines and the rules of how elections are to be 

conducted at the municipal level. Who should vote and should not vote. How the whole electoral system is 

to work. And to say that this is going beyond the jurisdiction of the Provincial Government. Is just not 

stating the fact. 

 

Over the municipalities under our terms and conditions and under our constitution the responsibility lies with 

the Provincial Government. To set the rules of who are the eligible voters; of how the system is to be worked 

and surely the matter of division also is the responsibility of the province as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) yesterday made reference to the last election. 

There were 30 candidates who ran for 10 positions. And that in itself, to the average voter, is something that 

is confusing. To vote for 10 people form a group of 30, to be able to decide who is the best person to 

represent him is not the easiest thing to do. Particularly when many of he candidates run on the popularity 

that they have developed in a community, not necessarily of their ability to be a good representative at the 

electoral level. But because of their activities and in many cases because of the money that they have to 

conduct an effective campaign, do get elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the system will be by far more democratic when the people in a division will have a 

choice from three or four candidates to elect a person to represent them in their area. 

 

It is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I do support the Bill. I want to again remind the Liberals that their 

policy and their principle enunciated by their former political leader, is one member, one vote, one person 

one vote. If that is the principle and that is their policy, then, Mr. Speaker, I submit they are compelled to 

support this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, long after those in Opposition have been 

forgotten, and their names no longer appear anywhere, the name of Everett Wood will be remembered in the 

city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon as the Minister who stood his ground, in spite of the most unfair and 

unethical attack ever directed at any Minister in an effort to dissuade him from bringing democracy to the 

larger cities. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Everett Wood, as Speaker of this House and as a member of the Executive Council 

from 1962 to 1964 and from 1971 until now, has established himself as a man of integrity, a man of courage 

and a man of principle. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — And those people who aim their vicious, unjustified remarks at him do themselves no 

good. They cannot hurt him. His integrity is established, his courage has been tried. His 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3248 

fairness when he was the Speaker and as a Minister has never been successfully challenged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after listening to this debate and the pathetic futile efforts of Members opposite to make a case 

for opposition to this Bill, one begins to realize that their whole motivation, their whole performance is not 

because of high principles but for self-preservation. 

 

Have they told us whether or not they are in favour of the division system? No, they have not. Have they told 

us whether or not they are in favour of polls with 3,000 people in them? No, they have not. Have they told us 

whether or not they are in favour of 38 per cent of the people, or 33 per cent of the people voting at civic 

elections? No, they have not. Have they told us whether they are in favour of representation from every part 

of the city? No, they have not, Mr. Speaker. Have they told us whether they want representations on boards 

and committees from every part of the city? No, they have not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what have they done? They have made a pathetic, inept attempt, Mr. Speaker, to argue for a plebiscite. 

Something that they took out of the legislation when they were the Government. A procedure that has always 

been used by them as a stalling technique. Why, Mr. Speaker? 

 

If you look at the map you will find that all the people on city council except two — one of them who was a 

former New Democrat Cabinet Minister and one who lives outside the area — are supporters of theirs in the 

ridings of Lakeview, Regina South and Wascana. I am talking about the new ridings. 

 

The Hon. Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane), unless he can get Glencairn cut out of his riding, since there is 

no chance that Lumsden will be gerrymandered again as it was to get him elected, will be fighting for one of 

those three ridings. So will the Hon. Member for Albert Park. It all adds up to this. The political machine, 

the Liberal political machine that elected most of the alderman and the mayor, is the only hope that any of 

them have of getting elected in these three ridings. 

 

It is a case of self-preservation. It is very simple. If you take the hood off the political motor and take a good 

look at it, this is what it amounts to. They need the people that are sitting there representing these areas on 

City Council in their desperate attempt to gain the three ridings in the one-third area of the south part of the 

city, and that, Mr. Speaker, is what this argument is all about. 

 

They are going to bat for these people because they expect them to go to bat later on, on their behalf. 

 

Their pathetic performance included challenging the right of the people to come to this Legislature to meet a 

Cabinet Minister. They say this group were the New Democrats. The Leader-Post said that there were 50 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that there may have been New Democratic chairman, but they weren’t all New 

Democrats. And if you come to the two-thirds of the city north of College Avenue you will find 

Conservatives and Liberals who agree with this legislation. And I am waiting for the time when a provincial 

election comes to see what the Liberal candidates say in that part of the city. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3249 

You will find that there are Liberals and Conservatives who agree with this legislation and are quite prepared 

and anxious to ask the Minister questions about it because they feel aggrieved and they wish to make 

representation. 

 

They suggest that secret meetings are being held about the division system. Well, Mr. Speaker, since 1956 it 

has been my good fortune to hold many meetings regarding the division system in this city. 

 

I want to say this to the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, no speeches by them, no castigation by their 

friends, will prevent any elected Member from this side of the House from holding meetings with any group 

at any time, at any place in this city, to answer questions regarding the division system or anything else, or to 

organize support for it or to explain the reasons for it. Members opposite have criticized me before, their 

criticism at no time has prevented me from holding meetings. It hasn’t before. It won’t now and it won’t in 

the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Voters in my riding, in answer to a questionnaire, by a huge majority have instructed me to support this Bill. 

They influenced me. They are the people who elected me, not the Members opposite; they did everything 

they could to sop me from getting elected. 

 

They ask us whether we have consulted SUMA. Well, it should be pointed out that the members of SUMA 

got elected on the other system. I think it is natural that they should make a certain position. Let me tell you 

about the position that SUMA took on Medicare. 

 

You know they have a history of taking positions. I dug out some old clippings. “Mayor Favours Medicare 

Satisfactory to Both”. Let me quote, June 22, 1962: 

 

Mayor R.C. Dahl of Swift Current said Friday (Who was he? Wasn’t he a candidate one time for the 

Liberal Party?) 90 per cent of mayors and overseers of towns, cities and villages polled by him on 

Medicare would like to see the plan go into operation with satisfactory arrangements to both sides. 

 

And on further: 

 

The response to the questionnaire was that 10 per cent were in favour of the plan as is. 

 

Ten per cent. 

 

The rest want to see the plan go into operation but with satisfactory arrangements made with the 

College of Physician an Surgeons. 

 

It indicates the position that these people take. 

 

The Chamber of Commerce speaks for those opposed. Do you think we would have had Medicare if this 

position had been followed through? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Certainly . . . 

 

MR. WHELAN: — You’re kidding, Cy. You’re 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3250 

kidding and you know it. The Chamber of Commerce speaks for those opposed. The Labour Council speaks 

for those in favour. The public knows this, and what is new about it? 

 

That was the situation in Medicare, when the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park was President of the 

Chamber of Commerce. What is wrong with it? The Chamber of Commerce is their ally. The Labour 

Council is ours. They have always said the labour people tell us what to do. What a brand-new approach, 

they now say we are telling them what to do. That is a brand-new song. I have not heard that one before. 

 

The truth is that they don’t really know. And I don’t think the labour movement will pay much attention to 

them anyway. There has been a lot of racket, a lot of noise about the need for a plebiscite. Hon. Members 

opposite have had lots of help from the media. I just want to tell them this. In spite of all of their noise, in 

spite of all the racket, only two people have indicated to me by telephone that they were opposed to this Bill. 

At least 50 have indicated that they are in favour. One of those who is opposed lives outside my riding and 

the one who lives in my riding is a stronger Liberal than the Prime Minister himself. 

 

We hear a great deal about blackmail and about rigging open line radio shows. Do Hon. Members think for 

one moment that most New Democrats are not aware of where the calls come from that clog up open lines 

on given subjects. Do they think that Regina citizens don’t recognize the voice of the wife of one of the Hon. 

Members opposite when she harangued the Hon. Everett Wood for 12 minutes on a radio program. Let’s quit 

kidding ourselves. When the Medicare dispute was on, an ad appeared in the paper suggesting that people 

phone their Members. 

 

Let me enlighten the House. This isn’t anything new. It said: 

 

In protesting Medicare doctors are not only fighting for their freedom they are fighting for the liberty 

of every working man in Saskatchewan. Support your doctor in your fight for your liberty. Demand 

the repeal of the Medicare Act. Write your MLA, phone your MLA. In Regina call Mrs. Marjorie 

Cooper, (the telephone number is there). Hon. Allan Blakeney (and the telephone number is there). 

Hon. C.C. Williams (and the telephone number is there — my name and phone number were also 

listed). 

 

This advertisement sponsored by the Saskatchewan “Keep our Doctors Committee”. Send your 

donations to “Keep Our Doctors Committee”, Box 1781, Regina, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t even put their names on the thing. They gave a box number. The telephone 

numbers appeared in the ad. And they were told what to say. And this harangue went on for days. I used to 

get a call at 3:00 o’clock in the morning over and over again. That is part of the game. If you can’t stand the 

heat, get out of the kitchen, they say. Each telephone all indicated that if Medicare wasn’t withdrawn the 

caller wouldn’t vote for the sitting Member. Blackmail: I don’t think so. I don’t see how it is blackmail. I 

expected that. This is what they said to me, Well, that is not blackmail. Oh, no, if the Liberals do it, it isn’t 

blackmail. When they talk about 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3251 

facts you can imagine our surprise, Mr. Speaker, when we discovered that the callers in the Medicare crisis 

were giving phony addresses, phony names and making phony sounds on the telephone like a dying baby. 

Mr. Speaker, we discovered by having the calls traced, because they were being made at all hours of the day 

and night, and they were coming from one location. 

 

This wasn’t blackmail, Mr. Speaker. This wasn’t planned, I am sure. Nobody was planning this sort of thing, 

it just happened, you know. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — There were banks of telephones all in one room. Just a complete accident. And it just 

happened that there wasn’t a New Democrat in the room. 

 

Before the accusation is made that the New Democrats are going into civic politics, let’s get the record 

straight. No decision has been made in Regina city in this regard. I think it is well known that I am not in 

favour of them going into civic politics. As a matter of fact, the first requirement that the people in this city 

have is representation from every area. 

 

If the alderman does not represent us in the division we will find it out a lot quicker than we do at the present 

time, because there will be no one to pass the buck to, as the Hon. Member from Regina North East (Mr. 

Smishek) has said. 

 

The Hon. Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) said it was a plan to get our people elected. 

That is quite a remark coming from someone who used a contemptible gerrymander to get elected to this 

House. 

 

The Hon. Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) made quite a speech this Session when he talked about a 

resident members for the riding of Rosemont. Mr. Speaker, he very well knows that Rosemont won’t exist 

until the next election is called. There is a resident member for Rosemont now because it is part of a huge 

riding called Regina North West. I am honoured to be the representative from that constituency. 

 

He asks why the people from the north side don’t run for public office. Mr. Speaker, the present system is so 

costly that they cannot afford to. And no group of ordinary people can afford to put on a campaign to explain 

the division system. If the Hon. Member knew anything about the finances of two-thirds of the people in this 

city, he would know why they don’t run for public office. Some of those who tried are still paying for their 

one fling in civic politics. The Hon. Member for Whitmore Park says we will be stuck with the division 

system for nine years. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s correct, but we were stuck with the Liberals for 

seven long years . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . .long, lean, good years! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — . . .All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that anyone who can survive that can survive any 

hardship. 

 

They say we are dictators. Well, you know that’s not new 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3252 

either. I was going through a raft of old clippings and this is something that the Liberals have been saying 

over, over and over again. I am glad the Hon. Member for Athabasca is in his seat. Away back on May 3, 

1973, he made a speech. The headline said, “Ituna: Policies blasted by Liberal MLA.” 

 

MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. He said May 3, 1973. I haven’t made a speech on that 

particular date yet. 

 

MR. WHELAN: — All right, May 3, 1962. It went way back to there. You had the record player on that 

day. I apologize, Mr. Speaker. He was using the record player and he turned on that dictator line and he was 

running it out at Ituna. This is what he said: 

 

The policies of the two ‘D’ boys, Diefenbaker and Douglas, have ruined Saskatchewan’s economy. 

Under these two dictators, results have been similar. 

 

The Hon. Member for Athabasca on May 3, 1962. I think their strategy committee went though the old 

clippings and dug out all the old files and said, this is the one for us. They decided on the dictator line. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will guarantee democracy in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. Evidence for its 

need exist in every aspect of civic government in these two larger cities. 

 

Why does the legislation only apply to cities over 100,000 in population while the need for division in other 

cities may exist, in places like Lloydminster where, according to my seatmate, the entire council lives in 

Alberta and the mayor lives in Saskatchewan. I think there is a definite need for a division system there, and 

it is entirely evident in the larger cities when one examines where aldermen have resided down through the 

years. 

 

There are criteria for aldermen being elected on a division basis in smaller cities or by mandatory legislation, 

cities like Brandon in Manitoba where the population is under 50,000, and rural councils being elected on a 

mandatory basis across this province. 

 

The need to introduce this legislation can be easily documented in the city of Regina. Over a period of many 

years, only two members of city council, only two aldermen have been elected from the north half of the city 

and yet the people on that side of the city pay taxes too. If you look at the map at the present time, the 

location of aldermen — this has been the case for many years, as long as you care to remember — there are 

50,000 — and you can take the latest constituency map — there are 50,000 people living in the area where 

the 10 aldermen and the mayor reside. There they are, just take a look at them. They are in your three 

constituencies, Regina South, Wascana, and Lakeview. If you keep on harping, there will be only one of 

these constituencies you’ll have a chance to get elected in at the rate you are going, even these two are close 

enough, if you keep on at the present trend, you will lose them. When these people see the advantages of the 

division system you will lose the three where you might have a chance. Here’s the picture, just take a look at 

them, all crowded in one little 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3253 

area of the city. This has been going on . . .take a good look at it, you can recognize the dots, you know 

where they all live. There is one of them north of College Avenue and he lives way north of College Avenue! 

He’s in the 23 block, he’s a hundred yards north of College Avenue! That just shows you what the situation 

is in this city at the present time. That’ the way the system works. That’s the way it has worked for years. 

There’s the evidence! It is just an unbelievable thing. You have got to be from that end of the city before 

they will let you be an alderman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what does this legislation do and why will it benefit cities over 100,000. Well it guarantees 

local autonomy for every portion of the city of Regina and on a representation by population basis. And it 

gives the citizen an opportunity to participate in civic government by knowing on a first name basis the 

person designated to represent him. It removes the discrimination which presently exists against the law and 

middle income people. I want you people to listen to this carefully. I think this is really important. This is 

where the discrimination of this whole system comes in, a monetary discrimination which prevents them 

from seeking election on a city-wide basis. It would be possible, in my estimation, under the new system for 

an alderman to be elected at a cost of $500. 

 

Let’s examine each of these points. On the basis of representation by population the present system is highly 

unrepresentative, unfair, and undemocratic. It provides a vehicle for a handful of people with a low voter 

turnout and high powered publicity to get elected. A contradiction in this and although he deals with many 

facets of Government that are close to people, an alderman has within his jurisdiction probably twice as 

many facets, including everything form cleaning sidewalks to police protection. Yet under the present 

arrangement there are 100,000 people in the city of Regina without an alderman living in their midst or 

anyone designated to look after their particular needs. 

 

MR. LANE: — . . .little . . . 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Well, try phoning one sometime. Try asking someone north of College Avenue who the 

aldermen are. They name almost anybody else, Les Benjamin, Henry Baker or Ed Whelan, but they don’t 

know who the aldermen are. This legislation would bring about a close association of voters with a person 

living in the division or designated for the division. They would know the alderman’s name, his telephone 

number, where he lives and could contact him at any time to make representations regarding zoning, street 

cleaning, pollution, traffic, fire protection, what have you. In return, the aldermen would be fully conversant 

with and fully aware of the needs of that particular area of the city. At the beginning of each year, as is done 

in rural municipal councils, a program could be worked out to develop the city as a unit without the fictitious 

conflict that is suggested as an obstacle to this type of system. 

 

The next point I want to expand on his cost. One alderman in the city of Regina is criticizing the system. He 

said, why don’t the people from the north side of the city run for office? Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to this 

alderman who probably spent $4,000 on his campaign for election, they don’t run from the 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3254 

north side of the city — and I mean north of College Avenue, that takes in the west end, the west end and a 

great portion of the city as well as the north side — because it costs too much money, they cannot afford to 

run. The cost of running in the city at large discrimination against those, against the low and middle income 

people. It says to them loud and clear, you cannot be a candidate. That, Mr. Speaker, I suggest, is what this 

legislation is all about. 

 

The argument is made that this legislation should not be introduced without a plebiscite. What are the facts, 

Mr. Speaker? The plebiscite was voted on on the 2nd of December, when the temperature hovered around 

zero. As I said earlier, there was a 38 per cent turnout of voters, the Members opposite, and I don’t care who 

their advisers were — they have to take the responsibility for this, set the date in December, by amending the 

legislation. Actually, only 36 per cent voted when you allow for spoiled ballots on the division system; 

17,000 or 20 per cent voted against the division system, the other 80 per cent didn’t exercise their franchise 

or vote for it; 80 per cent of them did not participate, 80 per cent were not even considered with the voting 

system and with the weather and with the date. Compare this turnout, if you like, with the average turnout in 

a provincial election. In the 1971 provincial election, there was an 81.5 per cent turnout of voters in the city 

of Regina as a whole. In a plebiscite of this kind it is obvious from conversations I have had with many 

people that these people have had no experience with the division system, they have no knowledge of the fat 

that it has been introduced in most parts of Canada. As a matter of fact, the position those people are taking 

suggests they are in step with St. John’s, Newfoundland. When we introduce it, Saint John’s will be the only 

city of any size without this sort of system. But because of high powered publicity opposing the division 

system, some of these people voted, “No” at the time, having heard only one side of the story. I ask, is this 

democratic? I may estimation this legislation when it is tried will give the residents of Regina a chance to 

assess the division system accurately and when a plebiscite is held, we shall get an accurate picture of both 

methods of government. The division system applies in the rural municipalities of Saskatchewan and was 

introduced on a mandatory basis in Manitoba and cities varying in size from Winnipeg to Brandon. The 

division system was introduced on a mandatory basis without a plebiscite and without a vote. Although some 

cities have had a plebiscite, and then brought in the division system by legislation, by and large, and this 

applies to Manitoba and Ontario, the system was introduced by mandatory legislation. 

 

In Saskatchewan when the larger school units were introduced the opposition screamed for a plebiscite. The 

answer was, a plebiscite shall be made available after the system is tried. Some plebiscites were held. Results 

of those plebiscites, I suggest, are the real reason why there is such an uproar emanating from City Council 

and Members opposite. You can tell fairy stories, and you can frighten people when they don’t know how a 

system operates. But fairy stories, exaggerations and screams of dictatorship will not work when the people 

have experienced the system. Mr. Speaker, the opponents of this Bill know that very well. At the present 

time, every province in Canada, as I said, except Saint John’s, Newfoundland have a division system. Are all 

these people wrong? Are they dictators? Are they undemocratic? Let’s quit being silly. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3255 

Let’s look at another example. At one time the cities of Saskatoon and Regina elected MLAs at large. The 

Opposition objected and led the move to have single member constituencies. I don’t think you will find 

anywhere that I object to this, because I agreed with the principle. What I want to say now to Members 

opposite, is there one of us who would go back to the city-wide system to represent our people? After we 

have answered that, don’t we agree that the principle applies even more directly to the aldermanic situation 

where the alderman deal with so many facets of administration that are close to the individual citizen. Mr. 

Speaker, I say that it does. I say that it is obvious to the people in the city, the larger cities. 

 

The division system has even been recognized in the city of Regina as a means of representation for 

recreation programs. City Council has divided the city into regions for recreational activities with good 

results and acceptance. Is this bad? Was there a need for a plebiscite? They did not object. 

 

In addition to having an alderman representing a designated area, it must be obvious that these people would 

know the leaders at the local level throughout he city. Check if you will the boards and commission in 

Regina and you will find that very few committee members are from certain areas in the city of Regina. 

Why? Because they have no representation to speak for them when the committees are put together. These 

areas are ignored on committees. What is the net result? They are without a voice, without representatives on 

committees. They get schools last or they don’t get them at all. One recalls the fight for Dieppe School, 

Mount Royal School; the fights over re-zoning, paving, parking, telebus, traffic lights and you name it, on 

and on. If the present system is good can we justify it with the record of participation by our citizens? Mr. 

Speaker, I say that we can’t. But if there is a condominium someone doesn’t want in another part of the city, 

or if there is a trailer court, it goes where there is no alderman to speak against it. At the present time 

representations are made by them who are upset by this sort of action when they arrive in a group at City 

Hall to express their chagrin at a decision because they don’t live close to them, whether it is traffic, zoning, 

paving, street cleaning, or schools. 

 

The argument is made that it will cost more to run an election this way. It will. But what price do these 

people put on democracy. How much will they spend for it and, furthermore, how democratic do you think a 

city-wide by-election is when 6 or 8 per cent turn out, as they did recently for a school board by-election in 

Regina. No one wants to pay the tremendous costs for this method to choose a school board member. There 

is an argument over who is going to pay for this, as a matter of fact. 

 

Criticism is voiced that the alderman will not have to live in the division. A rural councillor does not have to 

live in his division, an MLA does not have to, and an MP does not have to live in his riding. This provision 

gives present aldermen an opportunity to run in any division. Certain aldermen claim they have been looking 

after the city, doing a good job; they should be able to run anywhere and get elected. I think this is only fair. 

 

The argument is made that parks will not be looked after on a division basis. If anyone is looking after 

Wilson Park 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3256 

for instance, I wish he would let us know. If anyone is considering development of parks in some parts of the 

city, I wish he would give us some evidence. 

 

A great to-do is made about the plebiscite and how we are ignoring the wishes of the people. A plebiscite, if 

one had been held on the Medicare dispute — the Hon. Members opposite were screaming for that one — it 

would have thwarted Medicare. This Bill provides for a plebiscite after the system has been tried. The 

Members opposite had seven years in Government during which they could have had a plebiscite on 

Medicare, or on the drug program if you like. My question to them is: Why didn’t you? They talked loud and 

long about the need for one during the Medicare dispute just as they are talking now. They are asking us to 

respect the wishes of the voters. They are really afraid to oppose the division system. They are just really 

using this technique to stall. In the city of Regina, twice voters voted against paying for the construction of a 

bridge on Broad Street, built by a land developer during a dispute. Twice it was refused by the voters. As a 

council they recently decided to prepare a bill to ask this Legislature to ignore the wishes of the voters of the 

city of Regina to pay the land developers for that bridge. No, their concern and their sanctimonious respect 

for the voter is shot down in flames when one realizes that they have asked their officials to prepare a private 

Bill to pay back the land developer, after the citizens have turned it down twice in a bylaw. Twice they voted 

it down. But they bow with humility to a 20 pr cent plebiscite. I think it is a bit hypocritical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from where I sit the principles of democratic local autonomy and representation by population 

are at stake. Members can try to confuse the issues in any way the like. But when the division system has 

been introduced and tried, and this democratic operation . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — . . .Eugene is coming . . . 

 

MR. WHELAN: — I am sorry. He’ll have to wait. This is far more important than any Liberal. 

 

. . .It’s democratic operation has been proven and the people in every local area have an opportunity to 

express themselves when they discover . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Can I continue, Mr. Speaker? When they discover that they have as much to say to their 

representatives about the operation of the city, when the 100,000 have as much to say as the others who now 

dominate the city, then we will have proved the value of representation by population. 

 

I ask all Members, is that bad? This Bill is necessary. It will give democracy back to civic governments. 

Those who call it a dictatorial Act can’t explain satisfactorily the domination of this city by a handful and the 

complete isolation of the others. 

 

The truth of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that the community will be stronger. There will be better leadership 

and there 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3257 

will be more participation. Thee will be a feeling in every part of the city, Mr. Speaker, I venture to say, that 

they belong to the community, that it is theirs, and that they will have something to say about the taxes they 

pay and how they are spent. 

 

Without representation designated by the present system many citizens feel that they are paying taxes to 

people over whom they have very little influence and even less control. It is typical and predictable that the 

people who drew the rotten boroughs of Albert Park and Moose Jaw North would defend the lopsided 

representation that is the result of the present governmental system we have in Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

I approve of this Bill in principle and practice. It is the essence of democracy and it is guaranteed in this 

legislation. 

 

The Hon. Members ask who requested this legislation. Let me answer. The people who requested this 

legislation were those who could not understand or follow a ballot that at one time or another had as high as 

five slates on it for aldermanic positions It looked like a skipping rope, as I said yesterday. 

 

Those who live in polls with 2,700 or 2,800 people and did not know a single alderman in the city because 

they were so isolated from them, they asked for this legislation. 

 

The people who were disenfranchised because they live so far from a poll in the city that they could not walk 

to vote on the 2nd of December, or the husband took too long at a choked-up poll and when he returned with 

his wife the poll was closed. They asked for this legislation. 

 

The people who watched parks built in other parts of the city, while their part of the city was ignored, and 

they didn’t know the name of an alderman to approach, they asked for this legislation. 

 

The people who wanted a telebus when it was introduced in the south part of the city, and their area was 

ignored, they wanted this legislation and they asked for it. 

 

These people who have watched parks, road improvements and zoning and dozen of other city services 

administered by aldermen who can hardly name the streets where these people live, they asked for this 

legislation. And they represent 100,000 people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Compare that to the 20 per cent who rod to the polls in their warm cars, blocks from their homes on election 

day, the 17,000 that cast their ballots against the division system. 

 

Those who argue against the division system and for their system, argue for polls with 2,700 people in them, 

election day in below zero weather, against the system of polls used in federal or provincial elections. And 

against the system that is used in every city in Canada except Saint John’s, Newfoundland. And they argue in 

favour of one thing, a plebiscite where 20 per cent of the people voted against the ward system or the 

division system without any experience with the division system. They stopped us from having it. They 

received their instructions and publicity and knowledge from a biased, political group that has only one 

objective, to keep their hold and their iron grip 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3258 

on the administration of the city of Regina, in spite of the fact they are definitely a minority group in the city. 

Only their antiquated, political machinery has maintained them. 

 

The Province of Saskatchewan is responsible for the administration of urban and rural municipalities. Rural 

municipalities have division system. The province by its legislation decides who should vote and when they 

should vote, on what circumstances they should vote, the hours they should vote. Mr. Speaker, the province 

has an obligation to see that the vote for elected city officers should represent all of the people, that there 

should be representation by population, participation by voters, and an opportunity to vote on it after a trial 

period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does all of those things and I am in favour of it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I hope that you will excuse me as I just about fell asleep trying to 

follow the last speaker. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, there are many advantages to the instant replay and there can also b some 

disadvantages. What we have just heard from the Member for Regina North West is one of the disadvantages 

of instant replay. Exactly the same speech that we heard yesterday. I wished that he had the courtesy though 

to interject some new paragraphs into that speech to make it more interesting. I don’t believe that any further 

comment is required. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, we are waiting to hear some new ones from that side. 

 

MR. WIEBE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, taking about new speeches and new ideas, the news reports that came 

out of the Legislature last night stated that the Opposition was repetitious in their debates on this Bill. And I 

don’t mind news reports like that at all. It just points out the fact that the NDP Government Members have 

got such thick skulls that it takes a tremendous amount of repetition to fully make some dent in their line of 

thinking. 

 

My remarks are going to be rather brief. I should like to comment on a statement made by the Member for 

Saskatoon City Park (Mr. Dyck), in which he stated that he believes in the right of every citizen to have a 

representative on city council. Of course, each and every one of us believe in that right. But here is the 

difference between Liberals and the difference between NDP. 

 

We not only believe in that right but we also believe in the right of every citizen to be able to have the choice 

as to how he will choose that representative. And this is the major debate on this Bill before us right now. It 

is the fact that the Minister of Municipal Affairs is denying the people of Regina and the people of Saskatoon 

the right adequately to voice their opinion on whether we will have the ward system or whether we won’t. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3259 

I must agree as well with the Member for Regina North West when he mentioned the integrity of the MLA 

from Swift Current. And I have no quarrel with this and I agree with it 100 per cent. I have known the 

Member for Swift Current for many years. He is a man who does believe and listens to the people. It is for 

this reason that I was amazed and shocked when a Bill such as this was brought by the Member for Swift 

Current, into this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to read an editorial which appeared in the Swift Current Sun, the home town of 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs. I imagine that the Minister has had an opportunity to read this editorial. I 

quote: this in regard to withdrawing legislation which would be an appreciative move. 

 

In the behind the scenes drama which almost certainly is played when a Government faces such a 

major decision as withdrawing proposed legislation, which has already been justified by its 

supporters, it is certainly hoped that our Swift Current MLA, Everett Wood played a prominent part. 

 

Much as we have disagreed with Mr. Wood, he is certainly one of the Government’s more capable 

Cabinet Ministers. He is not a tub-thumping, run them capitalists out of this province socialist. But 

rather a calm, cool, collected man, fully capable of not only appearing to listen, but also of actually 

listening to another’s viewpoint. Unfortunately, Premier Blakeney, doesn’t have enough men of the 

calibre of E.I Wood . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WIEBE: — 

 

. . .and neither does the ever-growing army of governmental advisors. Time and again there has been 

outspoken opposition to what those who are being governed term ill-conceived legislation or 

legislative proposals. Time and again the Government has rammed through what it wants and what it 

considers best for those it governs. It is therefore refreshing and heartening to see a break in the chain 

of events with the withdrawal of the proposals which would have directly inflicted elected 

politicians’ whims and wishes on the administration of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Municipal Affairs had this effect on the Cabinet and was able to talk the 

Cabinet into withdrawing that Bill. I wish that he would use that same influence on the Bill which we are 

discussing today. 

 

It is for this reason that I feel it is not a Bill that was drawn up or designed or brought to this Legislature by 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs. I think that possibly the Minister is just a victim of circumstances. Of 

course, there is Cabinet solidarity. A Bill like we have before us today could only be drawn up and only 

scrutinized by Members like the Attorney General, Members like the Minister of Health, Members like the 

Premier of this province. 

 

The Cabinet has decided that this is what their Party wants. Cabinet has decided that this is what this 

Government wants and, 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3260 

therefore the poor Minister of Municipal Affairs who happens to handle that department, and who also 

believes in Cabinet solidarity, has agreed to forego some of his other principles and allow this Bill to be 

introduced and rammed through the House. 

 

Just in closing, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Minister of Municipal Affairs will reconsider his statement. He 

voiced some reservations to this Bill when he introduced it for second reading. I hope that he has had an 

opportunity to fully assess what this Bill can do and that he will withdraw this Bill, that he will urge the 

Members of the Cabinet to withdraw this Bill. Allow the citizens of Regina, allow the citizens of Saskatoon 

to voice their opinion on it. If they in turn want a ward system then by all means reintroduce the legislation 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make a few comments on this 

Bill. 

 

You know one of the things the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) said, you know every time the 

Liberals ask for a vote, it is nothing but a stall. Every time they ask for a vote, it is nothing but a stall. You 

know something, I want to tell you, that if that is a stall I hope that we can stall this Bill forever. Go and ask 

the farmers whether they want a voice on Bill 50 or not. Go and ask the people in Regina. This not an 

argument on the merit or on the demerit of the divisional system. This is an argument about the heavy hand 

of the NDP, trying to force their way into municipal government in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are very rapidly getting to have the opinion and the reputation among the people of 

Saskatchewan — and I suggest the Member for Regina North West and some of the others — walk down the 

street, or the rural Members go back to their constituencies. The people of Saskatchewan are saying, “What 

are they going to force down our throats next?” “Who are they going o take over next?” 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Just Liberals. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What do you mean Liberals. Just go and find out. The problem is that you have 

been in this room for so long that you have lost touch with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I defy the Minister of Municipal Affairs to sand up and tell me that his department was in favour of this Bill, 

because they weren’t. I have talked to some of his officials and they advised him against it. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Who is against it? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I am going to say everybody. Hammer your fist again. You know when they talk 

about you they don’t call you Romanow any more; they call you Romanoff. That is what they all you around 

the Province of Saskatchewan. You are a dictator! 

 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs brought this in in direct 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3261 

opposition to the very people whom he is supposed to represent and to be in charge of. I am referring to the 

SARM, to SUMA and to city councils of Saskatoon and Regina. I want to tell you that I don’t think that the 

people of Saskatchewan, for example, were against the Hog Marketing Commission. They were against the 

fact that a dictator like Jack Messer would ram it down their throat. The people of Regina and Saskatoon I 

don’t think are against the divisional system. I think they are against the fact that you are going to ram it 

down their throats. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think that when a Member is speaking it should be a solo and not a 

quartet. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank you. Mr. Speaker, that is what they are 

against. They are against the method of imposition of this Bill. The Member for North West Regina said that 

the Minister, Mr. Wood will be remembered and so will that Government. They will be remembered for 

trying to destroy the University independence, for taking away the authority of the school boards, for now 

forcing the ward system down their throats. Don’t kid yourselves, you will be remembered and you will be 

remembered for a long time. 

 

Now the Premier stood up and he said that he wanted some criticism of the ward system. Well, I want to say 

that I am one who is criticizing the ward system. I am criticizing it for the city of Regina. I think the ward 

system was designed for one thing. 

 

It was designed for large areas of population in urban centres that were not homogeneous. For example, the 

city of Vancouver. When you go over the north shore, we have to come over the Lions Gate Bridge and you 

get into Richmond, when you get to Lulu Island, when you get out to all the various areas of the city of 

Vancouver which are so large and so different and so distinct, that it is very difficult for a group of people to 

represent the city as a whole. It was designed, for example, for cities like New York, London, Toronto, 

Montreal, huge areas of population, where there is a distinct ethnic and geographic division between those 

areas. 

 

I don’t think the divisional system was ever designed for a city the size of Regina. I think that the aldermen 

and the mayors including our Member here — old hammering Hank himself — the Member for Wascana 

(Mr. Baker). I think that the mayor of Regina and the aldermen on his council were very sincere and 

dedicated to the city of Regina as a whole. 

 

The second criticism I have of the ward system, and believe me it is a criticism that is recognized — that 

ward politics is tougher and provincial politics. That ward politics is more difficult than federal politics and 

that ward politics in many areas of the country is the dirtiest form of politics. 

 

I say that ward politics is bringing in a new element into a small urban area like the city of Regina, in 

contrast to the other urban centres in Canada, you are bringing in the ward politics and you are going to find 

that it is going to be vicious, and it is going to bring divisions. This is my second criticism. 

 

The third criticism is the fact that I believe there will 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3262 

be inter-ward rivalry. Don’t suggest there isn’t in the SARM, because the SARM officials will tell you 

themselves that one of the real weaknesses of this rural municipal system is the fact that divisions, the 

various councillors trade off the goodies. You build a rod this year, I’ll support you on that if you do the 

same here. The exact same thing happens in the larger school unit If you put a gymnasium in this town today 

or this year, we will vote to put a gymnasium in the other town a year from now. 

 

Very often it destroys the sense of responsibility for the unit itself and the whole rural municipality itself. If 

you talk to the larger school unit people, or the SARM, they will tell you that that is the one weakness in the 

divisional system, in the rural areas. And it is far more apparent in the city system or the urban system, 

because in the rural system there is one reason that does justify the divisional system and that is the fact that 

a rural councillor is not only a policy maker but an administrator. He has the responsibility of going and 

checking on the culverts that are being put in, the road contractor that he has in his division. In other words, 

it is an economic means to keep the costs down because they don’t have a large administrative cost. 

 

But in the city Government there is strictly policy makers. They are not administrators. They are not 

administrators of the various branches of the Government . Now they do have administrative duties on 

committees, of course, but they have hired personnel that look after many of the functions that rural 

municipal councillor do not have. Don’t worry there is inter-ward or inter-divisional rivalry in the larger 

school unit and in the SARM and the Minister knows it. That is the one weakness in the rural system. And 

certainly in the city system I suggest that this is going to be worse. I really believe it very, very strongly. 

 

They also talk about the costs and about the great plea for the poor people. Well I am not sure and I would 

suggest to you that perhaps provincial politics is much more expensive than is municipal politics. I really 

believe that and yet I can remember when I first got into this business, I don’t see any great wealthy 

Members over here. You take a great deal of delight in pointing to the rich, rich people that live in the south 

of Regina. 

 

I tell you that in Whitmore Park there are a lot of good working people. People who don’t make a great deal 

of money. People who are just ordinary citizens in the city of Regina. I don’t like to have the Member for 

Regina North West stand up an point to those terrible wealthy Liberal so and sos who live in the south of 

Regina. There are lots of good NDPers there too. Ordinary people. I also believe that to run in a ward will be 

more costly to an individual than to run in the city-wide system. Now you turn around and put the ward 

system where you have to run your own campaign, where each one is an individual campaign with an 

individual person, you might have five, six, seven councillors running in that same division, all investing 

their own time and money. On the city-wide system very often the radios and television, the newspapers put 

on city-wide debates, competitions, education and so forth. I don’t believe there is going to be any change. I 

don’t think there will be any change. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3263 

The last criticism I have for the ward system, and I want to be perfectly frank is the one that is recognized 

right across the nation, that very often the quality of the people who run isn’t necessarily as high because 

unfortunately or fortunately you might have the two most brilliant administrators or the best living side by 

side and door to door. And I don’t think that just because they happen to live in Regina South or Regina 

North or Regina East or Regina West that there is any detriment to the city. The whole concept of city 

Government or municipal Government should be to get the bet representatives elected that is possible 

regardless of where they live. I’m not suggesting, of course, that we should elect somebody in Saskatoon 

from the city of Regina. That is carrying it to the extreme. 

 

I want to talk about some of the arguments that the Premier used. You know, he said, there has been a 

movement directly toward the divisional system in provincial politics, federal politics and of course the 

Member from Regina North East brought up the fact that the Liberals on this side of the House broke up the 

multi constituencies in Regina and Saskatoon, he brought up the concept of Halifax. He brought up his own 

constituency that he had run in, a single, a dual, and a multi, but there was a basic different. That we were 

legislating about our own Government, the Government that we had the right to legislate about. Now would 

the Premier like to stand up here and have the Federal Government pass legislation dictating to him where 

he’s going to run. But what you are doing, Mr. Minister, and what the Government is doing is standing up 

contrary to the wishes of everybody in local government in the Province of Saskatchewan and forcing them 

to accept your will at another level of government. And I want to tell you. I don’t object to the divisional 

system if the people of Regina want it. 

 

I want to tell you, if it’s as good as the Member from Regina North West says, with all the power of the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs, why doesn’t he put on an education program? Why don’t you go out and hold 

public meetings? Why don’t you go out and put on advertising campaigns or public relations campaigns on 

the radio, the television and the newspapers? Why don’t you have a good public discussion? Why don’t you 

educate the people and sell this great concept that you’ve got? And then in the fall when the municipal 

elections come along, put in a plebiscite, give them an opportunity. If it’s as good as you say it is, why in the 

devil are you frightened to have a vote? Why in heavens name are you frightened to have a vote? Why won’t 

you give the people an opportunity to express themselves? And the interesting part of it is that it is the 

SARM and SUMA and the city councils of Regina and Saskatoon, I don’t think they object to the division 

system. They object to the way you are forcing it down their throats, the same as the farmers object to Jack 

Messer and Bill 50. And don’t ever think that won’t come back to haunt you. Don’t think that won’t come 

back to haunt you. 

 

The Premier made the statement, he said, you know, the system that doesn’t get over 50 per cent of the 

electorate to turn out is a bad system. I agree with you but you had better go out and look at the divisional 

system in the school boards in the Province of Saskatchewan, and in the rural municipalities, go look at what 

happened in Winnipeg, 38 per cent. The divisional system is not going to bring a magic wand to expand the 

interest of the electorate and the Minister knows it. Ask the Minister to give us some picture of the votes in 

the rural municipalities 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3264 

for councillors. Most of the time there is so much lack of interest in the divisional system in rural 

municipalities that sometimes the same councillor runs unopposed for 25 and 30 and 40 years. Is that not a 

fact, Mr. Minister? Unopposed! In fact the divisional system works in rural Saskatchewan against the interest 

of competition, because there isn’t any competition in the vast majority of them. There isn’t and the Minister 

will tell you that. There are hundreds of municipal councillors in the Province of Saskatchewan who got 

returned to office by acclamation year after year after year after year, and there isn’t even a vote. So how is 

the divisional system the magic wand to expand the electoral interest? 

 

I can see that NDP machine, the political machine grinding out those NDP vote to elect George Bothwell, 

Wally Coates and I grant you there will be the next time. Oh boy, can’t you see it? The Member for Regina 

Whitmore (Mr. Grant) really tabbed this Bill. The Bill to accommodate Bothwell and Coates. And I’ll tell 

you something. If there’s any reason this Bill should be defeated, it’s the very danger that George Bothwell 

will get elected again. So don’t wave this as a magic wand to expand the electoral interest of the voters 

because it hasn’t worked that way in the school system, it hasn’t worked that way in the rural municipality, it 

hasn’t worked that way in other cities in Canada and the Minister knows this. 

 

Now there was another argument that the Premier used. There is just one thing I want to finish and that is 

what bothered me most about the Member from Regina North West and everybody that stands on their feet 

is they justified the attempt on intimidation, justified the intimidation of this secret subversive meeting. And 

I should like to hear more of you stand up and justify this. First of all, if the NDP had gone into a campaign, 

public advertising, if they had turned around and had public meetings, publicly advertise for people to come 

and support this Bill and turned around and had a real education program, I would say they would be 

carrying out their responsibility. But when you turn around and call a secret meeting and instruct party hacks 

to intimidate the mayor of the city of Regina and the aldermen, I think that’s foul. 

 

And the real motivation is a very simple one. The NDP have been struggling within their own party as to 

whether or not they should enter the municipal field, struggling very hard, and they recognize that if they 

ever did enter the municipal field, particularly under the existing electoral system that they’d get slaughtered, 

and they know that. It happened in other parts of Canada. And they know that there is a large number of 

people that object to national political parties entering the municipal political scene. A lot of free people in 

Canada object to this, in principle, regardless of what party they are talking about. But the NDP knows that if 

they can get that municipal political 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3265 

machine to grind in the off years between provincial elections, keep that party machine really oiled up, that 

it’s going to be to their advantage, provincially and nationally. And so there is the motivation in this Bill and 

it isn’t the altruistic ideas of the Member from Regina North West or the Member from City Park. Their one 

motivation in this Bill is to lay the groundwork for their political machine so the NDP can enter municipal 

politics in the Province of Saskatchewan and that they will have some opportunity of success in selected 

areas in the divisional system, and that’s all. And I want to tell you that I hope that the people of Regina and 

Saskatoon recognize that for what it is and I hope that they respond on election day in the next municipal 

election with a resounding vote against the idea an the concept of gerrymandering the existing system for 

personal advantage of the NDP. That’s the motivation behind it and that’s why I can’t support this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.M. McPHERSON (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words having been 

a former member of City Council for many years in the city of Regina. Listening to the remarks of the 

Member for Regina North East (Mr. Whelan), he’s got a very short memory and he can’t remember his old 

friend Albert Wilson who lived in the north part of Regina. He represented everybody in this city. His friend 

Ken Cooper who held one of his cards, he know Ken Cooper well, NDP, he lived in the north side, west end. 

He represented everybody in Regina. And no one can deny the Member from the east end of the city, Henry 

Baker, he represented everybody in this city; there’s no question about that. And talking about everybody 

south of College Avenue that’s an alderman or been mayor of the city of Regina. I lived in the east end of the 

city just like Henry Baker did. He lived in the nine block and I lived in the thirteen block College. And I was 

re-elected year after year at the top of the polls, year after year as you know, and I received more votes over 

in Scott Collegiate area and Luther College area than I got in any other area. So don’t tell me that an 

alderman can’t represent all of the people in Regina. He knows something about what goes on. Gordon 

worked just as much in the east and as he did in the west end of the city and he lived in the west end of the 

city. So don’t tell us that we haven’t got everybody. 

 

All you’re trying to do is get this Bill through and you’re trying to get it through for those great friends of 

yours, Bothwell, Pout McDonald, Coates, and the other one . . .oh yes, Koskie. Now where do they all live? 

Your friend Bothwell he lives up on 14th Avenue and Rae Street, that’s not very far from here. And the rest 

all live in the south end of the city. So don’t tell me that the only thing you can do . . .they’re all defeated 

NDP candidates. They are also defeated in City Council. So what do you want to do? Bring them back! So 

don’t give me that, that a ward is a good thing . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

MR. McPHERSON – One or two things I wanted to say in this. Our friend from North West was worrying 

about what the ads cost. The ads cost the same for me as they did for Ken McLeod and I represent three 

times as many people. So you’re a little out on your 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3266 

estimate about what the average cost is. 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — I never got any discount. 

 

MR. McPHERSON: – No, he didn’t get a discount. Nor, Mr. Speaker, it’s a bad Bill and I, like the Member 

for Morse (Mr. Wiebe), have a lot of respect for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. I’m a little surprised that 

he’s bringing this in. The Councils have strongly opposed the ward system and yet we’re bringing it forward. 

Saskatoon opposed it and yet we’re bringing it forward. We’re doing it only for that group of four and they’ll 

hurt this Government. When you get men like Bothwell around you and Coates, you’ve got real problems. If 

you keep them around you because they’re the people that will bring you right down. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Mill stones around your neck. 

 

MR. McPHERSON: – I want to repeat again, Mr. Speaker. This is the only reason they are proceeding in 

this direction, is the great welfare for those four members. If the Government wished representation on City 

Council from all the areas of the city then why did they not make provisions also that the councillors be 

elected from each ward should be residents of that ward? This, Mr. Speaker, would at least be consistent 

with any concern to ensure regional representation on City Council. The fact that such provisions are not 

contained in the Bill is additional proof, of course, that they are not worried about the cities, they are not 

worried about the regional representation. Their only concern is about organizing politically and abusing the 

structure of civic government. We’ve had good civic government in Saskatoon. We’ve had good civic 

government in Regina and you’re going to run it. That’s what you’re going to do if you bring in those 

fellows that have done so well. Look at what they’ve done for the city of Regina — nothing, not one of them. 

 

There are other provisions in the Bill related to the change over to the ward system. As well there are a few 

provisions that might be termed as housekeeping amendments. I have no real object to these. At the same 

time I do know that some of my colleagues in the Opposition do object to that provision. 

 

We will oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because it is one more denial of the rights to one quarter of the people 

of Saskatchewan, a denial of the right to choose the form of civic government they wish. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to take part in this debate because this is a debate about basic fundamental principles to which 

the New Democratic Party adheres. There has been a fair amount of publicity of this topic in the press and 

other media. I must say that I think some of it is much too colourful, overly dramatic, stemming, in fact, 

from the type of releases and speeches that have been made by some people describing this action, which is a 

democratic action, as being dictatorial, in contempt and causing a fever pitch in the community. 

 

MR. LANE: — And arrogant. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3267 

HON. MR. BROCKELBANK: — And arrogant as well. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the concept which is 

embodied in this Bill deserves more light, more searching examination, than it does the heat that has been 

generated in the public mainly by the Members opposite who made inflammatory and overly dramatic 

statements about this basic fundamental principle. 

 

The Opposition in leading off the debate on this Bill, the Member from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) suggested that 

this Bill was in contempt. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that we view this Bill as being an appreciation of 

the democratic principles to which our party adheres. Plan and simple, that is what this Bill means to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

A number of statements have been made by Members opposite in this debate saying, in fact, Regina and 

Saskatoon have rejected the ward system. I want to deal specifically with my city of Saskatoon. The Member 

from Lumsden, the Member from Prince Albert, the Member from Lakeview all said that Saskatoon has 

rejected the ward system. However, I might remind them that Saskatoon rejected the ward system, but that 

was 53 years ago. And that’s a fact, 53 years ago. If a person had lived in Saskatoon all of his life, he could 

be 53 years of age and never have experienced the ward system of government or the division system of 

government. So consequently, Mr. Speaker, I say that it’s time for a trial of that system for the simple reason 

that at that time the city population in Saskatoon was a fraction of what it is at this time. 

 

Some suggestions have been made about polls and plebiscites. It is interesting to note that the Jaycees in 

Saskatoon have taken a survey. I obtained the results of that survey, Mr. Speaker. The survey said 69.8 per 

cent were opposed to the ward system. I thought, that’s interesting that the Jaycees have released those 

figures. I thought maybe I’d better have a look behind the scenes and see what the Jaycees are not releasing 

at this time to the public. They released those figures in a telegram to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. I did 

a check. I found out that 381 people voted in that plebiscite. There are more than 75,000 voters in the city of 

Saskatoon, so that represents about one-half of one per cent of the people responding. That means that the 

people of Saskatoon were not disturbed about the possibility of having the ward system or the division 

system and in fact were not alarmed about the possibility of having the division system. 

 

Of that small percentage that indicated they were interested either pro or con, 115 were in favour of having 

the division system implemented in Saskatoon. I would suggest to the city of Saskatoon and as a matter of 

fact to the city of Regina, that in Saskatoon clearly indicated that a plebiscite or a referendum on the 

implementation of a division system in Saskatoon or Regina is unnecessary. 

 

The people of Saskatoon and Regina, by their actions, have shown that they are not concerned about the 

implementation of this division system. They are quit willing to give it a try. I have no doubt, Mr. Chairman, 

that they will find the trial period will work out and they will be satisfied with the system. 

 

Remember that the city of Saskatoon has not had a division 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3268 

system for 53 years, when the population of Saskatoon was about 25,000, whereas now Saskatoon has a 

population of approximately 131,000. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that some other statements have been made across the way about the effect of 

the ward system in other cities. The Members across the way suggest that there is a comparison to be found 

in Winnipeg. Well I took the trouble of getting in touch with Winnipeg and I found that in the city of 

Winnipeg proper, in civic elections from 1964 to 1970 the vote turnout ranged between 42 per cent and 22 

per cent. When the city of Winnipeg went into the unified or unicity concept the voting increased to 60.7 per 

cent, so I say there was a better turnout generally speaking in Winnipeg. There has been some suggestion 

across the way this won’t help the voting turnout in the city of Saskatoon. I checked the figures on voting 

turnout in the city of Saskatoon. We find over the last five yeas, the voting turnout in the city of Saskatoon 

civic elections has ranged from a high of 37.7 per cent to a low of 18.8 per cent. That is a combination of the 

electors and the burgesses. If you deal with the electors alone you will find that the high for the voting 

turnout was 20 per cent and the low was 7.1 per cent. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will cause an increased interest in the civic elections in the 

city of Saskatoon and the city of Regina thereby we may see ourselves moving closer to the percentage vote 

turnout in the provincial elections, which in Saskatoon in the last provincial election was 82.5 A very good 

turnout. We should be encouraging all people to participate more in civic politics, in civic Government. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, there were some other comments made about politics at the civic level. I think 

that’s a red herring. Mr. Speaker, just for the simple reason that there is just as much opportunity at this time 

for participation of a political nature at the civic level as there will be under a division system. I suggest to 

you that if the voters of Mayfair constituency, at the civic level, are not that interested in politics. They are 

very interested, as my friend across the way will know, at the provincial level. The people of Mayfair 

constituency could elect all of the aldermen to the city of Saskatoon. But they don’t choose at this time to 

participate in that manner and there is no reason to say that they will choose, if there is a division system, to 

involve themselves in that way. They may — they may not. I don’t think that anybody across the way is 

suggesting at this time that they should be prevented from involving themselves in municipal government 

and municipal politics. 

 

The Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) in his comments suggested that there was a reason for the 

city of Vancouver probably being divided into wards or divisions. He said it is because there are distinct 

divisions there that can be better served by a division system. He says it is only because the city is large — a 

huge city. He says that’s not necessary here. Well, what about the province of Ontario? I asked the Member 

from Milestone. What about the province of Ontario where it is mandatory that cities of 15,000 have the 

division system? That is mandatory in Ontario and the Members across the way don’t draw any attention to it 

in this Chamber but they choose instead to daw attention to the city of Vancouver. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3269 

I suggest to you it applies to cities in Ontario, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia, equally as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s well-known what the stands of the two parties in this Chamber are with regard to electoral 

reform and democratic procedure. I think their crowning example was in 1965. At that time they divided the 

cities of Regina and Saskatoon into single member constituencies. Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I was in 

favour of that move. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You didn’t vote for it. 

 

HON. MR. BROCKELBANK: — The Member is right — I didn’t vote for it because there were two 

hookers in that legislation. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Were they happy? 

 

HON. MR. BROCKELBANK: — And the hookers were this — it’s unbelievable when you find out the 

kind of amendments that the Liberal Party was going to put into that legislation. One of the amendments was 

this — that if a vacancy occurred in the city of Saskatoon when it was a single seat that they would suggest, 

by order-in-council, which one of the new seats under the redistribution was the one that was vacant. They 

would, therefore, of course, by order-in-council suggest that perhaps Nutana South, would be the seat that 

was vacant. In other words, the Liberal Party of that day was rigging it so that if a vacancy occurred in the 

city of Saskatoon they would almost assure the election of a Liberal to the Legislative Chamber from 

Saskatoon City. 

 

MR. McLEOD: — What year was that? 

 

HON. MR. BROCKELBANK: — That was 1965. That was the year that they created Albert Park, the most 

rotten borough in the Province of Saskatchewan and that’s the other reason why I was against the legislation 

at that time because they created constituencies whose size bore no relationship whatsoever to representation 

by population, which I think is fundamental to the democratic system. An example of this in Saskatoon city 

was that they created the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair and along beside it they created the constituency 

of city Park. The Liberal Party did that because they had lost all hope of winning the constituency of Mayfair 

so they cut out chunks of the area that was the old University constituency of City Park which they would 

win. The people of Saskatchewan ha an opportunity to comment on this particular practice of he Liberal 

Party. Their understanding of how the democratic system should operate and they commented on it loud and 

clear in 1971 when hey threw the Liberal Party out. They threw the Liberal Party out because they paid no 

attention to democratic representation by population. This Bill pays attention to the principle of democratic 

representation by population. 

 

The policies that were enunciated by the Liberal Cabinet Minister of that day, who has now gone to the 

happy rest home at Ottawa, the Canadian Senate — an institution which is 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3270 

continuously imposed upon the people of Canada with no choice as to whether they accept it or reject it. 

Senator MacDonald when he stood in this House had this to say? 

 

The workers of the city of Saskatoon had five votes. It is a well-known principle and especially 

well-known to my friends opposite that one person ought to be entitle to one vote. 

 

That’s what Senator MacDonald, a Minister of the Crown of the Government said at that time? 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

Why should a voter in the city of Saskatoon have the opportunity of voting for fie people and a voter 

in any rural constituency has the privilege and opportunity of voting for only one person, and one 

person only? 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Is he on welfare now? 

 

HON. MR. BROCKELBANK: — Yes, I think he is on welfare now. 

 

Senator MacDonald at that time representing the Liberal Party and the Government of Saskatchewan said 

that that was a good principle, and I agreed with the principle, but they didn’t follow through with the 

legislation They followed through with the gerrymander and they heard the results of that particularly 

nefarious bit of legislation that they brought to this House. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that since I entered this House along with other Members, e have consistently 

fought for electoral reform, especially in the area of representation by population, and independent 

constituency boundaries. This Bill provides for the representation by population principle; balanced 

representation as a result of boundaries drawn by an independent electoral boundaries commission; it 

provides for a plebiscite after the trial period is completed; and it takes no power away from the civic level 

of Government that they presently hold. It provides that a candidate does not have to live in the division in 

which he is running, so that all of these aldermen in Regina and Saskatoon that have done such a good job, 

will have no doubt in their minds that they will be able to get elected in any division that they choose to run 

in in Regina or Saskatoon. In this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the cities have the power to choose the number of 

divisions that they wish to have. 

 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, in concluding my remarks that a trial of this system is certainly justified 

in this instance, especially with regard to the city of Saskatoon, and I heartily support the principle of this 

Bill and will work for its implementation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.R. GUY (Athabasca): — I should like to speak to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I think what we have to 

talk about here basically is the principle of the Bill and the principle of the Bill, of course, is that here is one 

Government trying to force its authority on another local government. I am sorry that the Attorney General 

isn’t 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3271 

in his seat, but I’m happy to see that the Premier is here for the first time today. I should like to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I should like to have heard the Premier’s screams of protest if, when the Boundaries 

Commission had presented its map, the Federal Government had said you cannot accept that map, we are 

going to draw the boundaries for the Province of Saskatchewan. We are going to tell you how many 

members. You would have heard the screams of protest of Allan Blakeney all the way to Vancouver and all 

the way to Halifax and yet he’s not above telling the cities of Saskatoon and Regina that he is going to draw 

the boundaries for them — he’s going to tell them that they are going to have a ward system — he’s going to 

tell them when they are going to vote and how they are going to vote and he’s not going to give them any 

opportunity or say otherwise. And that’s the principle of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. The one level of government 

taking the authority upon itself to force its own will upon another level of government (and in this case a 

lesser level of government). As I was saying before, the Attorney General came in, I am surprised that he 

hasn’t stood up in his seat and condemn this principle, because I am sure that he does not believe in it. 

 

The other point that I want to raise, Mr. Speaker, in regard to this Bill is that the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs (Mr. Wood) should be ashamed of himself bringing in two pieces of legislation and then bringing in 

six and two pages of amendments respectively. If there has ever been sloppy drafting in any department it 

has to be the Minister of Municipal Affairs department and it is certainly not the officials in he department 

who could be blamed and I hope hat he doesn’t get on his feet and try to blame the officials for six pages of 

amendments in one Bill and two pages of amendments on another Bill. The Minister has to accept the 

responsibility for the sloppiest piece legislation that’s ever come into this House. 

 

Those are the only two comments I wish to make on this piece of legislation. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF MR. EUGENE WHELAN 

 

MR. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I have already spoke in this debate, but if I 

may beg the indulgence of the House — we are very honoured to have with us a very distinguished 

gentleman. You now the Irish are very famous — if you get two Irishmen they say you have a fight, but I 

think if you get one Irishman you’ve got a fight. We’ve got a member of an Irish family, the Hon. Eugene 

Whelan, Federal Minister of Agriculture with us today, and we have had his broth, Ed Whelan, as a Member 

of this Legislative Assembly for many years and the Whelans are a very honoured name in Canadian politics. 

It is my pleasure to introduce to the House, Mr. Eugene Whelan, Minister of Agriculture. I wish him well in 

his deliberations with our Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) and I welcome him on behalf of the 

Members to Regina and to our Legislative Assembly. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I join with the Leader of the Opposition in 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3272 

welcoming the Minister of Agriculture for the Government of Canada. We do hope that the discussions with 

the Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan will be fruitful and we hope that he enjoys his sojourn in 

Western Canada, seeing what farming is all about. I know that at least one other Member of our caucus 

wishes to add a word. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Premier in extending a very warm welcome to my brother. I should like to extend a very 

warm welcome to my brother, the Minister of Agriculture. It is with some knowledge that I can say that his 

mother is very proud of him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — His constituents and his family and his party, I am sure, are very proud of him. And on 

my own behalf, if the Liberals are lucky enough to get elected and form the Government at Ottawa and if 

they have to choose an Agriculture Minister, I guess I might be biased enough and I might say that I don’t 

think they could do any better than to appoint him as their Minister of Agriculture. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — As young me we played on a hockey team. We never won any championships but three 

of the players took up politics. First there was Dick Thrasher who sat in the House of Commons as a 

Progressive Conservative and was John Diefenbaker’s Parliamentary Assistant. Of course he played right 

wing. Then yours truly was elected to the Saskatchewan Legislature and he played left wing. Then Eugene 

Whelan was elected to the House of Commons and he is here today. I think it is appropriate and he played 

his position very well. He played left defence. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, it is apparent I am sure to the Minister when he looks at the makeup of the 

Legislature that the New Democrats speak for agriculture in Canada’s most agricultural province. The 

Minister will find us Members here, I’m sure, co-operative and progressive and prepared to work with him. 

To be sure that he is getting all the facts on Canada’s Farm Tenure Bill I am going to send across to him a 

copy of the Saskatchewan Land Bank legislation. I wonder if the page would take it across to him to make 

sure he gets it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — You know, many don’t believe that I have a brother who is a Liberal. If the Minister 

can spare the time I should like to introduce him to Members on this side of the House. Again, I say to the 

Hon. Minister of Agriculture, a very warm welcome, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3273 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Bill 104 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1970. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words on Bill 104 

much to the approval of the Member for Watrous (Mr. Cody) and others because I know I have their full 

support anytime I enter a debate. I want to enter into this simply to add a few comments and thoughts as it 

particularly relates to the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice by the local press in Saskatoon that one of the aldermen has placed a notice of motion 

before the council on the matter of a plebiscite with respect to the introduction of the division system. My 

remarks would be o urge the people of Saskatoon to very carefully consider this motion by the alderman and 

the City Council in question. I think we are entitled all to ask ourselves about the full merit of plebiscites in a 

situation such as this when we know that the proposed legislation will become law very shortly. I Saskatoon 

we’ve had a number of major projects over the last several years which concerned the citizens. There was, 

for example, the establishment of an auditorium which was, as I thought, a good decision, but at the same 

time being opposed by a number of our people and the plebiscite was asked of our city fathers. To my 

knowledge, no plebiscite was, in fact, granted. I could think of the project to build the Idylwyld Freeway 

which was a joint city of Saskatoon-Government of Saskatchewan approach to which some people had 

questions and felt they ought to be consulted by way of a plebiscite. None was granted. I can think of the 

Midtown Shopping Centre which in my judgment is a good development, a positive growth for the city of 

Saskatoon and for the Province of Saskatchewan, to which many of our citizens asked for a plebiscite and a 

vote. Our city father saw fit not to grant or to have an opinion passed by them in this area. There is a place 

for plebiscites and there is a time for positive action to be taken by various levels of government. Before the 

plebiscite move in Saskatoon is considered by our city fathers and by the citizens, I ask them to consider why 

it was that no plebiscite was, in fact, granted on these and other important issues. Why it was that, in fact, 

plebiscites when the people all for them on other major issues have been, on occasion, turned down. And I 

don’t quarrel with the decision to turn them down. That is the right of the City Council, the right of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the right of the Dominion of Canada, given the individual and the particular 

circumstances. 

 

I want to reiterate on this matter of a plebiscite the remarks made by the Premier. There was no plebiscite 

when the Liberal Government removed the provisions relating to the ward option in the present Bill back in 

1970 or thereabouts, I believe. And I support the Premier when he says that if the removal of the ward 

system did not result in a demand for a plebiscite from a city council or demand for a plebiscite from my 

learned friends opposite, why then in the converse situation the plebiscite should be asked when we now see 

fit to re-introduce the ward provision? 

 

The question of a plebiscite in Saskatoon or in any other community, in my judgment, will be, by the time it 

is set, academic. The mater will become law. Plebiscites are costly and expensive procedures. Plebiscites are 

matters which have 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3274 

been established as a matter of fact, can, I think be open to some serious criticism, some serious criticism of 

the judgment in terms of the expenditures by city fathers in terms of all the other priorities for money 

spending that they have. This will not be an opinion poll of any merit. A plebiscite will, in fact, be an 

expensive and a costly opinion poll which will hurt the ratepayers of Saskatoon or the ratepayers of Regina. 

And so I urge those who call for a plebiscite to look at the realities of the situation, the realities of the 

situation being that there is very little opposition to the ward system, very little opposition. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) smiles or laugh, chuckles, whatever he wants to do. I can tell the 

Leader of the Opposition that the only communication that I have received on the ward system to date is a 

telegram from the Saskatoon Board of Trade. I haven’t even been given a telegram by the Saskatoon Junior 

Chamber of Commerce or by the Regina Board of Trade or Chamber of Commerce. I haven’t received one 

letter opposing the ward system. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I have received very little correspondence on it but 

what I have received has been in favour of the ward system. I don’t think that anybody can generate an issue 

in opposition to a system which is basically the improvement in the establishment in the democratic 

institutions in the Province of Saskatchewan. And that’s why the Opposition is having, I think some 

difficulty in generating any support for their point in this area. 

 

And I want to challenge the comments made by some of the Members opposite. For example, it was stated 

by my colleague, the Member from Regina Lakeview (Mr. McPherson) this morning, that the cities oppose 

the ward system. That is not so. The cities have not passed a resolution in opposition to the ward system or 

division system. 

 

MR. McPHERSON: – What do you think they voted on? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — They have not passed any resolution that I have seen. Well, the Member from 

Lakeview says that they oppose it and I invite the Member from Lakeview to forward to me a copy of any 

resolution in the last two years, the last three years, for that matter by any city council, either Regina or 

Saskatoon, which says they are opposed to the ward system and I stand corrected if he can forward it to me. I 

can’t speak with authority in Regina but I do know that so far as Saskatoon is concerned there is no 

opposition by resolution by the members of City Council to the ward system. In fact, in any conversations 

that I have had, formal and informal, with the aldermen, many will tell you that they are prepared to give the 

system a try, that they don’t oppose the concept of the system. It’s true that some feel that there should be a 

plebiscite before its implementation. That I don’t argue with. But the business of saying that the people 

oppose the division system, that is to say the elected aldermen and councillors, is simply not consistent with 

the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the mayor in Saskatoon is, in fact, 100 per cent in favour of the division system and the 

ward system. Mayor Bert Sears has stated time and again in the newspapers that he is for the division system. 

What he has opposed is the fact that there hasn’t been plebiscite. This is a point taken. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3275 

But to say that he is opposed to the division system is totally misrepresenting the facts. 

 

And this is the point. The Member from Milestone does misrepresent the two, He says this because there is 

no plebiscite that means opposition and I say, Mr. Speaker, that spells in his mind exactly why he is 

advancing the argument of the vote. He’s advancing the argument of the vote because that’s just another way 

of saying that the Liberal Party opposite is opposed to what is I consider to be a major democratic piece of 

innovation in Saskatchewan, the division system. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No question, I’m opposed to it. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And the Member from Milestone, at least he’s honest about it. He’s opposed to it, 

fine. We obviously differ but at least you are honest about it. As the Premier says when you’re asked too 

vote on this Bill, the Bill is going to be a question of whether you stand for or against the division system 

and at least we know that one on that side is opposed to the division system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very brief by simply saying that I dispute the arguments made the Member from 

Milestone that somehow this is going to be more costly, the ward system. This I can’t understand. I don’t 

understand how it is an alderman who wants to convince 125,000 people at large, how he can argue that 

somehow is cheaper than trying to convince approximately 15,000 or 16,000 people at large from a ward. 

That just doesn’t make sense to me. At the least the alderman has got an area over which he can go door to 

door campaigning, which he can pamphleteer in relatively inexpensive ways. But how in the world does he 

get to 125,000 to 150,000 residents in order to get them to know him, in order for him to get to know them 

and understand their problems? How in the world can that be done except with massive expenditure on the 

radio and television and the like I strongly disagree with the argument advanced by the Member from 

Milestone that somehow this is going to be more costly. Quite obviously, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be less 

costly for those who run in a special or distinctive division system. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to record my opposition to the point of view advanced opposite that somehow the 

quality of those seeking office in the wards will not be as high. I suppose that one could say that the same 

argument applies to provincial politics; that the best quality of candidates rises only when you have five 

MLAs running at large, elected five from Saskatoon and five from Regina. The Member opposite doesn’t 

believe that because he was part of the Constituency Boundaries Commission that drew the individual 

boundaries in the cities. He doesn’t believe in that. And I object to his view because I think that it is 

peculiarly an elitist point of view, that somehow there are people in certain areas of the city who just don’t 

have the quality or the ability to represent their own people on city council. That somehow the people in 

Riversdale, somehow the people in Mayfair, or somehow the people in North Regina don’t have the quality 

in order to have them representing on city council, that the quality is going to go down because of this 

system. And I find that is a particularly objectionable concept, Mr. Speaker, that I, for one, cannot endorse. I 

say the converse. I am not one to judge quality. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3276 

The persons who are going to judge quality are those who will be passing judgment on those running, 

namely the people living in the divisions and in the wards and that’s what the purpose is behind this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also just want to make a comment about municipal party politics, and the objection to 

municipal party politics. I want to record my personal view in opposition to party politics. I am opposed to 

the development of New Democratic Party politics at the civic level and I say so now publicly as I have said 

so in times gone by and I will be saying so in Saskatoon. I oppose it because I don’t think that at this 

particular time any advantage can be gained and I think there is an element of party divisiveness that can 

enter into it. But just take a look at Regina. We’ve had CVA and RCA now for how many years? Is that not 

party politics? It may not be NDP or Liberal carrying label party politics but it’s politics sure as I stand here 

and as I’m a New Democrat and the Member for Milestone is a Liberal. It’s party politics. And even if it was 

party politics, Mr. Speaker, what in the world are we so afraid about when we talk about people who come to 

hold public office whether it’s on a civic level or on a provincial level because they have to hold strong 

convictions, political or otherwise. I mean we know as a matter of fact that one of the very able mayors of 

the city of Saskatoon, Sid Buckwold is, was and always will be a Liberal. We know that as a fact. He’s now 

a Senator. I wouldn’t knock Mayor Buckwold. I think he was one of the better mayors that the city of 

Saskatoon ever had. But does anyone here seriously suggest that Mayor Buckwold somehow was able to 

divorce his Liberal political convictions when he took the mayoralty chair. Of course, he couldn’t. He’s after 

all a human being. He brings to his decision making powers the same biases and prejudices and conviction 

as I bring to mine. Yet he was a good mayor. And so to suggest that party politics will creep into this system 

is totally wrong. Or Mayor Baker was the same way. As I said I don’t intend to speak about Regina because I 

don’t know about Regina but I’m prepared to stand 100 per cent behind Mayor Baker. He’s a New Democrat 

and I say he was one of the better mayors the city of Regina has ever had. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And so when the Member for Milestone argues about party politics being injected in 

this, I say that’s simply not so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that, and I must reiterate the point made by the Premier and by others 

on this side of the House on this matter of arrogance. Frankly, no doubt the news media will play it up. They 

have to date. Any allegations of arrogance made by the Liberal Party opposite on this issue with the media in 

Saskatoon and in Regina has certainly obtained headlines. And I suppose there’s nothing that can be done to 

convince the Members opposite or convince the media about the arrogance of those who cry arrogance — 

the arrogance of the Liberals opposite, the arrogance of those opposite when they were in power. I know 

everybody shudders every time we mention Bill 2 but it happens to be a fact because I think that is a Bill that 

will be remembered long after I’m gone from party politics. There was no plebiscite and I don’t know how 

many cries there were of arrogance. For those opposite to get up and to cry arrogance, for those opposite who 

drew the gerrymander Bill in 1971, and Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you this 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3277 

was a gerrymander bill of four or five politicians. The Member from Lakeview was one, the Leader of the 

Opposition was one, I don’t know whether Milestone was in on the inner Cabinet or not, all right the 

Member for Milestone, a political group. Mr. Speaker, they were the most partisan of the Liberal Cabinet, 

and the Member from Athabasca. They were the most partisan of all the Cabinet Ministers on the Liberal 

side oat that stage of the game, and they played with the very basics of democracy when they drew those 

gerrymander lines. 

 

The Member from Lakeview got up and he said, I represent three times as many voters as the Member from 

Albert Park.” And he’s right. He represents three times as many on the boundaries that he himself drew. I felt 

like asking him how in the world could it be, Member from Lakeview, that you represent three times as 

many people as your colleague and deskmate the Member from Albert Park? How in the world could it be in 

a democratic system? And these are people who sit down and now get up and cry arrogance, and they’re the 

same ones that get the coverage from the news media on that cry of arrogance. It’s simply because the news 

media adopt the approach that if it’s said, it will be reported. If it’s said, no matter who says it, or how it’s 

said, it will be reported. We’re not going to go behind what is said to interpret what is said, we’re going to 

print it, especially on the ward system. Well, I consider in Saskatoon the opposition to the ward system 

comes from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix an the Board of Trade, Mr. Speaker. Period. I’m not worried about 

the editorial comments. I’ve long ago given up on the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and their editorial comments 

as I think most of the people in this province have. But everywhere that one considers this issue, the 

emotional coverage contained in the media about the ward system simply is not consistent when we consider 

from where those cries of arrogance come and they come from the most arrogant group that ever occupied 

the front benches in the history of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. GRANT: — You’re ruining a good speech. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I know that they say I’m ruining a good speech, but I get a bit sensitive especially 

this late in the Session now, no kidding, I get a bit sensitive when I hear these types of unfounded allegations 

and comments and I want to make my point of view clear, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t think that they can 

brainwash too many people, maybe themselves and maybe a few journalists on the Star-Phoenix and maybe 

a few on the Leader-Post who have already been brainwashed to this point of view. But they’re not going to 

be brainwashing the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. And if there is any integrity in the freedom of 

the press and in the independence of the journalism and in the artistry of reporting they will tell the people 

the facts, that this Bill is a positive step to increase democracy in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I must confess at this time that I had not 

intended to enter this debate, but I do wish to make just three or four minutes worth of comments after 

listening to the Attorney General. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3278 

The one thing that came through in the Attorney General’s comments is that just about everybody in 

Saskatchewan is wrong except him. Everybody in Saskatchewan is wrong except him. The Leader-Post, Mr. 

Speaker, is wrong; the Star-Phoenix is wrong; the people who voted in Regina two to one against the ward 

system, they are all wrong, the City Council in Regina is wrong; the City Council in Saskatoon is wrong; 

everybody is wrong except the Attorney General and he says it’s all our fault. Then the Attorney General 

wonders why the people of Saskatchewan think he’s arrogant. Well, his speech today just about proves he is. 

He proclaimed to everybody here that except himself and a few more of the front benches and the back 

benches, I won’t blame it on them because I don’t think they are ever consulted in any event, but himself and 

a few more along the front bench have taken it on their own determination that they have decided what is 

right and hell or high tides are not going to prevent putting it into operation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the one fact that comes out loud and clear is that the people of Regina here determined 

not too long ago how they wanted to run local government. They determined how they wanted to run local 

government. And no amount of rationalizing, arguing or displaying of oratory will every change the fact that 

they themselves determined not long ago that the ward system was not in their own best interests, the present 

system was in their interest, and they said it loud and clear, that the municipal type of government they 

wanted was not the ward system. Now I think that for most people that would be a fairly good verdict that 

they rendered but apparently it’s not good enough for the Government opposite. 

 

Now I don’t want to go into all of the pros and cons of the ward system, but I can assure the Attorney 

General that he can accuse us of all sorts of arrogance and everything else but we would have rendered that 

verdict as being sufficient and not imposed the ward system upon them. We would have rendered that 

sufficient. So I only want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition and we’re delighted the Opposition gets 

that much attention because there’s not too many of us over here and we’re delighted that he considered we 

warrant that kind of attention. So I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I think that the Attorney General’s 

display this afternoon has proven just about all of the things we have been saying about the Government not 

listening to anybody in Saskatchewan have been proven correct. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, would the Member answer a question? I’d just like to ask a question. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — He signifies he doesn’t wish to answer it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, before we adjourn this debate, I couldn’t 

resist rising because it’s one of those occasions where I can wholeheartedly stand behind the House Leader. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3279 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — And once again prove my non-partisanship that I don’t always oppose what the Hon. 

Member from Saskatoon Riversdale is for. I’m afraid I won’t be able to parallel the Member from Riversdale 

in his flowery eloquence in the degree of his moral fervour but I shall make the best that I can as I stand 

behind and I support the principle very much of imposing and bringing about the ward system in municipal 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key problem which I have seen is the ability of the Members opposite, the Boards of Trade, 

the people who run municipal governments in both Regina and Saskatoon to concentrate the fury of their 

attack on a secondary issue. And from their point of view it’s a good point. Concentrate all the fury on a 

secondary issue, how this measure is introduced, whether we should have a plebiscite, what was the 

significance of previous votes against it and ignore the fundamental point. And the fundamental point is that 

we do not have democratic civic government. The problems that we have faced again and again are 50 per 

cent of the people, as the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins) referred to who do not 

vote. Is it really democracy when only 20 pr cent of the electorate is sufficiently important to their interest to 

be involved to the extent of voting in municipal elections? We’ve got the repeated problems which Members 

have referred to, of the business community running civic government, of the classes who control civic 

government, of the non-representation of working people on civic councils. These are the real problems of 

civic government and these are the problems that in some small way the ward system is trying to address 

itself to. And to try and becloud the issue and refuse to address oneself to those problems is the kind of 

politics which the Members opposite are seriously guilty of. 

 

Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to re-emphasize another point made by my colleague from 

Saskatoon Nutana Centre and that is if the division system is good for the RMs, if the ward division system 

is appropriate to the cities over 100,000 what about everything in between If the arguments are valid about 

Saskatoon and Regina, the business community controlling the civic governments in both of these 

communities, the arguments are equally valid about Moose Jaw, Prince Albert and the other cities of 

Saskatchewan. And I would strongly urge that we amend this legislation at a later sitting in order that a ward 

system would become part and parcel of the civic administration and the way of electing councillors or 

aldermen in the other cities of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the other Members from Saskatoon in stating my strong support for 

the principle of this Bill which should b passed now and let’s hope that it will be one small device which 

will increase the democracy and the participation in the cities in their civic government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.I. WOODS (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, there are a few things that I should 

like to say in closing this debate, some of the things that I think it is necessary that I do say in regard to some 

of the 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3280 

remarks that have been made during this debate. One, that I should like to say to start with, is that I very 

much appreciated some of the kind remarks that were made by the Hon. Member from Regina North West 

(Mr. Whelan) and the Hon. Member from Morse (Mr. Wiebe) and some of the other Members of the house. 

Some of the others, I want to say that flattery won’t get them anywhere, some of the other remarks I got. I’m 

sorry the Hon. Member from Morse is not in his seat but I wanted to indicate to him that I much appreciated 

the editorial he read from the Swift Current Sun. It was, I admit, meant to be quite complimentary, but I want 

to say that it was purely conjecture and not to be relied upon as being any factual material because I am sure 

that the Editor of the Sun had no way of inferring or even any way of forming any opinion as to whether or 

not I had even any way of forming any opinion as to whether or not I had supported or I had not supported 

The University Bill. I think that complimenting me for opposing The University Bill was pure conjecture. 

And I want to say the same thing to the Hon. Member from Morse when he indicated that I personally was 

not supporting this Bill. I want to tell the Hon. Member if he were here, you can’t tell how far a frog can 

jump by looking at it. And he can’t tell from the position that I have taken or from anything that I have said 

whether or not I support this Bill personally. And I don’t want him to go away with any mistaken ideas on 

that score. But I do appreciate kind words whenever they are said; they’re not that frequent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — Right, we don’t get that many. I want to say that in regard to the remarks of the Leader of 

the Opposition, he had some thing to say in this debate. One was, why were we simply bringing in this 

legislation in regard to the two larger cities? Well, I think this makes sense. I think it’s logical. If you’re 

going to have this type of an electoral system in the cities, I think it is going to work best in the larger cities. 

They’re the only ones that have any need for it, but the city where the wards will be approximately the size 

of a provincial constituency, I think it is logical that they be divided up into such constituencies. The smaller 

cities where any division would make them into ten divisions would make them pretty small. I don’t think 

they call for the same sort of treatment. In fact, the Hon. Member for Milestone was saying that he thought 

that Regina and Saskatoon were too small for this sort of a thing. But I think that they are large enough and I 

think that there is a big difference between the cities of 125,000 or 140,000 as compared to the 30,000 and 

15,000 type of cities we have in the province otherwise. And I think this is a logical and a desirable place to 

make this difference between the larger and the smaller cities. 

 

The Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) also mentioned the telegram that he had received 

from the Jaycees in Saskatoon in regard to the ward system. I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have my copy of 

the telegram here today. I expect it is on my secretary’s desk as I drafted a reply to it yesterday and it is now 

being typed and sent away. I don’t think that I have much to say in regard to this because I believe the Hon. 

Member from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) answered this very well. His remarks were very well 

taken in the House. 

 

There was also something said by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in regard to a delegation which I met 

here in this 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3281 

House a week or so ago. I’ve already made my position very clear in regard to this on the Orders of the Day. 

I don’t think there is really any need for repetition, at least there shouldn’t be need for repetition. But when I 

hear the remarks that are made by the Leader of the Opposition and two or three other Members of the other 

side, I think that maybe they are among those that need hearing aids because they simply did not get it clear 

what had taken place. I indicated in the House the other day, Mr. Speaker, that I had received word just a few 

minutes before I met with the delegation, that there was a delegation here to see me in this building. It seems 

to me that this is the proper place for people to come to meet their MLAs and their Cabinet Ministers when 

the House is in session. You could have fooled me if there was any wrongdoing in this. After 17 years I 

guess it’s too late to tell me but I never knew this, that there was anything wrong in meeting delegations in 

this building. And I did go to see them. I met with them. And now they say that I counselled, that I was 

counselling blackmail and doing all sots of nefarious things. I want to say that I did understand that they 

were proposing to do some phoning in to a hotline broadcast. Actually, I didn’t remonstrate. In fact, I have to 

admit that after being in political life and having been a Member of the Cabinet when the Medicare was 

being brought forward and the KODs were doing their utmost to thwart the Government in what they were 

endeavouring to do in that regard, all the organization and what was done in those days, what was proposed 

the other night in regard to a hotline program seemed to me to be pretty pale and it never occurred to me that 

they should be stopped and not be allowed to go forward with such a nefarious thing. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Pure and straightforward. 

 

MR. WOOD: — Yes, pure and straightforward, that’s right. This sort of thing has been done so much. In 

fact I’ve discussed these things with some members of the media who are dealing with this sort of thing and 

they say it’s done all the time. And everybody knows it’s done all the time. Why should we try to hold up a 

great big bogey and try to make something out of something that everybody in this room knows is not out of 

the way and that it is done practically every day of the year someplace around here. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Part of the democratic process. 

 

MR. WOOD: — Looking for bogies under the bed. And I didn’t see my way clear to and that it was 

necessary and it was not my place to say that they couldn’t and I didn’t think that it was necessary for me to 

say that they couldn’t. 

 

Another thing that did bother me a little more though that this was that I believe the Hon. Member from 

Lumsden (Mr. Lane) said that I counselled political blackmail, that I had counselled people to say that they 

were not going to vote for Mayor Walker and along this line. Well, this I take real exception to. I may not 

agree with Mr. Walker’s politics. If it came down to election time I think I would have to possibly oppose 

him at 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3282 

the polls. Mayor Walker is a friend of mine. I consider him one of my friends and I am not going around 

behind his back sticking knives in him. 

 

MR. GRANT: — . . .did it. 

 

MR. WOOD: — All right, who are you pointing at? Are you saying that I counselled this? 

 

MR. GRANT: — No, I am saying you are better than the other ones. 

 

MR. WOOD: — Well, I am not saying who is better or who isn’t, but I am saying that I am not counselling 

any sort of political blackmail in regard to Mayor Walker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — And any of the Members on the other side of the House who have said this, I will ask them 

to eat their words. In fact I met with Mayor Walker this morning in a meeting and I am meeting with Mayor 

Walker and other municipal people all the time in this province. It would be impossible for me to work with 

these people and go around behind their backs, counselling people to vote against them. If the people on the 

other side of the House would stop to think they would know that I couldn’t do that sort of thing. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They don’t. 

 

MR. WOOD: — Bu that doesn’t prevent them from saying it here in the House and having it quoted in the 

Press. 

 

I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, it would tend to make me out to be a rather scurrilous sort of a character. All 

I can say that their saying so doesn’t make me on. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOD: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go on a little further on some of the other remarks that were said, 

also by the Hon. Member for Lumsden. He said that the cities were foolish to co-operate with the 

Government. He said it several times but I don’t have the notation too clearly, but they were guilty of 

collusion with the Government. Again, it had quite a familiar ring to me, as I say it went back about 11 years 

when I heard that sort of thing being said during the Medicare discussion, when the KODs were saying that 

the doctors and the people of the province should not obey the Government. They counselled rebelling, they 

counselled going against what the Government had to say. 

 

And what was said here in the House yesterday sounded to me like very much the same thing. It had a very 

familiar ring to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked, as I have said before, to both the mayors of these large cities and they have both 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3283 

assured me of the co-operation of the councils in this regard. 

 

Mayor Walker has said that they expect laws to be obeyed and they will obey ours. I think that I have respect 

for the mayors of these cities. I know that they are law abiding people that will respect the laws of this 

province. I can’t say I have that much respect for those people who counsel that they should not obey the 

laws of the province. 

 

MR. McPHERSON: – Did he say that? 

 

MR. WOOD: — Wait until you get the transcript on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also said that I have failed to consult with the cities. I want to say that a few days ago — I 

just forget in regard to which Bill — but the Hon. Members were giving some Ministers on this side of the 

House a bad time because they had gone to certain organizations with material that had not yet been 

introduced in the House. Well, now you can’t have it both ways. I can say in this regard that I did have some 

consultations with the cities and SUMA on this. I told the Mayor of Regina, months ago, that this sort of 

thing was under discussion. I did have quite detailed discussions with the Mayor of Saskatoon. The Attorney 

General and I were up and visited with him and discussed it with him some months or so ago. 

 

But since the material has been introduced in the House, since the Act was given First Reading in the House, 

we have had a good deal of discussion with the cities. We met with the SUMA representatives and 

representatives of both the large cities. Some of the Cabinet met with them and we had good forthright 

discussion in regard to the amendments to these Acts. 

 

MR. McPHERSON: – Did they ask for a vote? 

 

MR. WOOD: — Well, they wanted several things We don’t say that we did everything that they asked, but 

you can’t say that we didn’t have discussions with them. 

 

At that meeting it was decided that we would have discussions with their staff in regard to these 

amendments. Now the Hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) has held me up to ridicule in regard to having 

so many amendments brought into the House. You can’t have it both ways, again. Did we have consultation 

or didn’t we? Or did we have consultation with them that had no effect? This shows here that we did consult 

with them and we have a number of changes. 

 

My staff will assure him that these changes were not necessary to make this a tidy act. These changes, there 

are two or three here, that were matters of policy, admittedly. We went to the two cities; we sat down and 

talked to them and found out what they felt was really going to be detrimental in this Bill, and we took two 

things out. One is in regard to having to have a door to door enumeration this year and the other was in 

regard to the terms of office of the mayors and aldermen for this year. 

 

There are some other changes which my people maintain are 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3284 

simply for the matter of clarification and I will agree with the Hon. Member for Athabasca, the people on my 

staff do know municipal law. And they don’t make mistakes along those lines. There are times when things 

are said in other parts of the Act that they maintain they don’t need to be repeated throughout the Act. And in 

regard to every amendment that is brought in, and some of these amendments are simply the clarification to 

make sure that there can be no misunderstanding. My people maintain that there was no need for 

misunderstanding. Some of these are simply along these lines. There are others in here that were some small 

matters that the staff of these two cities thought would be desirable to have in and we agreed with them and 

put them in. 

 

I think that these six pages that we have here, instead of showing poor draftsmanship, shows good faith on 

the part of the Government in consulting with the cities in regard to these Bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a few more items that I want to mention. It has been said by the Members opposite 

that we are afraid to have a plebiscite, that we won’t allow cities to make their own decision on it. What we 

are simply saying here, Mr. Speaker, as I have said many times, we are not saying that they cannot have a 

plebiscite; they have had two or three plebiscites on it. We said that instead of having more plebiscites 

without having any illustration of what it is all about, we say, let’s put it in for four years an then the proof of 

the pudding is the eating. 

 

And all this matter of publicity and education that the Hon. Member was speaking about this morning that 

should be necessary, we feel that by simply putting this into effect for four years will have that effect and 

that the people will get to know the benefits and the failures of the divisional system. Inside of four years 

they will have the answers. They will know from experience what it is all about. They will be able to vote — 

I don’t wan t to use the word more intelligently — but they will vote as people who have tried the thing and 

not vote as people who have heard or read something in the paper about it. I think that this is worthwhile. I 

think that it is worth the effort to endeavour to have this type of illustration given to the people of these two 

cities on this. 

 

I want to say, that I am not saying that the governments of Regina and Saskatoon are not good governments. 

I don’t think that anything has been said here, and I don’t think that anything can be said that they are not 

good governments. But, I think that they are acting the best they can under the system on which they were set 

up. It is not their fault that they are all living in one corner of the city. It is not their fault that we don’t have 

representation in every part of the city for the people to go to some one person with their troubles and have 

one person responsible to them for that area. It is the fault of the legislation that has been in effect in that 

regard. I am not here to say that we are saying that the cities of Saskatoon and Regina do not have good 

municipal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a good many more things that I had marked down here, but I think that they have been 

fairly well covered by the speakers on this side. I have already moved second reading on this Bill, and I think 

from what I have said, 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 
 

3285 

there is little doubt that I will be supporting my own motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 

YEAS — 35 

Messieurs 

Blakeney Michayluk Richards 

Dyck Byers Faris 

Meakes Whelan Cody 

Wood Kwasnica Gross 

Smishek Carlson Feduniak 

Romanow Engel Mostoway 

Bowerman Owens Comer 

Kramer Robbins Hanson 

Larson Tchorzewski Feschuk 

Baker Cowley Kaeding 

MacMurchy Taylor Flasch 

Pepper Matsalla  
 

NAYS — 13 

Messieurs 

Steuart MacDonald McPherson 

Coupland (Milestone) MacDonald 

Loken McIsaac (M. Jaw N.) 

Guy Gardner Wiebe 

Grant Weatherald MacLeod 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

HON. MR. G. MacMURCHY (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, may I introduce to you, and to the 

Members of this House a Grade Seven and Eight class from the elementary school at Guernsey. Guernsey is 

in the northwest corner of Last Mountain constituency. They are accompanied by their principal and teacher, 

Mr. Wayne Bush and some fine citizens of the Guernsey community. We welcome them all here to the 

Session. We hope that they will have a very enjoyable trip and we hope they have a very enjoyable visit in 

Regina. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

BRENDA ZAKRESKI — PAGE GIRL 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before we call the next item of business I should like to — if the House will allow my 

indulgence for a few moments. 
 

I wish to advise the House that Brenda Zakreski, our Page Girl, is leaving this evening. So we will be 

without Brenda for the balance of this Session. I think on behalf of all the Members I should like to express 

to her the appreciation of the Members for the service they have had from Brenda and the other three Pages. 



 

May 3, 1973 
 

 

3286 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I have received a lot of compliments on the Pages this year. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:13 o’clock p.m. 


