



















































Hansard: November 30, 1973


9 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, November 30, 1973. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE — RAPESEED MARKETING 
 

HON. J.R. MESSER: (Minister of Agriculture) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 

should like to move pursuant to Standing Order No. 17 that: 

 

Priority of Debate be given to a definite matter of urgent public importance. I should like to state the 

matter of urgent public importance to be the reported mailing on or about December 3rd by the 

Federal Government of ballots to a selected group of rapeseed producers to determine the future of 

rapeseed marketing in Canada through a ballot system that disregards all principles of democracy in 

that voters may indicate that they are in favor, or not in favor or are undecided . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: (Milestone) — Ask the hog producers. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, on the Wheat Board marketing of rapeseed . . . I wonder, Mr. Speaker 

if the Members to your left would allow me to finish my statement. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

. . . in that voters may indicate that they are in favor, are not in favor or are undecided on wheat Board 

marketing of rapeseed with the undecided ballots being counted as opposing the Wheat Board system, 

with the result that the vote is undemocratically biased against Wheat Board marketing of rapeseed. 

And further the importance of orderly marketing of rapeseed for the future of the agricultural economy 

of Saskatchewan and the urgent needs of the Saskatchewan Legislature to express to the Government 

of Canada its views on the need for fair and democratic voting procedures. 

 

RULING 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE — RAPESEED MARKETING 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — A notice of motion regarding this matter proposed for Priority of Debate was 

received in the Clerk’s office at 8:30 a.m. today for which I thank the Hon. Member. After careful 

consideration of the wording of the Notice I want to point out to all Hon. Members that the matter 

proposed for Priority of 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

10 

Debate under Rule 17 is not whether rapeseed should or should not be sold under the Canadian Wheat 

Board. The matter raised pertains to the reported mailing in the future of a questionnaire by the Federal 

Government. 

 

In considering matters under Rule 17 several points must be considered: 

 

1. It must be of urgent and public importance. 

2. It must be one, single. specific matter. 

3. It must not be worded in general terms or covering a great number of cases. 

4. It must not be offered when facts are in dispute or before facts are available. 

5. It must not involve hypothetical circumstances. 

 

I would refer Members to Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 17th edition, pages 364 to 370, and 

further: 

 

A motion for priority of debate must involve the administrative responsibility of the Government and 

it must be so pressing that public interest will suffer if it is not given immediate attention. 

 

This Assembly cannot give its attention to matters over which it has no jurisdiction (Beauchesne’s 

Parliamentary Rules and Forms, fourth edition, Citation 100, page 89). 

 

A priority of Debate cannot take place on a grievance that is continuing. The fact that new information 

has been received regarding a matter that has been continuing for some time does not in itself make 

the matter one of urgency. A motion for Priority of Debate is also out of order if the matter can be 

debated in the ordinary manner with proper notice or in a major debate such as the Address-in-Reply 

and the Budget Debate. 

 

Again I would refer Members to Sir Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practices 17th edition, pages 364 to 

370. 

 

In considering the Notice which is before me now, the matter of the questionnaire offers facts which are 

possibly in dispute or are unavailable to the Chair. Whether or when the questionnaire will be sent out is 

raising a hypothetical case. The exact wording of the questionnaire and the effect the answers to the 

questionnaire will have on the federal policy is not known at this time. The question is whether this 

proposed questionnaire itself is a matter that must be debated today or whether the matter could be 

debated in the Address-in-Reply or in a substantive motion or resolution with proper notice. It is true 

that the matter of the sale of rapeseed either through the Canadian Wheat Board or through the Grain 

Exchange is an important issue to all Saskatchewan residents but this is not the issue in the proposed 

motion. I do not feel that the matter of the questionnaire is of urgent and of public importance so as to 

necessitate a Priority of Debate. 

 

For the above reason I therefore rule the Motion out of Order. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

11 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate your ruling. I believe there are many in the Province of 

Saskatchewan who do believe it is of urgent public importance but I can assure you that the Members to 

your right, Mr. Speaker, will agree with your ruling and that, in your wisdom, we deem the matter then 

not of urgent public importance. 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order raised I must 

say that I agree the matter is not within the jurisdiction of that administration. Certainly, it is a serious 

problem, no one argues that, but they have had the information for months and done nothing with it. We 

know that it was just a grandstand play but I am very pleased . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I have ruled that it is not in order at this time and I can’t permit a debate 

coming in by the back door. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

FREIGHT RATES 
 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Premier. In the Speech from 

the Throne yesterday, the Speech delivered to the Members of the Assembly by the 

Lieutenant-Governor, there was a statement that, “Freight rates have continued to climb”. Now at the 

Western Conference a commitment was given as far as it could be given by the Hon. Jean Marchand that 

he would request a voluntary moratorium on open tariff freight rate increases. To date this request, by all 

the information I have been able to gather, has been honored by the railroads. Mainly because the Crown 

owned Canadian National has agreed not to increase rates and obviously the other railroads have gone 

along in order to be competitive. Now I have two questions, (1) Would the Premier please tell us which 

specific freight rate increase is referred to in that Speech and I presume he was referring from the 

Calgary conference which was in July to the present time. (2) I should also like to ask him what shipper, 

or producer or group of shippers or producers has the Government of Saskatchewan, or anyone acting on 

behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan directly, joined with any producer or shipper in bringing an 

application before the Canadian Transport Commission for a reduction of freight rates since or besides 

the case that was brought concerning rapeseed oil and rapeseed meal, which case as we all know was 

found in favor of the people who protested it and applied in Western Canada? It was opposed by some 

governments in Eastern Canada. I want to know if the Government has joined with any other group, any 

other individual shipper or any other group of producers since then or even since July, outside of that 

one case, before the Canadian Transport Commission 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, the questions, so called, by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Steuart) are obviously lengthy and will require a lengthy answer. May I state at the 

outset that the only thing the Federal Government agreed to do was to freeze the open tariff freight rates. 

Now, my recollection, I don’t have the figures with me, but my recollection is that less than 

http://problem.no/


 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

12 

perhaps one-third of the traffic in Saskatchewan moves pursuant to open traffic freight rates. The bulk of 

the traffic moves pursuant to agreed charges or other freight rates and there has been no commitment to 

freeze agreed charges or other freight rates and in fact they have not been frozen. 

 

Now with respect to the second question asked by the Leader of the Opposition, the facts are that under 

the rapeseed case, that case took a couple of years and some hundreds of thousands of dollars. That 

rapeseed case proved two things; (1) that we did not get the results notwithstanding what the Leader of 

the Opposition says, in favor of Western Canadians and (2) that the procedure was totally inappropriate. 

 

MR. STEUART: — On a Point of Order, I have asked the Premier if he is joined by anyone else and 

what freight rates were increased. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I am saying that anyone would be out of his mind to go through that procedure 

again and we have not joined with anyone. We want the Act changed and we said so as clearly as 

possible. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — What the Premier said in spite of the applause from his back benchers that he has 

left, is that. in fact, he could name no freight rate that has been increased and, in fact, that Government 

has done nothing since July to try and bring freight rates down. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Now my supplementary question is: In the face of that then would the Premier 

explain how he was hypocritical enough in the Throne Speech to criticize the Federal Government about 

something they haven’t really done and yet we have as of November 29th, bus freight rise in this 

Province some of them as high as one hundred per cent. Can he explain to the people of this province 

how he can whine to Ottawa about freight increases about which his Government has done literally 

nothing, and then allow freight increases of this magnitude to happen in his own jurisdiction in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the Opposition has misconceived the nature 

of a Throne Speech Debate. The debate takes place after the mover and seconder move it and not on the 

Orders of the Day. We are perfectly willing to defend every line in that Throne Speech at the appropriate 

time. I know that when we do the Members opposite will wish that the debate were terminated much 

sooner than in fact it does. 

 

But with particular respect that you raise, I say this, Mr. Speaker. If we are to maintain a trucking 

industry in this province, they must have adequate rates and the Federal Government has made 

abundantly clear that they decline, they decline to control freight rates except by competition, and we 

have only the weapon of a trucking industry for competition, 

http://that.in/


 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

13 

inadequate as it is, and propose to see that this province has a healthy trucking industry as competition 

for the railway companies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . then it is all right for freight rates to go up in this province over which he has 

control, but it is not all right for those in Ottawa. What hypocrisy. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think we are getting into the Throne Speech Debate again through 

the back door. I think we should wait and have it when it comes up. 

 

MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL CARDS 
 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD: (Moose Jaw North) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Saskatchewan residents have received their Saskatchewan medical and hospital cards in the last few 

days. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — These cards were accompanied by a political propaganda letter from the 

Premier. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker. I am not able to calculate the cost of preparing and mailing out 

these cards, but I think a cautious estimate would place the cost to the taxpayer well over $75.000. 

 

My question is: Why was the coverage only extended from January 1st to June 30th, thereby 

necessitating the whole costly procedure again in May or June of 1974. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And another letter! 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Public Health) — Mr. Speaker. I note with interest the 

calculation the Hon. Member made stating it was $72,000 that we spent in mailing out the medical and 

hospital care cards. I presume he based it on the cost of the leaflet that the Liberals mailed out right 

following the last Session, and they know the postage cost to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of this mailing didn’t cost the Provincial Government anything as the cards were 

to be mailed out anyway, and therefore the cost of mailing the letter did not cost any money. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear. hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — And, perhaps it might be of interest to the Members, 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

14 

since apparently they have not read the letter that I might place it on record. It says in part: 

 

Enclosed with this letter is your medical and hospital card for 1974. You will need this card to obtain 

medical and hospital treatment as in the past, but you will not have to pay any premiums because the 

Government has abolished medical premiums. This card is free. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — We were glad to provide the free cards. Mr. Speaker, because of the changes that 

take place in the movement of people, since mailing out the cards, 12,000 of them have been returned. It 

was decided that new cards will be issued in six months time, because the cards that were issued were 

initially printed on the basis that there would be the premium paid. Therefore in six months’ time we 

will be issuing a new card to the people. The card will be provided free and if necessary we will also 

send a further explanatory letter to the people when we provide the other free card. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure that the question was answered, but as a 

supplementary to it. I think there is great doubt in the eyes of the public about the motives behind the 

accompanying letter and that is what raised the question. 

 

I should like to ask the Minister why he did not sign the letter as the Minister of Health and the 

preparation of this political propaganda letter that was sent out, which was included by the Premier, was 

it paid for and there was certainly a charge for the preparation and inclusion of it in with the cards. Was 

it paid for by the NDP, the Premier’s office, or by funds allocated for health to SHSP? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — The cost of the letter was paid for by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOCIAL WELFARE RECIPIENTS 
 

MR. H.E. COUPLAND: (Meadow Lake) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 

direct a question to the Minister of Social Services. 

 

In an article appearing in the November 27th issue of The Leader-Post the Minister was quoted as 

saying that there were 23.103 people receiving assistance under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. Now 

according to statistics published by the Department of Social Services in August of this year there were 

56,728 recipients as of March, 1973. 

 

What I should like to ask the Minister is: Would the Minister inform the House which of these figures 

are correct? Would he also inform us if these figures include the 16.000 people living on reserves? If 

they are, then the number receiving welfare in Saskatchewan is seven per cent of the population or one 

out of 14, rather than 2 per cent as stated by the Minister in his Press release. 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

15 

HON. A. TAYLOR: (Minister of Social Services) — Mr. Speaker, may I say first of all concerning 

those living on reserves that if they are Treaty Indians they are certainly not under our Department. I 

can’t answer for the figures on that. They are Federal Government responsibility if they are Treaty 

Indians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, relating to the 23.103 cases that the Member mentioned, the figures I used, the quote in the 

newspaper said. 23,103 cases not persons. He may be right as I haven’t the figures with me. It may be 

45.000 or 50.000 persons when you include all family members. May I also say that if that is the case, if 

he wants it in persons, the ratio is about 2.1 per case, that instead of 1,240 fewer on welfare, it would be 

about 3,000 fewer than a year ago. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COUPLAND: — Mr. Speaker. I happen to have the quote here and it says persons not cases. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t say that I have read every newspaper in the province, but the 

press release said cases. I am sure that if the Member would have a look at most of the newspaper 

reports he would find them accurate. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, it has been traditional in this Legislature the day 

following the delivery of the Speech from the Throne to recognize the contribution made in the public 

life of this province, by Members of this Legislature who have died during the interval between the last 

time this Legislature met and the present time. 

 

I accordingly move, seconded by the Member for Prince Albert West, Mr. Steuart: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of two former 

Members of this Assembly. and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions they made to 

their community, their constituency and to this province: 

 

DONALD MIGHTON McPHERSON, who died on September 14 1973 was a Member of this 

Legislature from 1967 until his death. He first represented the constituency of Regina South West and 

since 1971 he represented the constituency of Regina Lakeview. He received his education in Regina 

at Thomson Public School and Luther College and he studied agriculture at the University of 

Manitoba. He attained the rank of Captain in the Canadian Army and served overseas with the Fort 

Garry Horse, the 10th Canadian Armoured Regiment, from 1941-1945. He was awarded the Croix de 

Guerre avec Etoile de Vermeil (with Silver Star) for gallantry and leadership displayed on June 11, 

1944 when a troop he was leading was under heavy attack. He had a long association with the Regina 

General Hospital and was a member of the Board of 

http://cases.am/


 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

16 

Governors at the time of his death. He had been a member of that Board from 1953-1957 and then 

from 1959-1973 and had served on most of the committees. On December 5, 1966 a new wing at the 

hospital was named in his honor and is known as the McPherson Wing. His other work in the 

community involved the United way, serving as Chairman of the committee that formed the United 

Appeal in 1958, as President in 1961 and Fund Chairman in 1962. He was Chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board for two years; Chairman of the South East Regional Hospital Council; and 

Director of the Regina Exhibition Association. He was Vice Chairman of the YMCA building fund 

drive and in 1964 he became Chairman of the Campaign Committee for the YWCA. Although he 

stepped down as Chairman in 1967, he continued to be involved with the Advisory Committee. He 

was a well-known businessman and held directorships on several companies. In 1966 he was awarded 

Saskatchewan Salesman of the Year by the Sales and Marketing Club of Regina. The owner of a farm 

he was an avid breeder of purebred Aberdeen Angus livestock. He was a prominent sportsman and 

was a strong supporter of the Saskatchewan Roughriders. He was a Director of the Roughriders since 

1949, served as President in 1956-1957 and was on the Management Committee since 1961. He was 

President of the Canadian Football League in 1959-60, President of the Canadian Rugby Union in 

1963, and Chairman of the Western Football Conference in 1965. In 1962, at the request of the British 

Columbia Lions, he was Chairman of a Committee to re-organize its management; consequently he 

was awarded a life membership in that football club. In addition, he was an Alderman for the city of 

Regina from 1953-1958 and for the last three Sessions of the Legislature he was the Opposition Whip 

and Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

JOHN WELLBELOVE, who died on November 26, 1973, was a Member of this Legislature from 

1944 to 1956 for the constituency of Kerrobert-Kindersley. He was born on September 13. 1878. in 

Berkshire. England, and was educated at Sunningdale School. He came to Canada in 1907 and 

journeyed West with a harvest excursion in 1909 and homesteaded the following year. During his 

years as a farmer, he was an executive member for the United Farmers of Canada. a Wheat Pool 

delegate from 1930 to 1942, and a member of the Western Grain Standards Committee from 1927 to 

1944. He also had been associated with many farm organizations including the Saskatchewan Grain 

Growers’ Association, the Agricultural Society and the Field Husbandry Association. He was a charter 

member of the Saskatchewan Wholesale Society. He was involved in the community in many ways 

and in 1916 he was appointed as the ratepayers’ representative to the Hospital Board which erected 

one of the first hospitals in Saskatchewan under the provisions of the Municipal Hospitals Act. He also 

served on the Council of the Rural Municipality of Snipe Lake and on the Eston School Board. He was 

a representative from his congregation to the higher courts of the United Church and was on the Board 

of Stewards; first with the Methodist Church and subsequently with the United Church. He was a 

Sunday School Superintendent from 1922 to 1958 and was honoured in this regard in 1950 by the 

Eston United Church. From 1946 to 1956 he 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

17 

was Deputy Speaker of this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may add a word other than the formal Motion, I think that all who knew Don 

McPherson, knew Don as a worker and a leader. I first came to know him as a member of the Queen 

City Kinsmen Club in Regina in the very early 1950s when he, with others, was active in arranging for a 

park to be built in the Pasqua Street North of Regina, which was one of the many things which he has 

done for this city, and I happen to remember it because it was the first time I had met Don. In this 

project, as with so many projects. he worked tirelessly without any thought of gain for himself. Don 

McPherson was a true businessman and conducted his business affairs in an admirable way. But, in 

addition to being a businessman he had a great deal of time for his community. Few people I have 

known have given as much of their time and their talents to community endeavours as Don McPherson. 

He will be, indeed he is missed in this city and this province. 

 

John Wellbelove I knew less well. I knew him because I was a public servant associated with the 

Legislature from 1950 to 1956 when John Wellbelove was a Member. In his years in the Legislature he 

was regarded as a person of solid integrity and of unassuming confidence. He lived a long, full life and 

as the record of his service shows, he left his mark on his community and on this province. 

 

We will then be asking the House that in recording its deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased and privileged to join 

with the Premier, and I’m sure other Members of this Legislative Assembly, in paying tribute to two 

men who served our province in many capacities and served as Members of this Assembly. 

 

Don McPherson. What can you say about a man who in a relatively short life, and it was a relatively 

short one, accomplished so much and did so many things? We knew him in this House, of course, as an 

MLA. He was a veteran, a businessman, a farmer, he served on the Regina City Council, on the Regina 

General Hospital Board. He was a leader and one of the first organizers of the United Way; fund raising 

for the YMCA, fund raising for the YWCA. Of course, with the Saskatchewan Roughriders — I don’t 

think he ever missed a game if it was possible, either here or wherever they played, and he was the 

President of the CFL. 

 

The Premier has mentioned many other capacities in which he served his fellowman, his community 

over the years. 

 

I think the key word when we think of Don McPherson, was involvement. He was involved in so many 

aspects of life as it went on around him and he threw himself into it with all his energy and all his 

enthusiasm and he had tremendous energy and tremendous enthusiasm. He really cared. Everybody who 

knows him in every facet of his life, says the same thing — Don McPherson cared about what he did, 

Don McPherson was an enthusiast, Don McPherson was involved — whether it was in peace or war, 

whether it was as a young man in service club work, or a little later in the city council, when he became 

an active MLA, or whether it was in sports or his social life. Yet, he did all 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

18 

these things with a certain verve, a certain touch and a great deal of humility and a great deal of humor. 

He was our Whip and I know that he and Mr. Pepper had great mutual respect for each other and used to 

sit at the back on that side of the House, or the back on this side of the House and many an hour they 

spent I think discussing the shortcomings of Members on both sides of the House and the difficult 

problems they had. I think they had a great deal of sympathy for each other and I know they had a great 

deal of respect for each other. We had a great deal of respect and admiration for him on this side of the 

House because he did do a difficult job for us, he did keep us in line, he never failed us. But with 

everything Don McPherson did, and with all the things that he accomplished, he remained, Mr. Speaker, 

above all a family man. All those who knew Don well knew that his family, Edna and Rod and Brent, 

his sisters and all of his family, came first in his loyalties, in his love and had first call on his tremendous 

energies and the wonderful things he accomplished. 

 

I should like to join with the Premier and with all Members on both sides and the thousands and 

thousands of friends that Don McPherson had in this city and this province and across this country, in 

paying our respects to the memory of Don McPherson and passing on our sympathies and regrets to 

Edna, to the boys and to the rest of his family and saying that we are all the losers. Yet, on a positive 

note, this is a better city, a better community and a better province because of Don McPherson. 

 

Mr. John Wellbelove, I didn’t know, but I knew of him and I’ve talked to people about him before I 

came into this House, in fact, when I first became involved in politics. 

 

He was a pioneer in many things. He was a pioneer in the Co-op movement, he was a pioneer in the 

farm organizations in this province and of course, he was a very, very active member in the political life 

of this province. 

 

Like Don McPherson, he was an outstanding man and played a most important and active role in his 

community and the affairs of this province. Again, I would join with others in paying my respects to his 

memory and passing on our deepest sympathies to his family. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add my word of tribute to those already expressed 

by the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition to the late Don McPherson. 

 

As Minister of Public Health I particularly want to pay tribute to the late Don McPherson on the 

contribution he made in the field of health. My associations with Don go back to 1960 when we both 

served on the Advisory Planning Committee on Medical Care, commonly known as The Thompson 

Committee. Those were exciting times in which important decisions were taken affecting the lives of our 

citizens. Working together under such conditions of stress and tension you get to know people on more 

than a superficial basis. Though we were on the opposite sides on many issues, I came to admire Don’s 

dedication to the things that he believed in. 

 

I want, also to make special reference to Don’s long association with the Regina General Hospital. Of all 

his associations with community groups this one surely is one of 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

19 

the longest. He was a member of the Board of Directors at the time of his death and he has been a 

member of the Board for a period of nineteen long years. During that time he served nine consecutive 

terms as chairman of the Board of Regina General Hospital up to 1970. In recognition of his service to 

the hospital, the new wing of the hospital in 1966 was named in his honor. The McPherson wing stands 

as a tribute to his concern for the care of the sick of this city and people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It has already been indicated Don has played an active role in building campaigns of both the YMCA 

and YWCA. He served as vice-chairman of the YMCA’s building fund drive and was director of the 

YWCA and chairman of the building fund committee. In these two capacities he made a real 

contribution to children and young people of our city. 

 

As others have already expressed, Don McPherson was one of the driving forces behind the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. ‘Big Don’ as he was often called was a man who gave instinctively of his 

time and energies. Don was a well known community leader, an alderman of our city, a Member of the 

Legislature since 1967, and a well known sportsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his untimely death will be mourned by all who knew him. I join with others in expressing 

my deep and sincere regrets to the family of the late Don McPherson. 

 

May I also express my deep regrets at the death of John Wellbelove, whom I knew very, very briefly. 

Again, our deepest sympathies to the bereaved family. 

 

MR. H. OWENS: (Elrose) — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to add a few comments to those made by the 

Premier, the Leader of the Opposition and Mr. Walter Smishek. A sincere tribute to a lifetime friend and 

advisor. 

 

Mr. John Wellbelove was an early settler in the Eston district, filing on his homestead approximately 

three miles from the future townsite of Eston and taking up residence in 1909. His nearest post office, at 

that time, was the one located in my parents’ home, a distance of 12 miles. John walked the prairie trail 

regularly to pick up his mail, as well as the mail for neighboring homesteaders. This early acquaintance 

grew into a deep and lasting friendship. 

 

John’s love for nature’s beauty, along with his training and work in the culture of trees and flowers in 

his native England before he immigrated to Canada in 1905, was confronted with a formidable challenge 

on the treeless area of western central Saskatchewan. With his expertise and determination and much 

hard labor he overcame the formidable obstacles and succeeded in creating an oasis of trees, flowers and 

shrubberies with small fruits, providing an enriched surrounding for friends and neighbors during his 

long sojourn on the homestead. The laying of steel by the CNR and the selection of the townsite of 

Eston offered an opportunity for service to this gentleman’s store of abilities and leadership qualities. 

Every progressive organization and movement received his wholehearted and energetic support. 

 

Although John remained a bachelor for many years his home was a welcome stopping place for the first 

ministers of the 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

20 

church. His love and desire for the spreading of the Gospel and the teaching of the Bible challenged his 

Christian character and found him an original member on the Board of Stewards and subsequently the 

Session of the Methodist Church and later the United Church, until his retirement in about 1968. He 

served as Superintendent of the Sunday School for 36 years — 1922 until 1958. 

 

Adopting farm life on the prairies as his future livelihood, John realized the need for a united voice by 

he farm people and subsequently accepted many of the offices of responsibility. The formation of the 

Saskatchewan Grain Growers’ Association in 1913 found him as one of the charter members of the 

Board of Directors and secretary of the association. When the Saskatchewan Grain Growers merged 

with the Farmers’ Union to form the Farmers’ Union of Canada, Saskatchewan Section, he continued as 

the local director and acted as joint chairman at annual conventions of the union for several years. 

 

In the early days, John was a member of the board of the Local Co-operative Elevator Company, which 

later merged with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. As district director of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

he was also joint chairman of the annual conventions in Regina, until 1942, resigning that post to accept 

nomination for the provincial constituency of Kerrobert-Kindersley for the CCF. He was successful in 

the election of 1944, was appointed Deputy Speaker in 1945 and continued in that capacity until retiring 

from politics in 1956. 

 

Under The Companies Act of the Province of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Wholesale Society 

Limited was incorporated in 1928. John was elected as one of the charter members. The name of the 

organization was changed in 1929 to The Saskatchewan Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited and is 

now the well known Federated Co-operative Limited. Demand by western farmers to have farmer 

representation on the committee of Western Grain Standards, resulted in Mr. Wellbelove being chosen 

to serve on the committee. He continued to serve in this capacity until he personally asked to be released 

of the responsibility in 1965, after 36 years of service. 

 

In his “at-home” community, John served at various times on the council of the Rural Municipality of 

Snipe Lake, the Eston School Board, the Agricultural Society and the board of the Eston Union 

Hospital. 

 

As previously mentioned, in 1915 John was chosen as a member of a committee to interview the 

councils of the adjoining municipalities, with a view to forming a municipal hospital district. Under the 

1916 Act of the Saskatchewan Legislature, the RM of Snipe Lake and the town of Eston formed, what I 

believe to be, the first municipal hospital district to build and operate a municipal hospital in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

John’s work and leadership should be given credit, to a large extent, for this remarkable achievement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege and an honor to have the opportunity to add a few words to what the 

Premier and the Leader of the Opposition have said in tribute to John Wellbelove. Having known this 

great gentleman for my lifetime, I feel I knew him better than most of the Members of this Legislature. 

John’s ability and his personality fitted him well for a place 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

21 

in the public life of our society that he fulfilled so humbly and so capably. 

 

I feel a great personal loss in his passing. But also a wonderful feeling of satisfaction in having the 

privilege of his association for so many years. 

 

John was predeceased by his wife in 1956, and by a daughter Margaret in 1936, at the age of 16 years 

and by an only son, Army Lieutenant John, lost in combat in 1944. He is survived by two daughters, 

Jean Wellbelove of Regina, Mrs. Mary Stokes of Grand Prairie, Alberta and two grandsons, Raymond 

and Ronald Stokes of Winnipeg, Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this afternoon his daughter Jean and grandsons Raymond and Ronald are seated in the 

Speaker’s Gallery. 

 

Another great humanitarian pioneer has passed on and has received his great reward. We who remain 

will forever profit by his leadership. Beryl and I and our constituents extend our sincere sympathy to the 

bereaved members of his family. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD: (Albert Park) — Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Steuart) and others have detailed many of the accomplishments of Don. McPherson. But we are also 

aware that much of what Don McPherson has done for us will not be known. Don was not the kind of 

person who would parade his good works. There is, however, a full and complete record of his activities 

somewhere and I have no doubt that he will be properly judged on his good works. 

 

He was a high powered individual. From early morning to late in the evening full speed ahead was 

Don’s normal pace. He was driven by a desire to make a contribution to this community. And in his 

passage through this way we have a better place because of him. We have a better Saskatchewan, a 

better Canada, a better city and a better neighbourhood. 

 

As Whip, he was patient and long suffering with a group of people who are not easily reined in. He was 

an acute observer of the human scene and had the knack of converting that scene to vital and precise 

expression. He had a talent for delightful and colorful expression. 

 

On behalf of myself and my colleagues, on behalf of the many others outside the Legislature who had 

the opportunity to work with and know Don, we should like to join together to express our sadness and 

sorrow to his family that Don has taken leave of us. 

 

We greatly miss him. 

 

HON. A. TAYLOR: (Kerrobert-Kindersley) — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the present constituents of 

Kerrobert-Kindersley I should like to say a few words regarding Mr. John Wellbelove. It has already 

been mentioned that he was first elected to represent Kerrobert-Kindersley in 1944 and served it in a 

most capable manner until 1956 when he retired. During that period the people of his constituency found 

him to be a warm and compassionate human being, greatly concerned with the needs of each individual. 

He never considered any problem too small to be bothered with. The fact that he entered the 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

22 

Legislature at an age when many people consider retiring is an indication of his real concern and 

dedication to the welfare of his fellow citizens. 

 

This was a concern that was well known to the people of his own community and surrounding area. For 

many years he had given himself selflessly in service to his community. He was active in almost any 

organization progressive in nature and which sought to improve the lot of ordinary people. He was a 

man who refused to opt out of responsibility, and accepted executive positions as part of his obligation. 

 

As this was true in community organizations it was also true in his church. Indeed, he would have said 

himself that it was his religious life which led him to be so involved in social concerns. His concern for 

the spiritual life of children was what prompted him to serve as a Sunday School Superintendent for 36 

years. His activities as a member of the Session of the United Church were always directed towards 

making the Church look outside of itself to the needs of other people. He truly believed that the Church 

and Christians must live and not only preach the Christian gospel. 

 

One of the really notable things about this man was that he carried his own religious convictions into 

every activity he undertook. This was as true of his politics as of anything else. In 1947 speaking in the 

House and speaking of an Opposition Member and to him, Mr. Wellbelove said, “He should try and 

carry through the social implications of that great teacher (meaning Christ) to their ultimate conclusion 

and he will find that he will arrive at pretty much the same position, the practical application of the 

principles embodied in the teachings of the world’s greatest teacher.” It is refreshing to read this kind of 

comment in one of Mr. Wellbelove’s early speeches when we remember how compartmentalized many 

people make their religion today. For him it was not something for Sunday but something for each day 

of his life. It was this which caused him to show his concern in debates in the House and in his own 

community for the disadvantaged, whether they be the poor, the mentally ill or others. 

 

In his political life he was an early proponent of orderly marketing. Within our party he was one of the 

early dreamers of farmer-labor co-operation believing that each was really dependent on the other. He is 

a man who will long be remembered by his constituents and by all who have come to know him. 

 

I had the opportunity of visiting with him just a short time ago in the nursing home in Eston. I was 

deeply impressed and moved that, although to all intents and purposes he was bed-ridden, his concern at 

that time was never for himself it was for the rest of mankind. It was said of that great teacher whom Mr. 

Wellbelove spoke of that “he went about doing good”. Of Mr. Wellbelove we can only say he spent 

himself in following that example. I too would like to say on behalf of my constituents that we share 

with the family in their loss. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say just a few words regarding Don McPherson, the Member for 

Lakeview. I first met Don in 1971 following the election when I entered this House. I want to say just a 

few words mainly because of my relationship with him when he became the critic for the Opposition of 

my Department. I just want to say how quickly I gained respect for 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

23 

Don as an individual, even though at times we differed in terms of philosophy and program. Above all 

else Don McPherson was a man of his word. There were no complications in this. If Don said yes, that 

was exactly what he meant. He did not later try to work his way around the issue. There is a scriptural 

passage which warns people, “Not to swear either by heaven or by earth or with any other oath, but let 

your yes be yes, and your no be no”. This was certainly true of Don McPherson. It is also true that never 

at any time in my association with him did he attempt to use the disadvantaged for political one 

upmanship. When he had a concern for individual cases, either for people who were in need of 

assistance, or people who might be abusing the system he would come and talk it over. In this his 

integrity was such that I found that I could be completely open with him, sharing of the facts of any 

situation knowing that he could be trusted, and that he would not attempt to use them or misuse them for 

his own personal advantage. During the period of a little over a year, while I was Minister and Don was 

serving in the Legislature, we had a number of consultations when he brought to me personal concerns, 

when we shared information, Don never betrayed this trust. He was truly a man of his word. 

 

I wish to join with others in expressing to Don’s family our heartfelt sympathy. 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER: (Weyburn) — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to express my condolences 

and to endorse the expressions and the feelings of those Members who have spoken before me. 

 

I sincerely believe that it is only when one has the opportunity to work, to organize and to negotiate with 

a person that you can truly say you have had the opportunity to understand one another. I believe I had 

the opportunity to understand the late Don McPherson, as we met each morning prior to our day’s 

procedure in this House. I found him first, always having his Party and his caucus members’ interest at 

heart. But he also realized that in our democratic system of Government all Members must have fair and 

equal opportunity to express their views and to represent their constituents, by whom they were duly 

elected. When our negotiations were finished I knew I could depend on his word of honor. This is 

something I think, Mr. Speaker, as Members it is a very important factor to adhere to. I am sure that it 

was not only in the political arena of life that Don McPherson displayed his loyalty to his people. But as 

one looks beck into the different positions that he held in the service of his various organizations which 

he was a member of, perhaps one of the greatest was the period of time he served his country in time of 

war with distinction and credit, that I am sure one can only say he gave unstintingly of his time and his 

effort and he served his people well. For this he will always be remembered 

 

I should like to express my sincere words of sympathy to Mrs. McPherson and to the two boys in the 

passing of a good husband and a good father. To me it was the passing of a very good friend. 

 

I should like also to express my regrets and sympathy to the family of Mr. John Wellbelove, one whom I 

never had the privilege of meeting. And I did not know him other than by name. But I am sure he was 

one who contributed greatly to the progress and to the betterment of this province. 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

24 

MR. E.C. WHELAN: (Regina North West) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join others in expressing 

to the family of Don McPherson our sincere sympathy. 

 

Don McPherson as has been said over and over again, served Regina and Saskatchewan with distinction. 

I am sure with accuracy much can be said for his tenacity, his drive, his ability to assess people and his 

ability to bargain with them. Many times we differed, head on, but there was no personal grudge held by 

this man. He played the game hard but he played it according to the rules. 

 

In my personal association with him there are a number of characteristics which remain. They are 

pleasant memories of the Hon. Member for Lakeview. First the hearty friendly way he greeted me when 

I met him as we arrived at the Legislature in the morning. I am sure all of us had the same experience. 

Second, when anyone in my family or indeed if I were ill, he asked about the health of the person 

involved, continually and with sincerity. Third, when he made a commitment to someone he would 

move to keep it. As an example I quote only one but there are many. He fought for an increase in the pay 

for Regina aldermen. Although he excited the anger of some of his own Ministers he had made a 

commitment and he kept it. 

 

Don McPherson was a strong person, his friends leaned on him. But he liked that challenge and he 

helped them. This city and this province owe him a great debt. His friends and that includes everyone 

that he met recognize it. We pay tribute to him. 

 

May I express, Mr. Speaker, to John Wellbelove’s family and his many friends our sincere sympathy. As 

a civil servant I met him representing his constituents. Many times I watched him chair the Committee 

of the Whole as Deputy Speaker. His voice was strong but kind, authoritative but democratic, patient but 

persistent. He gave dignity to this Chamber. To meet him in the halls here or on the streets of Regina 

was a pleasant friendly experience. The people of Kerrobert-Kindersley were well represented by John 

Wellbelove. I think he liked to represent them and I think they liked him. This was reflected by their 

long and uninterrupted association together. Saskatchewan and Kerrobert-Kindersley can be proud of 

John Wellbelove. 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER: (Regina Wascana) — Mr. Speaker, I too wish to join others in conveying my 

expressions of sympathy to the family of Don McPherson on this occasion. Our association in the field 

of politics and community activities dates back several years. The schools he attended played an 

important part in the life of our family too. My first real acquaintance with him and of working together 

was at City Hall, where we both spent three years as aldermen. While there we had our disagreements as 

we have also had them here in this Assembly. However, we did get things done. The list of activities 

which formed part of his every day world were numerous indeed. He worked tirelessly at them, which I 

am sure contributed to his untimely passing. He was a man with fixed ideas and portrayed them in the 

things he did. He did much in the field of community services which helped to make our city a better 

place in which to live. We remember Don in this way, as Albert Einstein once said, “Try not to become 

a man of success but try to become a man of value, a man of value will give more than he has received”. 

This description is fitting 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

25 

in many ways, and it no doubt will make us mindful of our responsibilities. My sincere condolence to 

the bereaved family. 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT: (Regina Whitmore Park) — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of meeting John 

Wellbelove on only one occasion so I can’t say I was well acquainted with him or was a friend of Mr. 

Wellbelove’s. But in his passing at the age of 95 we once again witness the passing of an era of those 

pioneers who came here shortly after the turn of the century and contributed so much to the development 

of Western Canada. Mr. Wellbelove was greatly involved in so many things surrounding his community, 

his church and the province that his memory will be in the annals of the history of Saskatchewan for 

many, many years. 

 

My acquaintance with Don McPherson dates back to about the same time as the Premier, back in 

Kinsmen days. It also included work with him on the city council. And I had the privilege and the 

pleasure of asking Don to join the General Hospital Board when I was chairman of that Board. I did it 

with a bit of apology because I felt that it was almost out of his field of activities, a man who was so 

active in a heavier industry type of business, cattle raising and football — but much to my pleasure he 

accepted the invitation and it was a real satisfaction to myself that he served with such distinction for so 

many years on that Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I sometimes wonder how well we know those we call our friends; I used to think it 

depended on the length of time we knew a person. Then on the other hand is it not a case of how 

intimate you are with the individual during the period you know him rather than the term of years? I 

have concluded that it really takes many, many people to know another person. Some people have very 

few interests in outside activities, consequently have a close circle of friends whom they really know. 

Don McPherson had a very large circle of friends because of his many interests and activities. Each of 

those associated with him knew him in a different way, so one could say that he was well known. Not 

only was he widely acquainted with people in every walk of life, he was respected by many who never 

met him. This respect developed from his unselfish dedication to his community and to his many 

interests. He will be long remembered for the part he played in making Regina a better place in which to 

live and in which to raise a family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a distinct honor to have been acquainted with Don McPherson and I should like to 

join with other Members of this House in expressing my sympathies to his family and as well to the 

family of Mr. Wellbelove. 

 

MR. F. MEAKES: (Touchwood) — Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself with the words that have 

been spoken by the different people who rose this afternoon to speak in memory of Don McPherson. 

 

I knew Don McPherson first some 20 to 25 years ago when I had an occasion to do business with him, 

when he was in the machinery business. I learned a lesson that day, we made a deal, I didn’t sign a 

paper, we shook hands and it was some three months later before the deal was concluded. There was no 

argument. I think that little story in itself tells something of Don McPherson. He was a man whose word 

was his bond. 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

26 

I next got to know Don very much better of course, Mr. Speaker, when I was deputy chairman of Public 

Accounts and he was the Chairman. I worked with him there and really got to appreciate Don even 

more. I found him an energetic man. I was talking to him one morning last winter at about ten past nine 

and he happened to mention that he had already been out to his farm which is out at Corinne to look at a 

new calf and he had attended a little while in his business office in the city and he was here at 9:00. He 

was certainly an energetic man, he was a fearless fighter. I appreciated very much working with him. I 

agree with what the other Members have said in all he has done for his community and he will be long 

remembered. 

 

In regard to Mr. Wellbelove, Mr. Speaker, I believe you and the Member for the Battlefords (Mr. 

Kramer) are the only two Members of this House who are left who sat with him in the House. He left 

this House in 1956 and I entered the House in 1956. I did not know Mr. Wellbelove really well, although 

I had known him as a casual friend. I always remember him as a kindly man, always patient and ready to 

stop and have a visit with you. He was a gentle man but a firm man, a man firm in his beliefs, firm in 

those things he was dedicated to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to add my words of condolence to these two great citizens who have been lost to 

Saskatchewan, but through whom we know that Saskatchewan is a much better place for those who 

followed them. 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS: (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add my brief 

comments with respect to the two individuals whom we are honoring today. 

 

I knew Mr. Wellbelove fairly well, perhaps better than I knew Don McPherson, I had contact with him 

through the United Church and also when I was on speaking engagements in the Eston-Kindersley area 

in relation to credit unions where I met him on a number of occasions. I also saw him in action in this 

House as a Deputy-Speaker in charge of the Committee of the Whole. 

 

I didn’t know Don McPherson that well, only having met him in the House since the 1971 election. I 

found him always to be a kindly, friendly person. I might say that both Don and John could be classified 

as big people; big physically, big mentally, big contributors to this province. I add my sympathies to 

both the families of Don McPherson and John Wellbelove. 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD: (Cannington) — It is my privilege to add a few remarks regarding Don 

McPherson and Mr. Wellbelove. Unfortunately I didn’t have the privilege of knowing Mr. Wellbelove, 

but I am sure from the words that have been expressed here today by many Members that knew him that 

he was an extremely well-thought-of person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all of us on this side, my colleagues feel this way, that Don McPherson was 

a person who packed enough things into his lifetime that we could easily spend all afternoon talking of 

his accomplishments and his family relationship. However, rather than have all of our Members 

participate in this expression of sympathy to the family, our Members have asked that as Chairman of 

our caucus I express the thoughts on their behalf. 



 

November 30, 1973 

 

 

 

27 

I think one of the things that I would remember Don McPherson for was his extreme hard work. He used 

to arrive here at 8:00 o’clock in the morning regularly and this was after he had usually begun his day at 

6:00 in the morning in the middle of winter, by contacting his farm operation, by contacting his business 

and by contacting many other people in the city with whom he had community and public work 

involvement. His hard work was quite remarkable for a person who did not have very good health at any 

particular time and this was recognized by those of us who knew him well as being quite remarkable. 

 

I think another thing that should be said about Don McPherson was his extreme kindness to other 

people. He was certainly well known for his family relationship and it was certainly very frequently that 

when he attended the sessions here during the day, which quite frequently became quite lengthy as the 

session goes on, that he would phone his wife to check with her as to how the boys were doing at 

university and how things were running at home. I think this was just a symbol of his concern for the 

family and the intimate relationship which they shared. This kindness was exhibited to other people 

throughout the city. In sharing an office with him I used to find quite frequently that he was trying to do 

some kind deed for some individual that went considerably beyond his requirement of representing them 

as their representative in the Legislature. He expressed this kindness and warmth to people of ell 

economic groups, all racial groups and made no distinction involving any person because of race or 

color. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that he will be well remembered for his concern for Saskatchewan, his great public 

involvement in the city of Regina, his intricate knowledge of the people and the feeling and the hopes 

and aspirations of this city and this province. 

 

I wish to express on behalf of the colleagues of mine who have not spoken in this debate that Don 

McPherson will be sorely missed by all of the Members on this side. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That the Resolution just passed together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:00 o’clock p.m. 


